R1956 11739299 48481
THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD: THE SECOND PART. BY ALEXANDER ROSS.
THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD: The Second Part, IN SIX BOOKS: Being a CONTINUATION of the famous HISTORY of Sir WALTER RALEIGH, Knight: Beginning where he left; Viz. at the End of the MACEDONIAN Kingdom, and deduced to these Later-Times: That is, from the Year of the WORLD 3806. Or, 160 Years before CHRIST, till the end of the Year 1640. after CHRIST: BY ALEXANDER ROSS. WHEREIN The most Remarkable Passages of those TIMES, (both Ecclesiasticall and Civill) in the greatest States, Empires, and Kingdomes, are Represented: Together with a CHRONOLOGIE of those TIMES, &c. and an Alphabeticall-Table by the AUTHOR. In Historia hoc praecipuè salubre ac frugiserum, omnis te exempli documenta in illustri posita intueri: ut inde tibi tuaeque Reipub. quod imitere capias; inde foedum inceptu, foedum exitu, quod vites. Liv. lib. 1. LONDON, Printed for John Saywell, and are to be sold at his Shop at the sign of the Greyhound in little-Britain without Aldersgate, M: DC. LII.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE HENRY EARL OF ARUNDEL & SURREY Primier Earl, and Earl Marshal of ENGLAND, Baron HOWARD, Mowbray, Segrave, Brewes of Gower, Fitz-Allan, Clun, Oswaldstry, Matra∣vers and Graystock, &c. MY LORD: ANtiquity did wittily adumbrate and represent unto us a Wise man, by the Fiction of double faced Janus, with a Serpent by him, biting his tail; intimating, that hereby wise men take notice, and make use both of things pre∣sent and past; and withall are not unmindeful of their End, ex∣pressed by the Serpent biting his tail. Now that which makes a man truly wise, and double faced with Janus, is History of things past; without the knowledge of which, a man hath but one face, and looks onely upon things before him; and such are Children, saith Tully, though they be aged; whereas History makes men ripe and aged in Knowledge, though they be children
in Years. God  hath appointed two Guides and Conductors of Mans life, while we are Pilgrims here in this Valley of Tears; namely, Precept and Example: The Law furnisheth us with Precepts, History with Examples; which make our way more short and easie then the other, as Se∣neca tells us: (Longum iter per praecepta, breve & ef∣ficax per exempla) These two Guides are like the two Pillars that conducted the Israelites through the Desart; and indeed, they are both so needful, that without them, we shall never attain to the Land of Promise, the Canaan of our Happiness. And as History is necessary to all, so chiefly to those who are set upon the Pinacle of Ho∣nour, whose actions are obvious to all eyes, and obnoxious to all mens censures; who being placed upon Watch-Towers, had need of better eyes, and a longer perspective then those who live below; Now History is the Perspective that lets them see the danger a far off: Had it not been for the know∣ledg of History, Lucullus the Roman had never subdued Mithridates the King of Pontus; nor had Xanthippus the Lacedemonian overthrown the Romans; whereas before this, the Carthaginian Commanders, for want of Historical Knowledge, were still worsted by the Roman Armies. In Histories great Men will find what uncertainty and vanity there is in outward splendor; what it is that makes true and genuine Nobility, and discriminates it from that which is supposititious and adulterate; and it will shew them that there is no confidence to be given to humane strength, Policy, nor Actions. Edocet humanis quae sit fiducia rebus. They that sit at the Helm of Government, had need of the Historical Compass to steer by. Among other emolu∣ments which accrew to Princes by History, they will finde them to be their truest friends, and wisest
Councellors, both in admonishing and reproving them: For this cause  Demetrius Phalerius advised King Ptolemy to read Hi∣stories, that from them he might learn truth; For Friends, either out of fear or shame, will not tell Princes of those faults, which History blusheth not to demonstrate. Be∣sides, great Men receive this benefit by Historie, That they are incited to vertuous actions, by the examples of those brave men who went before them. So was Alexan∣der by reading the Storie of Achilles; and Caesar by rea∣ding the Stories of Alexander; and the Turk by rea∣ding the actions of Caesar. Thus Aenaeas animates his Son. Tu facito mox quum matura adoleverit aetas Sis memor, & te animo repetentem exempla tuorum, Et pater Aenaeas, & avunculus excitet Hector. And as they are incouraged to vertuous Atchievements by Historie; so for the same Atchievements they shall be made glorious by Historie to all Posterity; which will be of longer continuance then Brazen or Marble Statues: Ther∣fore Theseus was more beholding to Connidas the Hi∣storian who wrote his life; then to Silamon that painted, or Pharrhasius that ingraved him to the life: And for this cause the Historian was more honored by the Athenians, then the other two; for Statues express the Lineaments of the body onely; but Histories demonstrate the Endow∣ments of the minde: Statues are for a time; Histories for perpetuitie; which had Pericles known, he would rather have entertained the Historian to register his actions, then Phidia the Painter to Delineat his Picture fighting with the Amazon upon Minerva's Target; which is long since lost; but the History remains. In a word, I may call Hi∣storie with Polybius, and Aristotle, the truest kinde of Learning, and usefullest exercise in the world.
Now my Lord; considering with my self, that what I have spoken here, is the object both of your knowledge and practice; And duely weighing your noble extraction, your Learning, and love to learned men; your goodness, wisdom, and affability, with those other eminent parts in you, wherin you are nothing inferior to any of your honorable Progeni∣tors; I was ambitious to send abroad this Piece under the shelter of your Honors Patronage, knowing it will receive the better acceptation, if it be graced in the Frontispiece with your Noble Titles. The chief end of this Dedica∣tion, is to shew to the world the dutifull respect and zeal I bear to the Ancient, and Honorable Family of the HOWARDS; and withall to your own Eminent Parts, by which you shine among others, (Velut inter stellas Lu∣na minores.) Your Honors most humble Servant, ALEXANDER ROSSE.
THE PREFACE TO THE READER. I Had scarce cast Anchor in the Har∣bour, and finished my Navigati∣on in the Sea of Sir Walter Raw∣leighs History, which I bounded within the narrow Streights of an Epitome, when I was sollicited by some of my Friends, to hoise Sail again, and to lanch into the Ocean of the Generall Histo∣ry of the World, that I might finish what he had begun, and begin where he had finished; descending from the times where he brake off abruptly, into these later Yeares, that so there might be a compleat Abridgement of all Memorable Passages from the beginning of the World till these present times. The Task I found somewhat difficult, being forced to be both Ship∣master, Pilot, and Mariner my self alone, as not having any A∣manuensis; but was fain to read, digest, contract, and write all my self: Yet considering I was now at leisure, and naturally hated Idlenesse, the Mother of mischiefe, and the Devils Cushion, as the Fathers call it; and that I was not born for my selfe, but sent hither to doe service in this great House of the World; to imploy the Talent committed to me, and not to wrap it up in a Napkin; to impart the light of my
Candle to the Family, and  not to hide it under a Bushell; to work in the Vineyard, and not to stand idle in the Market-place all the day long; to labour whilst it is Day, before the Night come wherein no man can work; and to be so imployed, that when my Master cometh, he may say, Euge serve bone; considering also how pretious time is, how quickly gone; how long a Lesson, and how short a Life (as Theophrastus complained) Nature hath given us; how great the account is we are to make up, of so many Hours, Dayes and Years spent, either idlely, or wickedly, or impertinently; and how uncomfortable must the end of those be, who spend their Seneca. dayes like Sardanapalus, or Hogges rather, in eating, drinking, sleeping and playing, having no remorse with Titus for so ma∣ny days and years which they have lost, wherein they have done no good, but like fruitless Fig-trees cumber the ground: When I considered, I say, these things, I adventured rather to under∣take this Task, then with Solomons Sluggard to fold my armes, to sleep and slumber away the short remainder of my Dayes in Idlenesse, or vain and sinfull Pleasures; There are above three parts already of the Glasse of my Life run out, being now almost 62 years of age, I desire that the fourth part may not be worse, for that were (desinere in Piscem) to look like a Syren or Mer∣maid, to begin in the Spirit, and end in the Flesh, with the foo∣lish Galatians; I shall be loath to degenerate with Hercules, of whom the Poet speaks: (Caepisti melius quam desinis ultima primis Cedunt dissimules hic vir, & illa puer.) Ovid. I have been hitherto a carefull dispenser of my time, and a Niggard of my dayes, having imployed as few of them as I could in Idlenesse, and even from my youth I have been more conver∣sant among the dead then the living, though I have seemed to some of Epicurus his swinish Schollars, no better then one of those mad men in the Gospell, who dwelt among the Graves; yet I have found more true content among these Dead men then ever I could enjoy among the living. But why should I call those dead, who are now more alive in their Works, then when they were alive in their Bodies, having attained to that life com∣mended by the Orator (De quis nulla unquam conticescet aetas, quae memoria vigebit saeculorum omnium, quam ipse aeternitas sem∣per Cicero. intuebitur) I have been content hitherto, rather to con∣verse in the Stoicall School of Zeno, then in th voluptuous Garden of Epicurus; and with Caesar (Equitare per Britannos Scoticus pati pruinas) then with Florus, cursitare per
tenebras,  pulices pati rotundos) But let men spend their days as they list, or as their good and bad Genius induceth them, I am sure, that they who have imployed their time in doing good according to their Calling, shall finde true content and comfort on their death-beds, when they are departing hence, to him that sent them hither; and who will exact a strict account of their time spent. Whereas the others must needs at their departure be accompanied with grief and horrour, remembring the preti∣ous houres and years they have mis-spent, saying with old Evander, (O mihi praeteritos referat si Iupiter annos!) Virgil. Which the Poets did elegantly and wittily express unto us, by shewing that none went over the River Styx into the Elysian Fields, but such as had Charon for their Pilot; that is, The comfort and joy of a good conscience, which will never prove the guide or companion of pleasure and sin. Some tell me, that it is now time for Me to give off writing, be∣ing old, and having the burthen of 62 years on my back. To whom I answer, That my age as yet (blessed be God) is to me no burthen; as it is to some who finde it heavier then Aetna was to Enceladus. I cannot accuse my age, as he said: (Nihil ha∣beo Cicero. quod accusem Senectutem meam.) But I may say with the old Italians in the Poet—Nec tarda senectus (Debilitat vires animi, mutátve vigorem) Virgil. and to whom God hath given, crudam viridem{que} senectam, a vivid and vegit old age, he expects of them more fruit in that age; who is so apt to write or speak as he who hath experience with maturity of Judgement, Wisdome and learning? which can∣not be in young men; (Temeritas florentis aetatis, prudentia, Cicero. Senectutis) young men may be fit in the great Ship of a Com∣monwealth, to hale the Ropes, to hoise the Sailes, to draw the Pump, to weigh the Anchor, and to clamber up the Masts; but old men are fittest to sit at the Stern, to Steer the Ship, and to keep her from falling on the rocks and quick-sands. Wine is ever best when it's old, and Fruits are sweetest when ripest. Young men are for action, Old men for direction; young men may see farther, but old men can judge better; the one may have a quicker Corporal, but the other hath a nimbler Mentall sight: . Therefore Isocrates, Pla∣to, Plato. Homer, Hesiod, Sophocles, Ambrose, Augustin, and many more, wrote most of their excellent Works in their old age. So I will with Solon be content, ,
both to grow Old with Teaching, and Learned with Age. It were weakness in me to claw the Reader with flattering tearms for his approbation or favourable censure of these my pains, and to beg his good word for my good will in compi∣ling this Epitome; for he that is Learned, Judicious, and In∣genuous, cannot speak ill of what is meant well, nor discom∣mend his pains that are undertaken for a Publick benefit; as for the carping Mome who hath a sting with the Wasp, but no honey with the Bee, who can be content to take his ease, and carp at other mens pains, which every Dunce can doe, being farre more easie to play the Mome then the Mime, to reprehend, then to imitate; as for such, I say, they can no more refrain their tongues from carping and reproving even those things they know not, then Rats and Mice can forbear gnawing of Books and Papers they understand not; which doth argue want, both of judgment, learning, and ingenuity; for the insepe∣rable companions of Momus, are Pride and Envy: Lasiness and Ignorance his Parents, which the Poets wittily expressed, by making him the Son of Night and Slumber. I will not here digress into the commendation of History, which Tully cals the Light of Truth, the Witness of times, the Cicero. Mistress of Life, the Messenger of Antiquity, and the Remem∣brancer of Life. It is indeed one of the most delightfull and profitable imployments of a mans life, to read Histories, which stirs up men to vertue, and deterrs from vice, whilst they read how the one is rewarded, and the other punished; it makes a man serviceable, both to the Church and State; it is a Study fit for Divines to illustrate and confirm their Doctrins, whilst they exhort to Vertue, and dehort from Vice; it shews them also the increase and decrease of Religion, with the divers concomi∣tants thereof; it's fit for the Lawyer, to shew him the original, diversities, and changes of Laws and Governments; for the same cause it is a fit studie for all Princes, Magistrates, and Po∣lititians, without which their Government will be but lame: and no less necessary is it to Soldiers, especially to Comman∣ders and Captains, where they may see the divers causes, events, attendants, and Stratagems of War. Physitians also, Philoso∣phers, and Poets may reap no small benefit by reading of Histo∣ries. Alexander made himself so expert a Warrier as he was, by reading the Life and Actions of Achilles. Selymus the Turk caused the Actions of Iulius Caesar to be translated (whereas his
predecessors slighted all Histories as fabulous) and by reading of these, he became so expert a Soldier, that in a short time he o∣verrun a great part of Africa and Asia. So Cesar was animated by reading the Life of Alexander, to undertake his great exploits. Plutarch tels us that Paul Aemilius who subdued Perses the Ma∣cedonian King, spent all his idle time in reading of Histories, Plutarch. which made him so good a Soldier. Charls the Great was so affected with Histories, that usually as he sat at dinner and sup∣per he caused them to be read to him. And Alexander Seve∣rus Lampridius. never undertook any great Action, till first he had consul∣ted with Historians. And because of the great benefit which re∣dounds to a Kingdome or State by History, we read how anti∣ently Histories have been honored. Polybius that wrote the Roman History, and their Wars with the Carthaginians, was ho∣nored Pausanias. at Megalopolis with a Statue on a high Pillar: The Hi∣story of Tacitus is commanded by Tacitus the Emperor to be placed in all Libraries, and lest it should perish, he caused it e∣very year to be written ten times over. Pompey the great hono∣red Cicero Theophanes the Historian with the Priviledges of the City of Rome. Titus Vespasian bestowed great wealth and honors on Iosephus the Iewish Historian, whose Statue was erected at Ioseph. Rome: And so did Iulian the Apostate upon Aurelius Victor, the Roman Historiographer. The Aegyptians who were care∣full Sigonius. to preserve their Histories and antient Monuments, slight∣ed the Grecians for their neglect herein, accounting them no better then children. And we read of Alphonsus King of Arra∣gon, that he doated upon Livies History. But how needfull History is for Governors and Princes, let Claudian speak in his own Language to Honorius the Emperor. Interea, Musis animus dum mollior jnstes, Et quae mox imitere legas: nec desinat unquam Tecum Graia loqui, tecum Romana vetustas. Antiquos evolve duces, assuse futurae Militiae; Latium retro te confer in aevum. Libertas quaesita placet? mirabere Brutum: Perfidiam danas? Metii satiabere paenis. Triste rigor nimius? Torquati despue mores. Mors impensa bonum? Decios venerare ruentes. Vel solus quid fortis aget, to ponte soluto Oppositus Cocles, Mutii te flamma docebit. Quid mra perficiat; Fabius: quid rebus in arctis Dux gerat, ostendet Gallorum strage Camillus. Discitur hinc nullos meritis obsistere casus. Prorogat aetrnam feritas tibi Punica famam
Regule; successus superant adversa Catonis: Discitur hinc quantum paupertas sobria possit: Pauper erat Curius, reges cum vinceret armis Pauper Fabritius, Pyrrhi cum sperneret aurum. Sordida Serranus flexit dictator aratrae. Lustratae Lictore casae, fasces{que} salignis Postibus affixi, collectae Consule messes, Et sul cata diu Trabeato rura colono. Which are thus Englished by an ingenuous Gen∣tleman. THy mind to Books (whilst yet 'tis plyant) bend, And what thou soon should'st imitate, intend; Often conferre, and set before thine eies The Roman, and the Greek Antiquities: Peruse those antient Captains, and prepare For all the hardships of thy future Warre: Reflect upon Rome's elder Annals, there If purchas'd Freedom any pleasure beare, Brutus thy wonder and applause will be: Art thou an enemy to treachery? Metius thy spleen in's death shall satisfie; Is too much rigour cruelty? despise, Torquatus fatherless severities. Is death sustain'd, an honest bravery? Then reverence the falling Deity▪ What single valour may perform alone, Number-prest Cooles with his bridg broke down, And Scevolas burning hand will let thee know; What wise delay may compass, Fabius shew; How Captains should in worst extremity Deport themselves, Camillus Victory Over the Gaules will teach; And hence we finde No Chance can master the deserving minde, Thee, Regulus, the Punick cruelty Hath purchas'd an eternall Elogy: Cato's misfortunes triumph o're success. What an excesless fortune may express We hence may learn, Curius even then was poor When he subdu'd proud Kings by armed power: Fabritius. Who Pyrrhus gold despis'd was poor enough; Serranus the Dictator held the plough; The Lictor then the Cottage walk'd around, The fasces ty'd to willow posts were found, The Consul hous'd the Corn, the Country than Was till'd by a Senatoricall Husbandman.
History is also usefull to Oratorie, as Tully often sheweth; without which an Orator either in perswading or disswading, will prove defective. It is also necessary for School-Masters; therefore Quintilian will have Poedagogues to read History to their Schollars, whereby they may have matter for their Exer∣cises and Orations: To be brief, History hath this prehemi∣nence above Oratory and Poetry, that Oratory hath been re∣jected by the Lacedemonians; Poetry by Plato, Tertullian and o∣thers, as two pernicious instruments in a Commonwealth, to pervert mens minds; but History was never yet rejected by any; and how can it, abounding with so much profit and pleasure; for what can be more profitable then to learn Wisdom by o∣ther mens follies, to get experience by other ns cost and la∣bours, and to be safe by other mens dangers (Foelix quem faci∣unt aliena pericula cautum.) History is like a watch-Tower on which we may see dangers a farre off, and so avoid them; and what can be more pleasant then to see a Tragedie acted to the life; which onely is to be seen in History; for here we shall see the whole world, but as a Stage on which men of all sorts have acted their parts; Princes, Prelats, Pesants of all ages acting the same things, on the same Stage; who after they have laid a∣side their discriminating Vizards, and personating garments, they are all alike, as they were before they put them on: For Kings and beggers have the same way of coming in, and the same way of going out: Mors Sceptra ligonibus aequat: Diogines cannot distinguish King Philips skull from the rest; nor is there any difference in Carons Boat, between the greatest and the mea∣nest; all must Row there alike. This History which I have compiled out of many Writers, contains all the most memorable passages and events which have been Recorded since the second Macedonian War, in which that Kingdom ended about the year of the World 3790. and the 155 Olympiad after the building of the City, Anno. 593. a∣bout 250 years before Christs Nativity; where Sir Walter concludes his History; so that from that time till this are about 1900 years; in all which space you shall see upon the same Theater of the World, the same Tragedies of Wars, Plagues, Famins, Oppressions, Tyrannies, Thefts, Murthers, Fires, Earth-quakes, Inundations, Massacres, Ruines of
Castles,  Temples, Palaces, Desolation of Countreys, Kingdoms and Commonwealths, Devastation of Towns and Cities, Alterati∣on of Laws and Governments, Transportation of Colonies of men, women, and children, from one place to another; I say you shall see the same Tragedies (with some variation of Cir∣cumstances) reiterated by different Actors, succeeding each o∣ther in their Generations: If you ask me to what purpose have all these stirs continually bin, and yet are stil in the World; I answer, to no other purpose, but that insatiable, covetous, and ambitious Mindes may have more of this earthly Turf to crawl and domi∣nier upon (as if they wanted elbow-room) and some more clods of earth, whereof a little will content them, when their vast and ambitious thoughts are laid as low as their carcasses; then shall a short and narrow Coffin contain those, whom one, or more Kingdoms will not content: Within how little room was that Pellaean Youth shut up, whom one World could not satisfie: E vix totam Hercules implevit Urnam, the huge body of Hercules did scarce fill an Urn, when he was burned to ashes. What madness is it then to turn the World upside-down, to cheat, oppresse, and murther one another, for more room, whereas a little wil serve a contented mind; one world can con∣tain many Elephants; many woods, fields, medows, hils and dales cannot suffice one covetous and ambitious mind; tantus amor nummi, & dominandi insana cupido; but if we wil truly consider the shortnesse of our life, the eternitie that comes after, the va∣nity, uncertainty and meannesse of the things we struggle for; we shall finde on our death-bed, that we have been striving all this while for Goats wool, an Asses shadow, Moon-shine in the water, for butterflies, nutshels, toies, and babies of clours, with children, saving that Majora ludimus, & grandioribus pilis, we sport our selves, and trifle away our time with greater bables then they do; so that we do little better then gather peble stones with Caligula and his Army, and hunt all our days after flies with Domitian: and when we have toiled our selves in vain, we may say with Peter, That we have laboured all night, but have got nothing. In Lucian when Mercury lifted up Charon Lucian. to the top of Parnassus, which they placed upon Ossa, Pelyon, and other high hills, he saw from thence , &c. a various and confused multitude, whose life was full of troubles, some sailing, some fighting, others pleading, some ploughing, some hoarding up their moneys, and others begging: the houses looked like mole hills, and the men like Emmets, the Cities seem'd to him like
bee-hives,  wherein each Bee had a sting, wherewith they did nothing but sting one another; some domineering like Hornets, carrying and pulling the weaker; some like Wasps, others as Drones; round about them did flie, hopes, fears, madness, covetousness, an∣ger, hatred, besides multitudes of diseases; as Fevers, Consump∣tions, Inflammations, Swords, Theeves, Judges, Tyrants, and so forth, : If (saith he) Men would' in time ac∣knowledge themselves to be Mortall, and that after they had fi∣nished their short pilgrimage here, they must forsake all terrene things; and awake out of their sleep, having been in a Dream, and would live more prudently and circumspectly, they would be less troubled in the hour of death, and not depart howling and weeping to Charon, as they use to do: but the Poet Bucha∣nan tels us, in few words, mens vanity in this point. Percipias rerum sit quantula portio, verbis Quam nos magnificis in regna superba secamus. Partimur ferro, mercamur sanguine fuso, Ducimus exiguae glebae de parte triumphos! &c. O pudor! O stolidi, praeceps vesania voti! Quantula pars rerum est in qua se gloria tollit? Ira fremit, metus exanimat, dolor urit, egestas Cogit opes ferro, insidiis, flammâ at{que} veneno. Scilicet & trepido servent humana tumultu. Which may be thus Englished: Behold how small the measure is of things, Which proudly parted is by earthly Kings. We share with swords, and with our blood we buy, Small Turfs on which we ride triumphantly, &c. O shame! O madness of our rash desires! What is't at which vain glory thus aspires? We fret, fear, grieve, we wants with wealth supply Got by fire, sword, poyson and treachery, We're full of tumults, fears and vanity. Why then shall we set our affections, and doat upon this Earth, which compared to Heaven, is but a Point; how inconsidera∣ble and smal then are the pieces of this point we strive for: we cheat, lie, steal, swagger, fight, swear, and forswear; we cut the throat, and squeese the blood of each others heart; yea, we sell our Souls to the Devill, and hazard the loss of eternal happiness, for the uncertain, vexatious, fugitive vanities of this world; we lay out our Money for that which is not Bread, saith the Pro∣phet; and we dig for, or make to our selves
Cisterns that will  hold no water; quantum est in rebus inane: O the vanity, emp∣tiness, and madness of men, that consider not how their life is but Persius. a span in length; their body like glasse or earthen pitchers for britlenesse; the things they so much covet, are but smoak, or that vain Emperors painted Banquet, which did a while please the eie, but no ways satisfie the stomach. And how the things we neglect are truely satisfactory and eternall, whilst we with Aesops. Frog and Mouse, fight eagerly for nothing; Death, that great Kite, which is still hovering over our heads, comes and carries us all away in his talons. Why should we dream of long continuance here, when we see the great Empires, Monarchies, States, Cities, and Magnificent Buildings of former times, all fallen into dust and nothing. Nunc segetes ubi Troja fuit, Troy is Ovid. a cornfield; Ierusalem a heap of stones, In aeternos collapsa cine∣res, saith Hierom, fallen into perpetuall ashes; and Rome is ruine Hierom. according to the old Prophesie, . of which Bellay the French Poet sings, as he is translated by Spencer. Thou stranger which for Rome in Rome here seek'st, And nought of Rome in Rome perceiv'st at all; These same old Walls, old Arches, which thou seest, Old Palaces, is that which Rome men call. Behold what wrack, what ruine, and what wast, And how that she which with her mighty power, Tam'd all the world, hath tam'd her Self at last; The prey of Time, which all things doth devour. Rome, now of Rome is th' only funerall, And only Rome of Rome hath victory; Ne ought save Tyber hast'ning to his fall, Remains of all: O worlds inconstancie! That which is firm doth flit and fall away, And that is flitting doth abide and stay. So then that once glorious City and Queen of the world, is but now, as Buchanan cals her, Tantum veteris cadaver Urbis, a car∣cass only, or bare sceleton of that ancient City. When Sulpitius sailed by the ruins of Corinth, and other ancient Cities, he writes to Cicero (who was much grieved for the loss of his daughter Tullia) shewing he had no reason to be discontented at the death of a mortall Woman; whereas the carcasses of so many Cities in one place lay flat with the ground: (Nos homunculi indignamur si quis nostrum interlit, cum uno in loco tot oppidorum cadavera projecta jaceant) the uncertainty therefore, and vanity of humane affairs, even in their
greatest glory, have induced many  brave men to quit their Dignities and high places, and to be∣take themselves to privacie; thus Dioclesian and Maximilian were contented to lay down their Imperiall Ornaments and Power, and to descend to a mean, yet a more secure condition of life; so that Dioclesian preferred his Garden of Pothearbs to all the Roman honors. Amadeus Duke of Savoy found more content and happinesse in his Monastery then in his Dutchie: And of late years, Charls the fifth, Emperor, after so many Triumphs and glorious Atchievements, was pleased to exchange all his dominions and Imperiall Robes, for a Monks Habit, and a place in the Monastery of St. Laurence in the Escuriel, five miles from Madrid: And it's no wonder that Princes and great Men many times are out of love with their own greatnesse, if we consider the perpetuall anxieties, feares, cares, jealousies, discontents and dangers they are subject to; so that King Antigonus truly told his son, If he knew with what cares and troubles his Crown was stuf∣fed, he would not take it up if he found it on the ground: there∣fore it is said of Pythagoras, whose Soule had lodged in so many Bodies, That he lived happier when he was a Frog, then when he was a King; the high Hills, not the low vallies, are most wea∣ther-beaten, as the Poet tells us. Saepius ventis agitatur ingens Pinus: & celsae graviore casu Horatius. Decidunt turres, feriunt{que} summos Fulmina montes. The blustring Windes more often farre 'Gainst lofty Pines doe threaten Warre: Brave Towers with greater ruine fall, And thunders highest hills enthrall. I will conclude this Digression with that saying of Petronius Petronius. concerning the Citie Croton: Omnes hic aut captantur aut cap∣tant, aut cadavera quae lacerantur, aut corvi qui lacerant. In this world all men either deceive or are deceived, they are either. Ra∣vens to teare others, or carcasses to be torn in pieces by others. This world is a Sea full of great and small fishes; if great, they are devourers; if small, they are devoured. Now as for this Piece which I have extracted out of divers Hi∣storians, and contracted into a briefe Epitome, I have endeavou∣red to set down in it all remarkable Passages in as little room as I could. If any say that I have been too briefe and succinct in some things, he must know I write not a large History, but
an E∣Epitome,  in which if I had bin more prolix, the book would have swelled into too great a bulk. For this cause, and that the se∣ries of the Histories might not be interrupted, I have not inser∣ted any Theologicall, Politicall, or Chronologicall Discourses or Digressions, as Sir WALTER RALEIGH hath done in his History, whereby his book is so voluminous; for what I have written here, is meerly Historicall; and I hold it fittest to reserve such observations to a book by themselves apart, which perhaps hereafter I may publish, if it shall please God to afford me so much time, health and opportunity. As for any encouragement, I expect none in this illiterate Age, wherein Ignorance is honored & Knowledge slighted, by our unlearned Lacedemonians; but the best is, Learning and Wisdom are justified of their own children, and Vertue is a reward to her selfe. Virtus repulsae nescia sordidae, Horace. Intaminatis fulget honoribus: Nec sumit aut ponit secures Arbitrio popularis aurae: Virtus recludens immeritis mori Coelum negata tentat Iter via, Coetus{que} vulgares & udam Spernit humum fugiente penna. Vertue that ne're repulse admits, In taintlesse honours glorious sits, Nor takes or leaveth dignities, Rais'd with the voyce of vulgar cries. Vertue (to worth heav'n op'ning wide) Dauntlesse breaks thorow wayes deny'd, And (taught) the rabble to despise, Forsaking Earth, to Heaven flies. The compendiousnesse of this Chronologicall History, or Historicall Chronologie (call it which you wil, for it containes both) wil be useful and acceptable to most sorts of men: 1. To those who have no time nor Leisure by reason of their other stu∣dies or employments in the world, to read over the many Vo∣lumes of Histories which have been written: In reading of this, they shal not need spend much time, which is but short, and eve∣ry wise man wil be willing to husband it as well as he can. 2. To those who have no Patience to dwell too long upon prolix and tedious Hystories, from reading of which many are deterred, as growing
weary before they be half way, despairing ever to at∣tain  the end of their journey. And indeed it's no wonder when we consider that Ars longa, vita brevis, that our life is a short Winters day, in which wee are to goe a great and tedious jour∣ney, and therefore had need to make the more haste; a man shall arrive sooner into the Harbour in a smal Pinnace, then in a great Ship. It's better and healthier to rise with an appetite from a short dinner, then with a surfeiting or fastidious stomach from a tedious Feast. 3. To them who have already read the Histories at large, who commonly loath to read them over again, to them I say, this Book will be as a Table, Index, or Remembrancer, to put them in mind of the chief things they had heretofore read; so that here they may have a short Collation after a long Feast. 4. To those also (Quibus rs angusta domi) who either cannot because of their narrow Means; or will not because of their nar∣row Minds, part with too much money on Books; in this, they that cannot reach to the price of a long Gown, may buy a short Cloak. Lastly, This benefit will accrew to all men who read this History, that they shall buy at a far cheaper rate the Expe∣riences of others Recorded here, then they can buy their own; for they that live long and travel far, pay soundly for their ex∣perience; but they who read Histories enjoy the experience of all that lived before, which is far greater and much cheaper. I have for the greater ease of the Reader, subjoyned a Chrono∣logie to this Historie, wherein as in a small Map may be seen the chief memorable Passages that have fallen out in the World, since the Overthrow of the Macedonian Kingdom, till these pre∣sent Times. History, indeed, is the Body, but Chronologie the Soul of Historical Knowledge; for History without Chro∣nologie, or a Relation of things past, without mentioning the Times in which they were Acted, is like a Lump or Embryo without articulation, or a Carcass without Life. I have not di∣gested this Chronologie as others do, according to each particu∣lar year, but have reduced the whole time into so many Decads or Tens, so that we see at one view what hath fallen out every ten years; which way is more ready to be found, and more ea∣sie to the Readers memory. Besides, I finde much difference among Chronologers, and much incertainty in their Computati∣on of years; it is not yet agreed what year of the World Christ was born in, there being four or five years difference in the Com∣putation; nor can Chronologers yet agree when the World be∣gan: It is ordinarily Recorded that Iulius Caesar Reigned five years; whereas in truth his Reigne lasted not above three years and 8 months; so that there are wanting of
five years, almost 16  months; for the first year of his Reigne contained but 6 months and a few days; and his fifth year but 2 months 15 days; for he was murthered the 15 of March: so that Emergent years, wherein Computations take beginning from some memorable Emergent Accident, fall out some times in the middle, sometimes near the end of the Tropicall year, so that a part is used for the whole year; Besides, there is no certaintie when the Olympicks and the Citie of Rome had their true beginning, and yet our Computati∣on dependeth upon them. The Iulian year also which we use, is longer then the Tropical or Caelestial by eleven Horary Scru∣ples, whereof each Hour containeth 60. the Aera of Nabonassar in the space of 1460 Iulian years, gaineth one whole year; so that 1460 Iulian, make 1461 Nabonassarian years, because these years consist of 365 days, without Intercalation of the remaining 6 hours, which every fourth year makes a day; and as there be divers Computations of years, so they have divers initiations, the Olympiads take their beginning from the New Moon next the Summer Solstice, the year of Iphitus contained 10 Olympiads, or 40 of our years: the threefold Seleucidan Computation, hath different beginnings; for that which is called the Iudaicall, be∣gins the 13 of March, the Alexandrea or Antiochian, takes be∣ginning in Autumn; the Chaldean in the subsequent Spring; so that the Antiochian Year begins in the middle way between the Iudaical and Chaldaical. The Dionysian Aegyptian Computa∣tion begins the 25 of March, the Macchabaean the 24 of Novem∣ber; the Spanish begins the 1 of Ianuary, but 6 years later then the Iulian, because it was brought into Spain 6 years later then into other places: The Computation from the Consulship of Augustus, begins the 22 of September; the Actiac Aera is two∣fold, one begins the 2 of September, when Augustus at Actium defeated Antony; the other begins the 29 of August of the next following year; to wit, from the taking of Alexandria, and the death of Cleopatra: the Augustan Computation begins the 14 of February, when Octavius was stiled Augustus by the Senat. Dioclesian Aera begins the 29 of August, which is yet in use a∣mong the Ethiopian Christians; the Hegira or Arabic and Tur∣kish Computation begins the 16 of Iuly, in the year of Christ 62 and consists of Lunary years; the Iezdagrid or Persian Aera begins the 16 of Iune, Anno Christi 632. These and ma∣ny more differences may be seen in Scaliger, Calvisius, Helvicus, Petavius, Genebrard, and other Chronologers. I have in this Chronologie set down the years of Popes and Princes Reignes, but have omitted the odd months and days for brevity sake, as
being  a thing of small concernment: I have likewise in every Decad, distinguished the Church Affairs from the States to avoid con∣fusion; and I have set down the number of Synods in each De∣cad, but not the Circumstances of the Place, Acts, and occasion of their calling (except of some that are more famous) to avoid prolixitie, and that the Book might not swel too big: There are also some Passages touched in the Chronology, which were omit∣ted in the History; and what is either wanting or brief in the Chronologie, will be found more fully in the History, that there might be no defect in both together, though the one may seem to be lame without the other. Lastly, I have in this Work performed the part of an Histori∣an, not of an Orator, or Tragaedian. Two things are commen∣dable in an Historian, to wit, brevity and simplicity; brevity to distinguish History from Oratory; simplicity of words and phra∣ses, to discriminate it from Tragedies, in which high and lofty Expressions are used to move the Affections. In History nothing is aimed at but a bare narration of things acted, or words spoken, which ought to be delivered without the painting of Tropes and lacivious dressings of luxuriant phrases, which oftentime adul∣terate the Truth; whereas she should be naked without any gor∣dious attire, or gawdy trappings, for such are for a want on cour∣tesan; not for a modest matron. Therefore Alcibiades confesseth that he could never give credit to the Polished and painted speeches of Pericles; and could never but give credit to the sim∣ple and naked Expressions of Socrates. History then is to be sought for, not in the delightful Cave or Grove of the Muses, but in that deep and horrid well where truth lay hid so long; yet I denie not but an honest woman may be comly attired, and Historicall narrations may be sweetned with some Oratoreall Flowres; but Ne quid nimis: in this the Historian who writes at large, must be very sparing, much more he who writes an E∣pitome. Perhaps some will object to me, that S. Hierom com∣mends Livie for his Milkie Rivers of Eloquence, the Flowres of Nectar, the Marrow of Honey, and the Attic junkets that are in him. To whom I answer, That S. Hierom in this Commen∣dation looked upon the Orations and Speeches set down in that History, rather then on the Historicall Narrations themselves; Now in these speeches Scaliger observes, that Livie playes the Poet rather then the Historian, in fastning such Eloquent speech∣es on those who were never guilty of them. To conclude all, I wish that Gentlemen who read Histories, may
receive the same benefit in the cure of their spiritual mala∣dies by which the Soul is infected, that Alphonsus King of Spain, and Ferdinand, King of Sicily, obtained in the cure of their bo∣dily Diseases; for that Health which neither of them could have Badin. from the Physitian, they had from the Historian; for the one by reading of Livie, the other by reading of Curtius, recove∣red their health again. Now this spiritual benefit they shall obtain in reading Histories, if they will but diligently observe how God hath shewed his Presence to the World in all Ages, by guiding this Universe in Iustice and Wisdom; by Punishing wicked men in his Anger, and Rewarding good men in his Mer∣cy; if they will look upon the various Examples of Vertue and Vice; of Humane Imbecilities, of various Changes in Kingdoms, States, and all Governments, of the Mutabilitie that is in mens minds, of the Inconstancy in their affections, of the Cunning and Falshood that are in Promises and Covenants, and the Vanity that is in all Humane Felicitie: They will truely finde that there is no such Antidote against the Infection and Poyson of Sin, as the reading of Historie: And so I bid thee farwell. A. ROSSE.
A SUMMARIE OF THE SECOND PART OF THE HISTORY OF THE WORLD The First Book: Intreating OF the Times from the end of the Mace∣donian Kingdome, till the Reign of Nerva the Roman Emperour; containing 273 yeares. The Second Book: Intreating OF the Times from Nerva the Roman Emperour, till the Reign of Constantine alone; containing 233 yeares. The Third Book: Intreating OF the Times from Constantine the Great, till Charls the Great; containing 476 yeares.
The Fourth Book: Intreating OF the Times from Charles the Great, till Philip the Emperour in the West, & the French Empire in the East; containing 400 yeares. The Fifth Book: Intreating OF the Times from Philip Emperour in the West, and the French Empire in the East, till Wen∣ceslaus the German Emperour; containing the Hi∣story of 200 yeares. The Sixth Book: Intreating OF the Histories of the World, from the yeare 1400.
THE CONTENTS Of the Chapters in the First Book of the Second Part of the HISTORY OF THE WORLD. CHAP. I. OF Antiochus, Epiphanes, and the Jewes under the Macchabees. 2. Of the affairs of Egypt and Sy∣ria, under Ptolemy, Phi∣lometor, Demetrius, Alexander, and others. 3. Of Cappadocia, Pontus, Bithynia, and Asia minor, under A∣riarathes, Attalus, &c. 4. The last Carthaginian War under Scipio, &c. CHAP. II. Corinth is taken. 2. The affairs of E∣gypt. 3. The affairs of Judaea under Simon and Hircanus. 4. The affairs of Syria under Tryphon, Demetrius, Alexander, &c. 5. The Roman Wars at home, in Sicily, in Spain, and in Asia. CHAP. III. The Jewish affairs, under Hircanus, A∣ristobulus, and Alexander. 2. The Egyptian affaires under Cleopatra, Philometor, and Alexander. 3. The Syrian affairs under Seleucus, Euse∣bes, Philip, Demetrius, &c. 4. The Roman Wars with Jugurtha, the Cimbri, the Thracians, and Sicilian Slaves. CHAP. IV. The Civil Wars of Rome, under Marius, Sylla, Cinna. 2. The Roman War with Mithridates. CHAP. V. The affaires of Syria, under Tigranes. 2. Of Judaea, under Alexandra. 3. Of Egypt, under Ptolemy Auletes, &c. 4. The Sertorian, Spartick, and Mi∣thridatick War, with Cataline's Conspiracie. 5. Pompey's actions, and some Roman passages about Ci∣cero and Clodius. CHAP. VI. Caesars exploits in Gallia, Germany, and Britain. 2. The affairs of Rome, under Pompey, Crassus, and Marcel∣lus. 3. Crassus his miscarriage in Asia. 4. Some passages of Judaea and Egypt. 5. Of Cicero and Cato. CHAP. VII. The fatal Civil war between Caesar and Pompey. 2. Caesars divers Victories in Thessalia, Egypt, Africk, Pontus, and Spain. 3. Pompey's death, and Caesar's. CHAP. VIII. The affairs of Judaea under Antigonus and Antipater. 2. The actions of Octavius in his younger years. 3. The actions & death of Cassius & Brutus. 4. The actions & end of Sextus Pom∣peius. 5. The actions of Antonius & Lepidus. CHAP. IX. The affairs of the Jews under Antigonus, Hyrcanus, Herod, and Archelaus. 2. The affairs of Rome and Egypt, under Antonius & Augustus. 3. The Birth of CHRIST; the life and death of Augustus; and the Insurrections in Judaea. CHAP. X. The life and death of Tiberius and Se∣janus, with their Cruelties. 2. The Baptisme, life and death, resurrection and ascension of CHRIST. 3. How the Gospel began to spread. CHAP. XI. The life and death of Caligula; and of the Roman and Jewish affairs under him. 2. The life and death of Claudius; and of all the memorable accidents in Rome, Parthia, Judaea, and elswhere under him. 3. Of Agrippa and Anti∣pas.
CHAP. XII. The wicked life and death of Nero. 2. The affairs of Germany, Britain, Parthia, and Armenia at that time. 3. The miserable condition of Judaea, Galilee, &c. CHAP. XIII. The affairs of Rome under Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasian, Titus and Do∣mitian. 2. The utter destruction of Je∣rusalem, and slavery imposed on the ob∣stinate Iews. 3. Some passages of Par∣thia, Armenia, and other parts. The Contents of the Chapters in the Second Book. CHAP. I. OF the Roman affairs under Nerva, Trajan, & Adrian. 2. Of the affairs of Jews and Christians during that time. CHAP. II. The Roman affairs under Antonius Ju∣nius, Antonius Philosophus, and Commodus. 2. The affairs of the Chri∣stians, and of foreign Nations at that time. CHAP. III. The affairs of Rome under Pertinax, Didius, and Severus. 2. Severus his actions in the East, and in Britain. 3. The Christian affairs during that time. CHAP. IV. The Roman affairs under Caracalla, Ma∣crinus, Heliogabalus and Alexander. 2. The affairs of Christians, Persians and others during that time. CHAP. V. The Roman affairs under Maximinus, Philip, Decius, Gallus, Valerian, Ga∣lienus and others. 2. The Christian, and forreign affairs of those times. CHAP. VI. The Roman affairs under Claudius, Au∣relianus, Tacitus, Probus, Proculus, Bonosus, Carus, Numerianus & Ca∣rinus. 2. Of Zenobia, and of the Chri∣stian and foreign affairs. CHAP. VII. The Roman affairs under Diocletian, Maximianus, Galerius, Constantius, and Maxentius. 2. The horrible per∣secution of Christians under them. 3. Of the Persian and forreign affairs of those times. CHAP. VIII. Of the Roman affairs under Constan∣tine, Maxentius Maximinus & Lici∣nius. 2. Of the Christian persecutions, and foreign affairs during that time. The Contents of the Chapters in the Third Book. CHAP. I. THe life, actions and death of Con∣stantine the Great. 2. The history of his foursons. 3. The Church affairs un∣der these Emperours. CHAP. II. Of Julian, Jovinian, Valentinian, & Va∣lens. 2. Of the Church, & foreign affairs. CHAP. III. Of Gratianus, Theodosius, Arcadius, Ho∣norius, & Theodosius the younger. 2 Of the Goths, Vandals, and other barbarous Nations. 3. The Church affairs of those times. CHAP. IV. Divers alterations in the Empire under Theodosius, Martinus, Leo and Zeno. 2. The Western Empire ruined by the Goths, Vandals, Huns and Heruli. 3. Divers foreign passages of those times, & of the Church affairs. CHAP. V. The Roman affairs under Anastasius, Ju∣stinus and Justinian. 2. Of the Persians, Goths, and other barbarous Nations of those times. 3. The affairs of the Church. CHAP. VI. Of Justin, Tiberius, and Mauritius. 2. Of the Persians, Goths, Longobards, Suevi, Avares, and others of these times. 3. The affairs of the Church then. CHAP. VII. The affairs of the Empire under Phocas Heraclius. 2. Of Mahomet and the Sa∣razens. 3. Of the Church, and divers for∣reign passages of these times. CHAP. VIII. The affairs of the Empire under Constans the 2. Constantine 4. Justinian 2. Phi∣lippus Bardanes Anastasius 2. & The∣odosius 3. 2. The affairs of the Sara∣zens, Longobards, Spaniards, French and others. 3. The affairs of the Church in that time.
CHAP. IX. The Roman affairs under Leo the third, and Constantine the fifth. 2. Of Pi∣pinus, and foreign affairs. 3. The Church-affairs of these times. CHAP. X. The affairs of the Empire under Leo, Irene and Constantine. 2. Of foreign affairs under Charles the Great. 3. Of the Church-affairs in those times. The Contents of the Chapters in the Fourth Book. CHAP. I. THe affairs of both the Empires, un∣der Charls in the West, under Nice∣phorus, Michael, and Leo in the East. 2. Of the Nations subdued by Charles. CHAP. II. The affairs of the Empire under Ludo∣vic and Lotharius in the West, under Michael Balbus, Theodosius, Theo∣dora, Michael the second in the East. 2. Forreign affairs of those times, and of the Church. CHAP. III. The affairs of the Empire under Ludo∣vic the second, Carolus Calvus, Ludovic the third, and Carolus Crassus in the West, and of Basilius in the East. 2. Of foreign affairs of these times. CHAP. IV. Of Carolus Crassus and Ludovic the fourth in the West. 2. Of Leo and his son Constantine in the East. 3. Of the affairs of Italy, Germany, Spain, Scotland, and other passages of those times. CHAP. V. The affairs of Italy, Germany, France, and other neighbouring Countries un∣der Henricus Auceps, and Otho the Great. 2. The Eastern affairs under Constantine and his son Romanus. 3. The affairs of the Church. CHAP. VI. The Eastern affairs under Nicepho∣rus, Phocas, Zimisces, Basilius, and Constantine. 2. Of the Western, under Otho the second. 3. Of the Turks, and some other passages of those times. CHAP. VII. The affairs of the Western Empire under Otho the third, Henry the second, and Conradus the second. 2. Divers pas∣sages of England, Scotland, Italy, France, and other parts of Europe. 3. Of some Popes. CHAP. VIII. The affairs of the Eastern Empire under Argyropolus, Michael, Calaphates, Zoe, Theodora, and Monomachus. 2. Of the Turks and Popes of those times. 3. Of the Polonian, Hunga∣rian, English, Scottish, and other affairs. CHAP. IX. The troublesome affairs of the West under Henry the third, and Henry the fourth. 2. The affairs of Italy, Spain, Portugal, Sicily. 3. The Popes of those times. CHAP. X. The Eastern affairs under Stratioticus, Ducas, Diogenes, Michael, Boto∣niates and Alexius. 2. The Holy-War, and Kings of Jerusalem, and new Orders of Knighthood. 3. The affairs of Cyprus, Portugal, England, Scot∣land, and the Popes of this time. CHAP. XI. The Western affairs under Henry the fifth, and Lotharius Duke of Saxony. 2. The Eastern under Calo-joannes. 3. The affairs of France, Spain, Eng∣land, Denmark, &c. with the Popes of those times. CHAP. XII. A brief History of Egypt from Au∣gustus till the Turkish conquest. 2. The Western affairs under Frede∣rick Barbarossa. 3. Divers passages of Italy, Germany, Denmark, and the other Holy-War. 4. Divers Occur∣rences, and the Popes of those times, with some passages of Tartaria. CHAP. XIII. The Eastern affairs under Manuel Com∣nenus, Andronicus, Alexius, Isaacius and Alexius Angeli. 2. The affairs of France, Spain, Denmark, Constan∣tinople, Rome, England and Scot∣land in these times, with divers other passages. 3. Henry the 6. Emperour.
The Contents of the Chapters in the Fifth Book. CHAP. I. THe troubles of Europe under Philip, Otto the fourth, and Frederick the second, Emperors of the West. 2. The affairs of the Holy-Land. 3. Of the Danish and other Europian affairs. CHAP. II. The true estate of the Eastern Empire. 2. The affairs of France, Tartary, Denmark, Poland, England, Scot∣land, Spain, and other places. 3. The Popes of these times. CHAP. III. Fredericks posterity. 2. The affaires of the Western Empire under Rodul∣phus, and others. 3. Of France, Eng∣land, Scotland, and other places. 4. Of the Popes of these times, and other memorable things. CHAP. IV. The Eastern affaires, under Michael Palaeologus, Andronicus the elder and younger. 2. The Turkish and Tartarian affairs. 3. The affairs of Hungary, Poland, Denmark, the Low-Countries, chiefly Holland, and the Switzers. CHAP. V. The affaires of Germany, under Adol∣phus, Albertus, Henry the 7. and Ludovic of Bavaria. 2. The affairs of Sicily, Naples, Florence, Rome, Millain, and other parts of Italy, with the adjacent Countries, from the year 1298. till 1347. CHAP. VI. The Eastern affaires, under the Palaeo∣logi. 2. A brief History of the Turks, till the year 1412. 3. The brief History of Sweden, Denmark and Norway, till the same year 1412. CHAP. VII. The affaires of Italy, Germany, Bo∣hemia, the Netherlands, under Charles the 4. and Wenceslaus Em∣perours. 2. The wars between Venice and Genua for the Isle of Tenedos, from the year 1349. till 1400. CHAP. VIII. The lives of the Popes, from the yeare 1305. till 1389. 2. The History of Holland and the next Provinces, from the year 1298. till 1404. 3. The History of Savoy, from the beginning till the year 1397. CHAP. IX. The French story from the year 1313. till 1380. interwoven with divers pas∣sages of England, Flanders, Spain, Germany, Italy, &c. CHAP. X. A prosecution of the French History from the year 1380. till 1407. In which are interlaced divers passages of Italy, Flanders, Navar, Africk, Britany, England, Scotland, Spain and Hungary. CHAP. XI. The History of England, interwoven with some passages of France and Scotland, from the yeare 1301. till 1350. CHAP. XII. A prosecution of the English story, from the year 1350. till the year 1399. CHAP. XIII. The History of Scotland from the year 1306. till the year 1377. CHAP. XIV. A prosecution of the Scottish History, from the year 1377. till the year 1400.
The Contents of the Chapters in the Sixth and last Book. CHAP. I. THe affairs of Italy, Germany, Hungary & Bohemia, under Wen∣ceslaus, Rupert, Sigismund, Em∣perours. 2. The Councel of Constance and Basil, with some other passages from the year 1400. till the year 1439. CHAP. II. The History of Swethland and Den∣mark, from the year 1412. till the year 1587. Of Denmark and of Swethland, till 1590. CHAP. III. The History of Holland, and the neigh∣bouring places, from the year 1404. till 1514. with some passages of Utricht, till 1580. CHAP. IV. The History of Savoy, and the neigh∣bouring parts, from the year 1397. till the year 1452. CHAP. V. A prosecution of the Savoyan History, from the year 1452. till the year 1503. CHAP. VI. The Helvetian History, from the begin∣ning till the year 1481. CHAP. VII. A prosecution of the Helvetian History, till the year 1521. CHAP. VIII. Of the Helvetian Confederates, till the year 1602. CHAP. IX. The Swedish History, from the year 1590. till the year 1631. CHAP. X. The prosecution of the Swedish History under Gustavus, from 1631. till the midst of 1633. CHAP. XI. The Savoyan History from the year 1504. till the year 1580. CHAP. XII. The History of Hungary, from the begin∣ning till the year 1532. CHAP. XIII. A prosecution of the Hungarian History, from the year 1532, till 1629. CHAP. XIV. The affaires of Germany, Hungary, Po∣land, Turky, Bohemia, Austria, Mil∣lan, Naples, Cyprus, and Borussia, under Albert and Frederick, Empe∣rours, from the year 1438. till the year 1480. CHAP. XV. The prosecution of the affairs of Germany, Italy, France, Spain, and the other neighbouring places, under Maximilian the Emperour, with the Coronation of Charls the fifth, from the year 1486. till 1520. CHAP. XVI. The affairs of Italy, Germany, Nether∣lands, with the actions of the Popes of those times, and the Councel of Trent, &c. under Charls the fifth, Ferdin∣nand and Maximilian, from the year 1520, till 1576. CHAP. XVII. The affairs of Portugal, Africk, Ger∣many, the Netherlands, Spain, Po∣land, Hungary, Transilvania,
Bohe∣mia,  Russia, Venice, &c. under Ro∣dulphus 2. Emperour, from the yeare 1576. till 1612. CHAP. XVIII. The affairs of Germany, Denmark, Swedeland, Holland, Russia, Italy, Hungary, Bohemia, Transilvania, Poland, Grisons, France, Switzers, &c. under Matthias & Ferdinand 2. Emperours, from the year 1612. till 1626. CHAP. XIX. A continuation of the History of Germa∣ny, Denmark, Swedeland, Holland, Poland, Italy, &c. under Ferdinand 1. from the year 1626. till the end of 1630. CHAP. XX. A continuation of the affairs of Turky, Persia, Egypt, Greece, Armenia and other adjacent parts, under Mahomet 1 Amurath 2. Mahomet 2. Bajazet and Selymus, from the year 1412. till 1520. CHAP. XXI. The Turkish History under Solyman, Se∣lymus, Amurath 3. Mahomet 3. Ach∣mat, Mustapha, Osman, and Amu∣rath 4. from the year 1520. till the end of 1636. CHAP. XXII. The affairs of France, under Charls 6. Charls 7. and Lewis 11. from the year 1407, till the year 1483. interwoven with the History of Burgundy, and o∣ther bordering places. CHAP. XXIII. The prosecution of the French History under Charls 8. Lewis 11. Francis 1. Henry 2. Francis 2. Charls 8. Hen∣ry 3. Henry 4. Lewis 13. from the year 1483. till 1633. wherein the lives of the Popes, the affairs of Italy, Spain, and other bordering Countries are touched. CHAP. XXIV. A prosecution of the English History, un∣der the reigns of Henry 4. Henry 5. and Henry 6. from the year 1399. till the year 1460. containing divers pas∣sages of the French and Scots affairs. CHAP. XXV. A prosecution of the Scottish History un∣der Robert Duke of Albany and Mar∣do Earl of Fife Governours; also un∣der James 1. James 2. Kings, from the year 1400. till the year 1460. CHAP. XXVI. The English History under King Edward 4. Edward 5. & Richard 3. from the year 1460. till the year 1485. CHAP. XXVII. The English History under the reigns of King Henry 7. and Henry 8. from the year 1485. till the year 1548. CHAP. XXVIII. The affairs of Scotland under king James 3. and James 4. from the year 1460. till the year 1513. CHAP. XXIX. The Scottish History, under king James 5. and his young daughter queen Mary, from the year 1513. till 1544. CHAP. XXX. A continuation of the Scottish History under the two Regents, Hamilton & the Queen Mother, from 1544. till 1560. CHAP. XXXI. The continuation of the English History under king Edward 6. and Queen Ma∣ry, from the year 1546. till 1558. CHAP. XXXII. The English History, interwoven with the History of Spain, France, Ireland, and Netherlands, under Queen Elizabeth, from 1558. till 1602. CHAP. XXXIII. The History of Scotland under Queen Mary, from the year 1560. till the year 1567. CHAP. XXXIV. A continuation of the Scots History under King James 6. from 1567. till 1602. CHAP. XXXV. The history of England and Scotland to∣gether, from the comming in of King James to be sole Monarch of the whole Island, from the year 1602. till 1625. CHAP. XXXVI. A continuation of the history of Great-Britain, under King Charls, from the year 1625. till the year 1641.
A CATALOGUE Of such Historians and Chronologers, which are made use of in the compiling of the ensuing HISTORIE. AMmianus Marcellinus. Venerable Bede, a Saxon-Presbyter, wrote many lear∣ned books, among the rest five books of the History of his own Nation: He lived about the year 731. Flavius Blondus an Italian; He was Se∣cretary to Pope Eugenius 4. He wrote the Roman History from the year 407. till the year 1400. He lived about the yeare 1440. Hector Boethius a Scotish-man, lived about 1500. in the University of Aberden, and wrote 17 Books of the Scots History, with a Description of Scotland and its Kings. C. Iulius Caesar wrote 7 Books of the Gallic war, the 8. was written by Hircius. Of the Civil war with Pompey 3 Books. These were printed at Venice and Basil, an. 1521. Georgius Cedrenus a Greek Historian, wrote a compendious History from the Creation till the year of Christ 1057. He lived about the year 1070. Marcus Antonius Coccius Sabellicus, lived about the year 1500. His works are printed in 4 Tomes: in the first is his History from the Creation, divided into 5 Enneads or Nines, that is 45 Books; in the second is the Continuation of the History by sixe Enneads, the last of which hath but 2 Books, so that there are but 47 Books, there is also in this Tome the Venetian History; in the third are 29 Books, and in the fourth 10 Books of Examples: he wrote also di∣vers other Tractates. Paulus Diaconus of Aquileia, was Secretary to Desiderius King of the Longobards, at what time he was taken by Charles the Great, who overthrew his Kingdom, about the year of Christ 774. He wrote 6 Books of the af∣fairs of the Longobards, and some think he wrote those Books of the Roman History, which are annexed to the History of Eu∣tropius. Evagrius Scholasticus, wrote the Ecclesi∣astique History in 6 Books; begining where Sozomen ended, till the 12. year of Mauritius the Emperour, about the year of Christ 597. Eusebius Pamphili Bishop of Caesaria; He lived in the time of Constantine the Great, whose life he wrote in 4 Books; he wrote also 10 Books of the Church-History, besides a Chronicle, and some other works. Eutropius Presbyter, wrote 1 Book of Chronologie, and 10 Books of the Roman History, printed by Aldus at Venice. L. Annaeus Florus lived in the time of Ha∣drian and Trajan. He wrote 4 Books of the Roman History: Some think he was the Abreviator of Livy, which is unlikely, because he recedes from him in divers pas∣sages; He is by some called Seneca, and some think that Seneca the Philosopher wrote this Story; but the diversitie of stile, times and other circumstances shew the contrary. Herodian lived in the time of M. Antoninus Emperour; he wrote the lives of 13 Em∣perours, in 8 Books. Rogerus de Hoveden, wrote two Books of English Annals, ending at King Iohn, who reigned about the year 1199. Roger lived about the year 1190. Flavius Iosephus a Priest at Ierusalem, comming to Rome, wrote 7 Books of the Jewish wars, & 20 Books of their Antiqui∣ties, from the Creation till the 14. year of Domitian, and 2 Books against Appion the Grammarian. These books of the Jewish wars, Antiquities, and against Appion, were first printed in Latine at Venice, an. 1499. and in Greek at Basil, an 1544. Isidor Bishop of Sivil, who died about the year 636. He wrote many books, among the rest, an Universal Chronicle, a Chro∣nicle of the Goths, the History of the Van∣dals, the History of the Suevi, of the Ecclesi∣astique writers, &c. Titus Livius Patavinus, wrote 3 Decads of the Roman History, besides other Pecces: his works were printed in 2 Tomes in fol. an. 1578. William of Malmesbury an English Monk, who lived about the year 1130. Contem∣porary with S. Bernard, Peter Abbot of Cluny, Hugo de Sancto Victore, & Richardus de Sancto Victore. He wrote 5 Books of the English Kings till Henry the first, and 5 Books of the English Bishops, with some other Historical Tractates. Iohn Maior a Scotish-man, lived about 1500. and besides other books, he wrote the History of Great-Britain. Marianus Scotus lived about the year 1083. He was a Monk, and wrote a Chronicle from the Creation till the year 1083.
Martinus called from his Country Polonus, Bishop of Consentinum, and the Popes Confes∣sor, to wit, Innocent 4. He wrote a Chronicle printed at Basil, with a Chronicle of Maria∣nus Scotus, in the year 1559. in folio; He writes the lives of the Popes and Emperours till his time, to wit ann. 1285. Matthew Palmerius a Florentine, lived ann. 1440. at the time of the Councel of Flo∣rence: He wrote a Chronicle beginning at the year 449. till the year 1449. Matthew Palmerius of Pisa lived at the same time, and continued Matthews Chronicle, from the year 1450. till the year. 1481. Matthew Paris, a Monk of St. Albans, in the time of King Henry the 3. He wrote the English History from William the Conque∣rour, till the 35 year of Henry the 3. that is, from the year of Christ, 1067. till the year 1250. Matthew Westminster a Monk, wrote three Books of the Flowers of History; He lived about the year 1377. Iohannes Nauclerus lived about 1500. He wrote a Chronicle of memorable things from the Creation till the year 1500. Nicephorus Callistus a Greek Historian, li∣ved in the time of Andronicus the elder; to whom he Dedicated his History, about the year of Christ 1300. He begins his History from Christs Nativity, and ends in the year 625. It contains 18 Books. Nicephorus Bishop of Constantinople, lived in the time of Pope Leo 3. ann. 811. He wrote a Chronicle extant in Bibliotheca Patrum. Paulus Orosius a Spanish Presbyter, and a disciple of St. Augustine, he wrote 7 Books of Histories from the Creation. C. Velleius Paterculus wrote two Books of the Roman History, printed at Basil, Lions, Geneva, and Venice, ann. 1571. Baptista Platina, born at Cremona, he flou∣rished about the year of Christ 1451. besides other Books, he wrote the lives of the Popes. Plutarchus Chaeroneus born in Boaetia, he flourished in the time of Trajan; He wrote many Books, among the rest, the Lives or Parallels of the famous Greeks & Romans, this Book was first printed by Aldus at Ve∣nice, an. 1519. Prosper Aquitanicus a holy and learned Bi∣shop, besides many Theological peeces, he wrote a Chronicle, beginning where Euse∣bius and St. Hierom left; he lived about the year 460. C. Crispus Salustius, wrote the conspiracy of Cataline, the war of Iugurtha, with other things, whose fragments are onely exstant: these were printed at Lipsic, ann. 1539. Sigebertus a Monk, lived in the time of Pope Gregory the 7 ann. 1101. He wrote a Chronology from the year of Christ 381. till the year 1111. Socrates and Sozomen, wrote the Church History, beginning where Eusebius ended, till the time of Theodosius the younger. C. Suetonius Tranquillus, wrote the lives of the first twelve Caesars, printed at Lions ann. 1539. He wrote also divers other books. Sulpitius Severus Presbyter, a learned and wise man, as St. Austin cals him in his 205 Epistle; he lived in the time of Hierom and Ruffinus, and was born in Aquitania; He wrote (besides a Dialogue, divers Epistles, and the life of St. Martin Bishop of Turon) two Books of the sacred Story. Aeneas Sylvius born in Sena of Tuscany, who was afterward Pope Pius 2. besides many other Books which he wrote: He set forth the History of Bohemia from the ori∣ginal of that Nation, till George that succeed∣ed Ladislaus; this work was first printed at Basil, ann. 1532. His Fasciculus Rerum Ex∣petendarum, at Colen, ann. 1535. Cornelius Tacitus was born in the time of Claudius the Emperour, and was in great ac∣count with Vespatian and Titus. He wrote 16 Books of Annals, 5 Books of Histories, one Book of the German manners, and one Book of the life of Iulius Agricola. Iohannes Zonaras a Greek Monk, wrote three Books of Annals, containing the Uni∣versal History from the Creation, till the death of Alexius Comnenus, who died about the year 1118. Of later and modern Writers, these have been perused. Bogistai Philippi à Chemnitz, Belli Sueco-Germanici, Vol. 10. Stetini. 1648. Caesar Baronius, first a Priest, then a Car∣dinal, compiled the Ecclesiastique History from Christs Nativity till the year 1200. in 12 Tomes. He died ann. 1607. Olaus Magnus Archbishop of Upsale, wrote the History of the Sueves. Adolphus Brachelius his History of these lat∣ter times from the year 1618. till the year 1650. Busbequius who was Ambassador at Con∣stantinople for Ferdinand and Maxmilian Em∣perours, about eight years together, wrote four Epistles containing all the memorable passages in the Turkish Dominions at that time. Camdeni Anglica-Normannica, &c. Carion; set out a briefe Chronicle which is explained and enlarged by Philip Melancthon and Caspar Peucerus. Iohannis Cluverii Epitome. Bartholomaeus Facius of Genua, wrote ten Books of the actions of Alphonsus first king of Naples; He wrote also a Book of the Vene∣tian wars with Genua; and divers other Tractates. Genealogia Austriaca, cum figuris. Francis Guicciardin a Patritian of
Florence,  wrote the History of his time in 20 Books in Italian; which Caelius secundus Curio transla∣ted into Latine, Printed at Basil in folio, an. 1566. Historia Normannorum. Paulus Iovius wrot the History of his time in 45 Books; besides the History of the Turks from Ottoman, and ends with Solyman. Opus Chronographicum Opmeeri & Beyerlink. Paraei Medulla Historiarum. Petavii rationorium temporum. Pezelii Mellificium Historicum. Polydor Virgil wrote the History of England till Henry the eight. Respublicae variis voluminibus, 120, 16. & 24. Impres. Amst. Lugd. Bat. &c. Saxo Grammaticus, wrote 16 Books of the Danes & Norwegians to the time of Canutus; this Saxo was Provost of Roscheld. Martinus Cramerus wrote the History of the Polanders. Ioseph Scaliger, son to the learned Iulius, who besides his Notes and Observations up∣on Varro, Festus, Virgils Epigrams, Catullus, Tibullus, Propertius, Manilius, Ausonius, and o∣thers; he wrote that usefull work De Emen∣datione Temporum, and Thesaurus Temporum, or Chronology upon Eusebius; he lived and died at Leiden, ann. 1609. Carolus Sigonius Professor of the Latine tongue at Bononia; wrote the History of I∣taly, and divers other Books, as De antiquo jure Romanorum, De repub. Iudaeorum, De repub. Atheniensium, De Imperio occidentis, &c. I. Iosias Simlerus, a Divine in Zurich, wrote many Books, among the rest, two Books of the League and Common-wealth of the Switzers: He died at Zurich or Tigurum, ann. 1576. Iohn Sleidan wrote the History of the Church and State under Charles 5. in 26 Books; and withall an Epitome of the four Empires of the World. Famianus Strada de Bello Belgico. Iac. Aug. Thuanus, second President of Pa∣ris. wrote a large history from the year 1543 till 1608. and was continued till 1618. Antonii Thysii Compendium Historiae Batavicae. Turselini Epitome. Raphael Volateranus wrote 38 Books of Historical Commentaries, besides divers o∣ther works; He lived about the year of our Lord 1503. English Chronicles and Histories. Lord Bacon's, King Henry 7. Baker's Chronicle. Camden's Elizabeth. Daniel and Trussel's Chronicle. Godwyn's Annals. Lord Herbert's King Henry 8. Martin's Chronicle. Speed's History. Stow's and Munday's Chronicle. Histories of Scotland. Buchanan. Iohnston. Knox his History of the Scots Reformation. Lesley. Udal's Queen Mary of Scotland. A Manuscript of the Battel by the River Avinum in Scotland, fought between the Earles of Huntly and Errol against the Earle of Argile, in the year 1594. written by Mr. Alexander Machoz, an Eye-witnesse thereof. French Histories. Paulus Aemilius. D' Avila's History of the Civil wars of France. Belle-Forest. Histoire du Monde, f. 3 vol. Histoire du Chesne. Dupleix. Froissard. De Serres. Lumiores pohr l'Histoire de France. Le Mercurie Francois. Philippe de Commines of the actions of Lu∣dovic 11. and Charles 8. Thivet. Histories in generall made use of. Ayscue's History of England and Scotland. Civil-wars of England. Councel of Trent. Dutch-History. Sir Clement Edmunds upon Caesar's Com∣mentaries. Estates and Empires. Fuller's History of the Holy-war. Godwyn's Roman and Jewish Antiquities, and Rous his Greek Antiquities. Heylin's Geographie. History of Portugal. Hungarian-History. Imperial-History. Interest of Princes, by the D. of Rohan. Machiavel's Florentine History. Powel's History of Wales. Spanish-History. Swedish-Intelligencer, with the later Oc∣currences, printed by Mr. Bourn and Butter. Turkish-History. Venetian-History, fol. Howel's Survay of Venice. Wars of Christendome, till 1640. by the Count Galliazzo Priorato.
For the Chronologie, these have been chiefly consulted with. Bellarmini Chronologia. Calvisii Chronologia. Davidis Chytraei Chronologia. Gilbertus Genebrardus, the Kings Professor of Divinity and the Hebrew tongue at Paris, wrote four Books of Chronographie, with divers other peeces. Iac. Gordonii Lesmorei Chronologia. Helvici Chronologia. Isaacson's Chronologie. With some others. Octob. 22. 1651. IMPRIMATVR, NA: BRENT.
The Second Part OF THE VNIVERSALL HISTORY OF THE WORLD. THE FIRST BOOKE, INTREATING Of the times from the end of the MACEDONIAN KINGDOME, till the Reigne of NERVA the ROMAN EMPEROUR, containing 273. years. CHAP. I. Of Antiochus Epiphanes, and the Iewes under the Macchabees. 2. Of the af∣faires of Egypt and Syria, under Ptol. Philometor, Demetrius, Alexander, and others. 3. Of Cappadocia, Pontus, Bithynia, and Asia minor, under Ariarathes, Attalus, &c. 4. The last Carthaginian War under Scipio, &c. ANtiochus Epiphanes (as we shewed in the end of the first part An. Mundi. 3806. of this Universall History) having submitted himselfe to the Romans and left Egypt, he returns into Asia, where hee shewed himselfe to be Epiphanes, or illustrious in nothing but in wickednesse, and indeed Epimanes a madde man; for he gave himselfe to all kinde of scurrility, riot, gormandi∣zing, cruelty, oppression, sacriledge, hee robbed the Tem∣ple of Ierusalem, beat down the walls of the City, made the Iews to offer Sacrifice to the Heathen Gods, dedicated the Lords Altar to Iupiter Olympius; burned the Holy Scriptures, tortured Elea∣zer the Scribe being 90 years old, and his Brethren, and perpetrated many hor∣rid acts, murthering and captivating incredible multitudes of Iews. This monster of men, notwithstanding, the Samaritans in hatred of the Iews honoured with di∣vine titles; which caused Matthias the Priest, and one of the Assamonean family, to bestirre himselfe, who having killed a Iew for polluting himselfe with idolatry, assembled a multitude of his kindred and alliance, and all such as loved God and their Countrey, who brake downe the profane Altars, circumcised children, and  by degrees setled the true Religion, but Matthias growing aged and unfit for acti∣on, gave the charge of the Army to Iudas Maccabeus his son, and appointed Simon to look to the State. Apollonins the Kings favourite having invaded Iudea, was by Iudas overthrown 3807. and slain: so was Seron the Governor of Syria, to whom succeeded Lysias, who sends an army of 40000. foot & 7000 horse against Iudea under the conduct
of Ptolemy,  Gorgias, and Nicanor; Iudas with 3000 fals suddenly on Gorgias his campe, (himselfe being then absent) which he burnes and spoils, so that Gorgias was forced ro forsake Iudea, Lysias sends a new Army of 60000 horse and foot, which Iudas with 10000 overthrew, killed 5000 of the enemies, and ob∣tained a great booty; then hee began to purge the Temple which was left deso∣late three years. He repairs the Lords Altar, appoints priests, keeps the feast of Dedication, and gards the Temple with souldiers, that the priests might not 3809. be hindred in their functions: but hearing of great preparations against him, by the Edomites, Sidonians, Syrians, Ammonites, and Arabians; resolves to hinder their combination. Therefore he first fals upon the Edomites and subdues them:  then he invades the Ammonites, and Arabians, and sends Simon against the Pheni∣cians; in the interim leaves Iosephus, and Azarias to governe Iudea, with a charge not to hazzard their army upon a battell; but they being more forward then wise, would needs besiege Iamnia, where Gorgias brake out suddenly upon them, and routed them with the losse of 2000. Antiochus being disgracefully repulsed by his owne subjects, as he was going to plunder the Temple of Diana Elymais, and hearing of the great losses his armies had received in Iudea, fals despe∣rately sick, and dieth, having reigned 12. years, to whom succeeded his son Eupator, a childe. Lysias who took upon him the government of the young King, invades Iu∣dea  with an army of 100. thousand Foot, 20000. Horse, and 32. Elephants, he takes in Betzura, then besiegeth Ierusalem; but hearing that Philip (whom Epiphanes on his death-bed had appointed governour) was now setled in An∣tioch, and meant to rule the kingdome, causeth the young King to make peace with the Iewes, which was performed, and Iudas proclaimed President, who put to death Menelaus the priest, the chief plotter and cause of these last warres; to whom succeeded Alcimus in the priesthood: but two years after the death of Epi∣phanes, Eupator and Lysias were both slain by their owne servants, after that their army had revolted to Demetrius, the son of Seleucus, who being an hostage at Rome, came suddenly into Syria, and seised upon Tripolis, and claimed the  kingdome in the right of his Father Seleucus, who came by the elder son of An∣tiochus the great. In the mean while Alcimus accused Iudas of rebellion, and cau∣sed Demetrius to send an army under his conduct and Nicanors against Iudas; this army Iudas overthrew, and so was made high priest by the people, and then enters into league with the Romans, but the next year he was overthrowne in a battell by Bacchides and slain; whose death was the occasion of much misery and oppression in Iudea. His people for whom he had done so much, treacherously forsook and left him to be sacrificed by his enemies, and so multitudes flocked 3813. to Bacchides, who by him being put into offices, used all the cruelty they could up∣on the friends and followers of Iudas. Ionathas is then made Governour by the people, who in a battell upon the sabbath day was set upon by Bacchides, the fight was fierce, Bacchides lost a 1000 men. Ionathas with his army escaped to the other side of Iordan, in the mean while Bacchides fortifies Bethell, Gaza, and Iericho, with other townes, Ionathas plundered the Amorites for killing his brother John. Alcimus the priest, as he was going to pull down a wall within the Temple, was suddenly struck with a palsie and dyed. Bacchides returnes to King Demetrius and Jonathas lived quiet∣ly for two years; in which time a plot against him was detected, and 50 of the plotters were put to death. Upon this his enemies invite Bacchides again into Judea, upon hopes of an easie victory, but he found such strong opposition and harsh entertainment by Jonathas and Simon, that in a rage he fell upon those that sent for him, and put many of them to death; and then makes peace with Jonathas, who for four years lived quietly and governed Judea. About this time Ptolomie Philometor, who had been driven out of his king∣dome by his younger brother, is restored againe; and an agreement concluded, 3816. that one of the brothers should reign in Egypt, the other in Cyrene, in the mean while Ariarathes King of Cappadocia dieth, he had one son
Mithridates, who di∣ed  young, but his two supposititious sons Ariarathes and Olofernes who conten∣ded for the kingdome, Demetrius assisted Olofernes and made him King. But the Romans took part with Ariarathes, and established him in his kingdome in spite of Demetrius. About which time C. Marius the Consul subdued the Dalma∣rians, for molesting the Illyrians, confederates of the Romans; and they were at last totally conquered by Cor. Nasica the Consul. About this time Spain rebelled against the Romans, and Antioch against Demetrius for his tyranny, inviting Alex∣ander who called himself the son of Antiochus, and claimed in right of his fa∣ther the kingdome of Syria. He was assisted by Ptolemy King of Egypt, Aria∣rathes King of Cappadocia, and Attalus King of Asia who succeeded his brother Eumenes, that had reigned almost 50. years. Alexander having all this strength, and the assistance also of Jonathas, whom he declared high priest; two great battels were sought, in the first Alexander was worsted, but in the second he obtained the victory; in which Demetrius Soter or Saviour, so called for the justice he did upon Heraclides and Timarchus, (the two great oppressours 3822. of Babylon) lost both his life and kingdome, Alexander marryed the daughter of Ptolemy Philometor. Demetrius Soter had two sons, the eldest called also Demetrius was invited by Apollonius governour of Coelosyria, to take up armes against Alexander, who gave himselfe to all kind of luxury. This Demetrius having the assistance of the Cretans, comes suddenly into Syria, but was overcome by Ionathas, and lost 8000 of his  men; Jonathas takes in Ascaton and Joppa, burnes Azotus to the ground, and over∣throwes the Idol Dagon: for which good services he is highly rewarded by Alexan∣der. Shortly after this, Prusias King of Bithynia (who fawning upon the Romans kissed the threshold of their Senat, calling the Fathers his Gods) was for his wicked 3828. life slain by his owne son Nicomedes, being assisted by Attalus King of Pergamus. Prusias indeed had intended to have slain Nicomedes, and to have set up his other the Romans had sent three Embassadors to reconcile the father with his son. These were the three which Cato said, had neither head, feet, nor heart, because the one had many scarres in his head, the other was gowty, and the third was none of the wisest. Ptolemy was much incensed against Alexander his son in law for his tyrannie and dissolute life. Wherefore he comes into Syria with a great army, pretending he meant to defend Alexander against his enemies, the gates of the cities are opened to him, so that all the sea coast even to Seleucia is delivered up to him, then having taken his daughter Cleopatra, and bestowed her upon Demetrius, he entred Antioch and put both the Crownes of Syria and Egypt on his head. Alex∣ander brings an army out of Cilicia, but is overcome and flyeth to Arabia; all his souldiers revolting to Demetrius, Zabdiel or Diocles a prince of that countrey, cut off his head, and sent it to Ptolemy, who not long after dyed, whilest the Chirurgians were curing of the wound he had received in his head. Hee  reigned thirty five years, to whom succeeded his younger brother King of Cyrene. The third and last Carthaginian warre was occasioned by the difference be∣tween Masanissa and Carthage about some lands. The Romans would have recon∣ciled 3823. the difference, and Masanissa was willing for peace sake to yeeld up his right. But such was the pride of Carthage, that they would hearken to no reason: besides, against the articles of peace, they had prepared an army and fleet. Gisco, Amil∣cars son, was a great stickler, and cause of this war, and so incensed the people against Rome, that the Roman Ambassadors were fain to flye, for fear of affronts. The Roman Senat was much exasperated against Carthage, yet by the perswasion of P. Cor. Nasica, ten Ambassadours are sent thither to try, if they would hearken to reason; the wars in Spain at this time, made the Romans the lesse willing to quarrell with Carthage. The Ambassadors returning to Rome acquainted the Senat with the preparations of Carthage both by land and sea; wherefore war is denounced against Carthage; and it was debated in the Senat, whether that city should be utterly destroyed or not. Nasica
would have it reserved, shewing it suited  not with policy to destroy that place, which exercised the Roman forces, and kept their armes from rusting; nor was it consonant to the clemency of Rome, to destroy and undoe such multitudes of people. But Cato told the Senat, that so long as Carthage stood, Rome could never be secure and quiet; this opinion pre∣vailed. As soon as the war was proclaimed, Vtica submitted presently, and so did Carthage, delivering up their ships and townes, which L. Martius, and M. Man∣lius Consuls, burned in the sight of Carthage. Then command was given that all the chief citizens should depart from Carthage, and build them a city 10 miles off from the sea. This command was rejected, and so they all resolved to defend themselves and city; upon this the Consuls set down before it, and on  all sides so besiege it, that no provision of corne could be brought into it, ma∣ny skirmishes, assaults, and eruptions there were, in which the Romans were sometimes worsted; sometimes the Carthaginians: this war was managed chiefly by P. Scipio Aemilianus, the son of Aemilius, but adopted by Scipio the son of that Scipio who overthrew Hannibal. This P. Scipio Aemilius had done good ser∣vice in Spain; where he obtained a murall or wall crowne, and being Tribune of the souldiers, advanced the Roman cause much in Africa. He was chosen Con∣sul younger then was usuall. After the Carthaginians both men and women had fought stoutly in their owne defence, at last they yeelded. The women had shewed such courage that they cut off their hair, and made ropes thereof for the warlike engines. This city had stood 700 years, it was 24 miles in compasse: the castle called Byrsa, held out some time after the city was taken. This last Carthaginian war fell out in the 604 year of Rome, the 52 year after the second Punick war, and lasted 4. years: they procured their own destruction by sending an army against their articles of peace of 58000 men in Masanissa's country, which army was de∣stroyed by famine, and the forces of that old King, for he was 94 years old when he dyed, at 86 he had a son, and used to goe bare-headed in all weathers. Before the city was taken Scipio gave way to all that would to be gone: 50 thousand departed. Asdrubal submitted himselfe to the Consuls mercy, but his  wife with her two children flung themselves into the fire, which burned for 17. dayes together, before it could be quenched. When Scipio saw Carthage on fire, he wept, repeating that verse, Illa dies veniet cum fato Troia peribit; and pre∣saging that the like calamity might befall Rome it self; as it did under Totila the Goth, 700 years after. Masanissa's kingdome was parted between his three sons Mycipsa, Gulussa, and Manastabelis, by the advise of Scipio, who by the old King was chosen arbitrator for that purpose. CHAP. II. 1. Corinth is taken. 2. The affaires of Egypt. 3. The affaires of Iudea under Si∣mon and Hyrcanus. 4. The affaires of Syria under Tryphon, Demetrius, Alex∣ander, &c. 5. The Roman wars at home, in Sicily, in Spain, and in Asia. THe same year proved fatall as well to Corinth, as it did to Carthage. The Achaeans and Boetians 50. years after Greece was made free by Tit. Flami∣nius, rebelled against the Romans, to whom the Spartans had complained of the wrongs done them by the Achaeans: Ambassadors are sent from Rome to Greece, to dissolve the confederacy of the Achaeans, and to restore every towne to its li∣berty;  which so madded the Achaeans that they fell upon the Spartan agents, plundred them, and being fled into the Roman Ambassadors lodgings for sanctu∣ary, were thence violently drawn out & beat, so that the Ambassadors themselves were in some danger. Critolaus the Achean pretor gathers great forces together, which Metellus who then had the charge of Macedonia quickly dispersed and slew, the Pretor himself in his flight was drowned in the fords.
Diaeus the next Pre∣tor  undertook the war, against whom L. Mummius the Consul marcheth with 23000 foot, 3000 and 500 horse: the Achaeans had not about 14000 foot, and 600 horse, who were quickly cut off by the Romans in the presence of their wives and children. Diaeus having first killed his owne wife, poisoned him∣selfe. Metellus had taken in Thebes and Megara, and was now laing siege to Co∣rinth: but Mummius sends him into Macedon, and sits down before Corinth, which at last he took by storme and burned: all were put to the sword except women and children, which were openly sold in the market. The chiefe ornaments and monuments of this rich city, were transported to Rome, such abundance of gold, silver, and brasse statues were melted in that conflagration, that meeting all toge∣ther  made up a mixt mettle called the Corinthian brasse, and of greater esteem at Rome then gold. All the other cities were by the Consul disarmed and unwal∣led. And so now ended the liberty of Greece, which became a province, and had a Pretor sent from Rome, being called the Pretor of Achaia, not of Greece, because Achaia had the principality when Greece was subdued. This fell out the 160. Olympiad. 952. years after the building of Corinth by Hales son of Hip∣potes. 3828. After these great victories over Carthage and Achaia, the Romans by degrees falling from their masculine vertues, gave themselves over to ease, luxury and magnificent buildings. In Asia, Egypt, and Syria, both princes and people  became extreme dissolute and profane. In Egypt after the death of Philometor Physcon, so called from the great gut (because he had so great a belly that he could not stand or walk without a staffe) succeeded King, and called himself Ptolomie Euergetes, but by the Alexandrians he was named and that deservedly for his wicked life: he had a good schoole-master, to wit, Aristarchus the Samothracian, a famous Grammarian; and he wrote some books himselfe. But became such a tyrant, that his subjects weary of his cruelties fell upon his house, and burned it to the ground: he fled away in the dark to Cyprus. Cleo∣patra his wife and sister is proclaimed Queen of Egypt; upon this Physcon divor∣ceth her, and marries with his owne daughter; he murthers his son which he had by her, and sends his head, hands and feet, for a present to the mother  whom he resolves to persecute with open war: here we may see what diffe∣rence there was between this monster, and his brother Philometor, who kindly entertained Onias the high priests son, and gave him leave to erect in Heliopolis a Temple, no lesse magnificent then that of Jerusalem, and punished the Samari∣tans for building a Temple at Garizim contrary to the Law of Moses. Demetrius Nicanor the son of Demetrius, having recovered his fathers king∣dome of Syria, he caused Jonathas the priest and captain of the Jewes, to give off the siege of Sion; and permitted to him the government of Samaria, Ga∣lilee, and soppe: but he became insolent with too much prosperity; he disban∣ded his old native souldiers, and retained the Mercenaries, which give offence to  Diodotus his Generall, who perceiving how divers cities weary of the Kings cru∣elty began to fall off from him, caused Antiochus the son of Alexander, who was the son of Epiphanes, to be sent for out of Arabia, and sets him up, having in a battell overthrown Demetrius, and driven him into Cilicia. He imployes the help of the two brothers Jonathas, and Simon, who had done good service for Demetrius at Antioch, and by their assistance he drives out of Gaza, Bethzura, and all Galilee, Demetrius his commanders. In the mean while Jonathas fortifies Ju∣dea, 3830. and renewes the Covenant with the Romans and Spartans. But Diodotus otherways called Tryphon, desirous to be King himself, resolves to make away with young Antiochus, and fearing the greatnesse of Jonathas, whose affection was true to the young King, perswades him to disband his forces, and come to Pto∣lemais; whither when he came, he was seised upon, clapt up in pri∣son, and his guard being a 1000 souldiers were all slain. At last having trea∣cherously murthered both Jonathas, and young Antiochus, made himselfe King of Syria: he caused the young King to be cut of the stone, pretending he died under the cure.
Simon in the government of Judea succeeds to Jonathas: he obtaines the fa∣vour of Demetrius, takes in the tower and garrison of Sion, overcomes Gaza, and made his son Hircanus Generall of his forces, and so advanced the Jewish affaires, that after Demetrius they never admitted any Macedonian to reign 3832. over them. In the mean time Demetrius suffering Tryphon for a while to reign in Syria, made war against the Parthians, who under Mithridates their King, had sub∣dued the Bactrians, Medes, and Elimaeans, extending their Monarchy from the hill Caucasus to Euphrates. Therefore Demetrius by the help of the Persians, Greeks, Elimaeans, and Bactrians, did in divers battels overcome the Parthians: but at length under pretence of peace he was taken and carried in the sight of those cities  which had revolted from him, to be laughed at: then he was sent to Hyrcania where he was well used. Tryphons luxurious life and government began to be wearisome to his soul∣diers; therefore they fell off from him to Cleopatra the wife of Demetrius; she was then at Seleucia with her sons, and imployed Antiochus the brother of her captive husband, to pursue Tryphon with an army; which he did in hope to get both the kingdome and the Queen to boot. He overthrowes Tryphon drives him out of upper Syria, and shuts him up within the Castle Dora. But escaping thence to Apa∣mea he was slain, having reigned 3 years in Syria. Antiochus forgetfull of the assi∣stance he hadfrom Simon the Jew, against his enemy, sent Cendebeus to subdue Ju∣dea, but Simon overthrew him, having sent against him an army of 20000 men un∣der the conduct of his two sons Judas, and John, so that Cendebeus was forced to flie into the Castle Cedro: but Simon was treacherously murthered at a feast, by his son in law Ptolomie whom he had made governour of Jericho. Simons wife and two sons were also put in chains; Hircanus or John the third son escaped by 3838. times, who succeeded to his father and drove the parricide out of Judea. Upon the death of Simon, Antiochus Soter, (so called from preserving of Syria, and Se∣detes from his country) besieged Jerusalem, and in it Hyrcanus, so that there was great famine in the city, being the 7th. year wherein the land rested from tillage. And the feast of Tabernacles being come, Hyrcanus obtained truce for seven dayes of Antiochus, who sent thither also to the feast buls with guilt hornes, gold and silver goblets full of spices: and made a great feast for the souldiers, wherefore he was call Pius. Hyrcanus in retaliation of so great favours, payeth tribute to Antio∣chus: He takes out of Davids sepulchre 3000 talents: with five hundred of these he buyeth his peace, with the rest he hireth souldiers, which he imployes for the Kings service against the Parthians, and there having overcome the Hyrcanians, he obtained the name of Hyrcanus. Demetrius Nicanor being weary of his private life, though he lived plentifully and like a prince, having marryed the daughter of Arsaces, King of Parthia: yet as soon as his father in law was dead, he endeavoured to flye into Syria, but Phraa∣tes the successor of Arsaces, sent a troop of horse who overtook him in his jour∣ney and brought him back to his wife; a stronger guard then was set over him, yet he escaped again, and was retaken; and reproved: and to let him see his childish levity, the King presents him with some golden dice, or huckle bones to play withall. In this interim, Antiochus with an army of 80000 men expert soul∣diers, besides cooks, bakers, skullions a multitude, invades the Parthian, and having fought three battles, obtains a great victory, and takes in Babylon. Di∣vers of the eastern Princes being weary of the Parthian government, submitted themselves to him, so that the Parthians were confined within their ancient bounds. In the mean time Phraates sends Demetrius with some Parthian forces  in Syria, purposely to draw Antiochus into his owne countrey, which was now in danger. Antiochus had quartered his army in divers cities; which being of∣fended with the burthen of free quarter, and the souldiers insolencies, revolted from him to the Parthians, and falling on the dispersed souldiers, killed them. An∣tiochus hearing of this, marcheth with such forces as he could at that time raise, and encountreth with the Parthian King: but being forsaken by his souldiers he was slain. Phraates bestowed on the dead
body princely obsequies, and mar∣ried  with the daughter of Demetrius, whom Antiochus had brought along with him. Phraates repenting that he had sent away Demetrius, would have recalled him again, but it was too late: for the troops of horse he sent to apprehend him, found him in his kingdome. Phraates employed his captive souldiers against the Scythians, and was killed by the Grecians. Demetrius having regained the kingdome of Syria, was sollicited by Cleopatra Queen of Egypt his mother in law, to raise an Army against Ptolomy her hus∣band 3843. and brother too, who had devorced her. Demetrius set presently upon Ptolomy, but withall lost his owne Kingdome of Syria; for first the Antiochians, then the Apamenians, and at last all the other Cities wearied with Demetrius his Parthian insolencies fell away from him. Ptolemy understanding, that his Sister Cleopatra had fled with the chief wealth of Egypt to Demetrius her son in law into Syria; sends one Zebina a young man home to Protarchus a Merchant, with an Army to conquer Syria, pretending that he was the adopted son of King Antiochus: the Syrians were glad to accept of any King, rather then endure the cruelties of Demetrius, admitted this Zebina, calling him by the name of Alex∣ander; in the mean while the Parthian King sent the corps of Antiochus in a sil∣ver coffin to be interred by Alexander, who expressing much sorrow (as if it had been true) obtained the love of the people. Demetrius being overcome by Alex∣ander, was at last forsaken by his own Wife, and sons, so that he was forced to flee  to Tyrus for Sanctuary, but as hee was comming out of the ship, hee was slaine by the Governours command: own of his sonnes Seleucus was killed by his mothers appointment, for crowning himselfe without her consent; the other sonne Grypho, so called from his big nose, was crowned by his mother; so that hee carried the title of King, but the whole Government of the Kingdome was given her; but Alexander having got Syria, insolently began to slight Kto∣lomy by whose help he obtained that Kingdome: therefore Ptolemy being re∣conciled to his sister; resolved to destroy the now upstart King Alexander, where∣fore he sends to Gryphus a great Army, and bestowes his daughter Tryphena on him in marriage, by which means the Cities fell off againe from Alexander, who being  overcome in a battaile, fled to Antioch, where wanting money to pay the souldiers, he commands them to seise upon the golden Image of Victorie in Iupiters Tem∣ple, scoffingly saying that Iupiter had lent him Victorie for a while; shortly af∣ter commanding Iupiters own golden statue to be taken down, hee was set upon by the people, and forced to fly; at last his souldiers being overthrown in a storm he was forsaken, and taken by some robbers, by whom he was brought to Gry∣phus, and slain. About this time, the Jews injoyed their liberties under Iohannes Hyrcanus, who having renewed the League with Rome, repealed all the Acts of Antiochus Sedetes; hee subdued Idumea, and forced it to receive Circumcision, hee pulled  down the Temple of Samaria, which had stood 200 years, and was built under Alexander. He made Antiochus Gryphus leave the siege of Jerusalem which hee had begun, this Gryphus was like to be poysoned by his mother Cleopatra out of a desire to reign alone; which desire made her betray her husband Demetrius, and murther her eldest son. Gryphus had secret information of the poison prepared for him, which when it was presented by his mother to him, he caused her to drink it up her self, and so shee perished by her owne device. After this Antiochus 3848. Gryphus reigned 8 yeares peaceably, till he attempted to poison his Brother An∣tiochus Cyzicenus of the same mother, but begot of his Uncle Antiochus Sedetes, these two brothers quarrelled so long about the kingdome of Syria till they  were both slaine, Gryphus by Herodian, Cyzicenus by Seleucus, the sonne of Gryphus. In the meane while Ptolemy King of Egypt dyeth having reigned 29 yeares; the government of Egypt was left to his wife, and to one of his sonnes. The Romans about this time had their Armes exercised at home by the Gracchi in Sicily by the slaves in Spain by Viriatus, in Asia by Aristonicus. Tiberius Grac∣chus
3839.  Tribune of the people was petitioned by the poore souldiers to have the Laws called Agrariae, put in execution: by these Lawes none of the souldiers could en∣joy above 500 acres of land; neither must the richer sort buy the poorer out of their estates: Gracchus urged the execution of these Lawes, as also that the trea∣sure left by King Attalus might be distributed among the poor. In these things hee was opposed by the rich men chiefly by C. Antonius the Consul, and Octavi∣us the Tribune, from whom Gracchus in an unusual way tooke away the Tribunate, hee also strove to continue in his Government against the Law: upon this Scipio Nasica the chief Pontifiee calls up the Senat to the Capitoll, who being accom∣panied thither with a great multitude; made Gracchus his friends forsake him, who striving to escape was slaine by his colleague Satureius, and 300 Citizens with him, whose bodies were flung into Tibris, the body of Tiberius lay unburied; this fell out an. urbis 60. About 4 yeares after Carbo the Tribune of the people, made a motion in the Senat, that the same man might be chosen Tribun as often as he pleased; this was seconded by C. Gracchus, Tiberius his brother, but mainly opposed by Scipio Emilianus, who the next morning was found dead in his bed, not without suspicion of poyson by Sempronia his wife, and sister of Gracchus the 56 year of his life. Carbo killed himself. C. Gracchus and Fulvius having seised upon the hill Aventin with an armed multitude were slaine by Opimius the Con∣sul: besides, 3000 citizens were killed in that sedition. Opimius after this was con∣demned  of treason. The Servill warre in Sicily began by means of one Eunus a Syrian, who encou∣raged the slaves (complaining of their hard usage) to rebell, this Eunus made them beleeve he was a Prophet, sent to foretell their prosperous successe; for con∣firmation of this he used to breath flames out of his mouth, having had within a nutshell fire and sulphur; the slaves chose him for their King; the prisons were broke open, and a great army of slaves were quickly raised. Another slave one Cleon of Cilicia gathered together 70000 runnegadoes; these overthrew the Ro∣man Pretors, the charge of this warre was committed to C. Fulvius the Consul; after him to Piso, then to Rupilius, who after divers events overthrew the slaves;  by famine he caused the cities Tauromenium and Euna to yeeld. Cleon was slaine in the fight: Eunus was taken in a cave, where he hid himself, and died in prison be∣ing eat up with lice. These troubles were presaged by the birth of an Hermophro∣dite in Rome, by the growing of corn upon trees in the fields of Bononia and by the eruption of fire out of Etna in Sicily. Viriatus a Portugall of a robber in the high wayes, became a terrour to Rome; for he overthrew the two armies of C. Vetelius the Pretor, and of Plautius Claudius, erecting the Roman Ensignes for Trophees on his Mountains; about that time 300 Lusitanians encountred with a 1000 Romans, and killed 320 of them having lost themselves 70 men. Appius Claudius the Consul, was beat by the Salassii, but in  the next battail he got the victory; for which he demanded a triumph, having kil∣led 5000 men: but because of his former overthrow, it was denyed him, wherefore he triumphed on his own charges. Q. Fabius Consul drove away Viriatus from the siege of Vacceia, and took the City with many forts and castles, he cut off the hands of 500 Princes, who upon his invitation had yeelded themselves to him. Pompejus the next years Consul was beaten in Numantia having lost the greatest part of his army, and many men of quality, at last Viriatus after 14 yeares war; being betray∣ed to Servilius Cepio, was slain by him, but the traitors received not any reward or thanks from Romans. Cepio's army was rewarded by Iun. Brutus Consul the with lands, and a City called by them Valentia. About this time the Plague was so hot at Rome, that scarce were there found men enough alive to bury the dead; this calamity was presaged by the birth of a hermophrodite at Rome, which by the Haruspices was drowned, S. Ce∣cilius, Metellus, and C. Fab. Max. Servilianus Consuls; another was burned alive about the beginning of the Marsian warre. Much about this time T. Man∣lius Torquatus caused his sonne Iunias
Silanus Pretor of Macedon to be put to  death, for oppressing the Macedonians with unjust taxes, then also was C. Ma∣tienus accused for deserting his army in Spain, for which he was whipped under the furca or gallows, being a long pole laid upon two erected forkes, and was sold for a slave. Mancinus the Consul at Numantia had such ill successe in his warres, that he was forced to make a dishonourable peace, which the Senat would not ratifie; for 30000 Romans were overthrowne by 4000 Numantians. Mancinus was made to stand naked with his hands bound behinde him, at the gates of Nu∣mantia till night, being forsaken by all his friends, and exposed as a spectacle of misery to his enemies. But Iun. Brutus in the inward parts of Spaine o∣verthrew  60000 Gallecians, who came to aide the Lusitanians, in that bat∣taile 50000 were slaine, 6000 taken, the rest fled; but in the hither Spain Le∣pidus the Proconsul was beaten by the Vaccei, and that deservedly; for they would have submitted to him, the Senat interceded for them, as being a harm∣lesse people, yet he would needs provoke them to fight, in which skirmish hee lost 6000 Romans, the rest fled. Rome to vindicate the losses and affronts su∣stained by the Numantians to C. Pulvius joined P. Scipio, who was chosen Con∣sul by all the Tribunes before his time; for none could by the Law be Consul twice, till after the expiration of ten yeares. Scipio therefore besiegeth Numan∣tia, which was seated on a hill, having walls 3 miles in compasse. This towne  had received and entertained the Roman fugitives, and had much afflicted the armies of Pompey, Popilius, and Mancinus; Scipio did not sodainly fall upon them, but first trained and exercised his souldiers, reducing them by degrees from their idlenesse and loose behaviour, to the old military severity, he was a man both fortunate, courageous and magnificent, for he gave a list of the rich presents sent him from Antiochus Sedetes, that the Senat might distribute them to the best de∣serving souldiers, whereas other Generalls used to conceal their presents sent them from Princes. The Numantians would have submitted upon tolerable conditions, which when they could not obtain, having drunk largely (not wine, which that countrey did not afford) but a liquor made of wheat, prepared as we doe our malt of barly; made a sally out upon the Romans, but seeing they could doe  little good that way, resolved to fly; which their wives hindered by cutting the horses girths and bridles, at last they set the towne on fire, and so con∣sumed themselves and all their wealth, leaving nothing for the Romans to tri∣umph over. Aristonicus in Asia made work for the Roman armes, hee was the bastard son of Eumenes, King of Pergamus. Attalus Philometor being now dead, and having left An. Vrbis. 622. his vast estate to the Romans; Aristonicus made hast to take possession of his brothers Kingdome, he draws many to side with him; he took by storm Myndus, Samos, and Colophon, which townes held for the Romans, against him was sent Licinius Crassus Consul and High Priest with a good army assisted by Nicome∣des King of Bithynia, Mithridates King of Pontus, (against whom the Romans afterward made war) Ariarathes King of Cappadocia, Pylemenes, King of Paphlago∣nia a great battaile was fought, and great slaughter on both sides; but Crassus lost the day and his life too; for being almost taken prisoner by a Thracian, he struck him in the eye with his rod, which so exasperated the Barbarian that hee runne Crassus through with his sword, and so he escaped by his death his shame and captivity; upon the news of this overthrow, Perpenna the Consul hastneth to A∣sia, falls sodainly on Aristonicus being secure, forceth him to fly to Strato∣nice the towne, which being besieged, and almost famished, yeelded; Ari∣stonicus  is sent to Rome, and all the wealth of Attalus. Perpenna fell sick at Pergamus and died. Aquilius put an end to the Asiatick warre, who by poysoning the Wells and springs caused divers Cities to yeeld. Aristonicus was strangled in Prison at Rome; which now enjoyed both the vices and wealth of Asia. Whilest Plautius, Hypseus, and Fulvius were Consuls Africk was so infested with Locusts, that after they had destroyed all
the fruits, corn and grasse, they  were carryed headlong into the Sea by a strong winde, and drowned; but with tides they were driven on the shoare, and there left upon the ebbing of the Sea, whose putrefied bodies so infected the air, that thereby all living creatures were poysoned, so that there died in Numidia 800000 soules upon the coast of Car∣thage and Utica above 20000, and in Utica it selfe there died 3000, so that in one day there were carried out of the gates of the City 1500 dead bodies; about this time the Gaules marching in a great Army to aid the the Allobroges, were over∣throwne by Q. Fab. Max. the Nephew of Aemilius in the flight 120000 were killed and drowned in the Roan whilest their bridge of boats broak under them. Bituitus the King and his son were imprisoned in Alba. CHAP. III. 1. The Iewish affaires under Hyrcanus, Aristobulus and Alexander, the Egyp∣tian affaires under Cleopatra, Philometor, and Alexander. The Syrian af∣faires under Seleucus, Eusebes, Philip, Demetrius, &c. The Roman Wars with Jugurtha, the Cimbri, the Thracians and Sicilian slaves. THe Jews under Hyrcanus, by the favour of the Romans enjoied peace abroad,  but were distracted with Sects at home, the Pharisees so called from separa∣tion from all other people, or from their exposition of the Prophets, placed merits in externall ceremonies and traditions, and looked for a Messias, that should be a temporall Prince, who should make the Jews Princes over the Gentiles: the Sadduces or Justiciaries were against traditions, they rejected all the Pro∣phets, save Moses, they denyed Angels and Spirits, the Immortality of Soules, and the Resurrection: the Esseans, that is, labourers from Asa, to consider and contemplate; (for they gave themselves to spirituall and corporall exercises) living a strict life, spending their time in reading, praying, studying of Physick) doing good workes, chiefly of charity to the poor; who had all things in common, 3870: and lived apart by themselves. Hyrcanus favoured the Sadduces, and rejected the Pharisees traditions he besieged Samaria, & laid it even with the ground. Antiochus entred Judea, thinking to raise the siege, but was driven out againe by Antigonus and Aristobulus, the sons of Hyrcanus then returning with new Forces from Pto∣lemy King of Egypt; began to wast and spoil the country, but having lost the great∣er part of those 6000 men he brought with him, was forced to give off. Shortly after this, Hyrcanus dyeth having ruled Palestine 31 yeers, his sonne Aristobulus changed the pincipality of Judea into a Kingdome, and was the first that wore the Diadem since the Captivity: hee reigned not above one year; having murthered his brother Antigonus with his owne hand, fearing that hee aimed at the Kingdome; he killed his Mother also, and then being tor∣mented in conscience, and vomiting out his bloudy soule, dyed. He enlarged Ju∣dea by the addition of Iturea, to him succeeded his youngest brother Alexander Ian∣neus. This Alexander began his reign with the murther of one of his Brothers, the other he permitted to live a private life in his reigne. Ptolemy Lamyrus killed 30000 Jews, feeding the captives with the flesh of their slaine countrymen, after this hee took Gadara, Amathus, and Gaza; hee had divers encounters with Deme∣trius, and was oftentimes troubled with the factions, and conspiraces of the Jews against him, 800 of the rebels he caused to be crucified whilest hee was feasting with his Concubines; and banished 8000 of them. He subdued many places in Sy∣ria, Idumea & Phenicia, then having fallen into a quartane ague of three years con∣tinuance, got by his intemperate drinking, he dyed in the campe, leaving his wife; Alexandra successour; whom he advised to continue the siege of the castle Raga∣be beyond Jordan, and to keep good correspondence with the Pharisees, who
3898.  were then the prevailing faction and to deliver his body to them to be used at their pleasure; which was done accordingly, and interred honorably, having reigned 27 years and lived 49. The kingdome of Egypt was left by Ptol. Physcon to his Queen Cleopatra, and to that sonne whom she should chuse; shee affected Alexander the younger, but was forced by the people to chuse the elder; who was surnamed Lathurus, be∣cause he obtained the kingdome as it were secretly and by stealth; for the hatred of his mother he was nicknamed Philometor. His mother made him repudiate his dear 3856. wife, and sister Cleopatra, and marry with the younger sister Selene. Cleopatra be∣ing devorced married in Syria with Antiochus Cyzicenus, who shortly after by  the help of the Cyprians waged war with his brother Gryphus, but lost the bat∣tail, and was forced to fly to Antioch. Gryphus besieged the Town and took it; he would have preserved Cleopatra, as being sister to his wife Triphena, but this cruell woman sent souldiers to murther her, after shee had taken Sanctuary; but shortly after in another battaile Cyzicenus had the better of his brother, who tooke Gryphus his wife, whom he caused to be killed for murthering of her sister. Cleopatra Ptolemies mother caused the people to rise against him, shee banished his wife Selene after shee had borne him two sons, shee made Alexander the young∣er son King, and persues with open warre her eldest sonne into Cyprus, who escaped from thence, shee being enraged at the Generall of her Army, for suffering her sonne to escape, caused him to be slaine. Shee had in great e∣steeme Chelcias and Ananias the sonnes of Onias, who built the Temple in He∣liopolis, for these two were faithfull to her. Whilest Gryphus and Cyzicenus were striving for Syria, Alexander besiegeth Ptolemy and wastes the coun∣tries of the Gazeans and Dorenses; these expecting no succour from the Kings of Syria call in Lathurus Alexanders brother, out of Cyprus, who perceiving that his brother Alexander meant to betray him, falls with fire and sword upon Judea, and overthrows Alexander in a battail neer Jordan, he killed 30000 Jews, takes Ptolemais with divers Castles which he throwes down, and was in some possibi∣lity  to recover Egypt from his mother; but shee comes into Syria with a great Army under the command of Chelcias and Ananias the Jews, shee recovers Pto∣lemais, and frees the Jews from the feare of Lathurus, but Alexander fearing his mothers cruelty betooke himselfe to a private life. Cleopatra fearing lest Cyzicenus should assist her eldest sonne to recover Egypt, sends great Forces to Gryphus, and calls back her sonne Alexander to his kingdome; but intending to murther him, which hee knew well, therefore having got her into his power, hee slew her: the people understanding this pa∣ricide, drove him out of his Kingdome, and re-established Ptolemy again in his Throne. Antiochus Gryphus being slaine the 29. yeare of his reigne, his sonne Seleucus succeeded, who made warre upon his Uncle Cyzicenus, at last took him, and killed him not long after, his sonne Antiochus Eusebes revenged his fathers death, by driving the murtherer quite out of Syria, who flying into Cilicia, for his exaction was burned in the Palace with his friends, his brother Antio∣chus was also overthrowne by Eusebes and lost both his Army and life. Af∣ter him Philip Gryphus his third sonne reigned in a part of Syria. Demetrius Euserus the fourth sonne was by Ptolemy Lathurus or Lamyrus as Plutarch calls him, sent for out of Cnidus and made King of Damascus. Antiochus Eusebes stoutly opposed these two brothers, but yet shortly after was slaine, as  hee was fighting against the Parthians in defence of the Queen of the Gala∣dens. So Philip and his brother Demetrius injoyed the Kingdome of Syria, this Demetrius was called in by the Jews against their owne King Alexander who in their civill wars had killed above 60000 Jewes, hee drove A∣lexander to the Mountaines after he had slaine all his Mercenary souldiers, but upon a supply of 6000 Jews Alexander made him to retire back; this Deme∣trius
would have driven his brother out of Syria; who for his owne defence cals in the Arabians and Parthians, these forced Demetrius to yeeld, and sent him prisoner to Mithridates the Parthian King; shortly after he sickned and died. Then did Philip enjoy Syria alone, but not long, for Antiocbus Dionysius having seised upon Damascus, endeavoured to get the kingdome of Coelosyria from his brother Philip, but whilest he was making warre upon Aretas King of Arabia, Philip invaded Damascus, and thought to carry it by treason, but was disap∣pointed, in the interim, Antiochus fighting against the Arabians was killed. Aretas challengeth Coelosyria, and overcomes Alexander King of the Jewes near Adid. About this time Appion brother of Lathurus by a concubine died, and left by his last will to the Romans the kingdome of Cyrene, so that part of Lybia was made a province. About the time that Hyrcanus besieged Samaria, the Romans overthrew Iu∣gurtha and seised upon Numidia. This Iugurtha was Masanissa's Grandchilde, 3861. but adopted by Mycipsa. He made warre upon his brother Hyempsales and kil∣led him: the like faet he intended against the other brother Adherbales, but he fled to Rome; wherefore Iugurtha sends thither by his Legats a great sum of money to draw the Senat to consent, that the kingdome between him and Adherbales might be divided. Legats with M. Scaurus are sent. But the Ro∣mans perceiving Iugurtha's cunning and bribery, in corrupting their legats,  denounce war against him as a Paricide. Calphurnius Bestia the Consul is sent in∣to Numidia, but the crafty King bought his peace, and seemingly submitted himselfe. He is sent for by the Senat, and upon the publick faith repaires thi∣ther; in the interim he causeth Massiva competitor of the kingdome, being the nephew of Masinissa, to be murthered; wherefore Sp. Albinus is sent over with an army, which the King corrupts with his gold, hereupon the army makes a voluntary flight, and gives him the victory. Metellus to revenge this disho∣nour, fals upon the King in earnest, being no wayes moved either with bribes, threats or prayers, wasts and plunders all his countrey, seiseth upon his capitall townes, and drives him quite out of his Kingdome, pursuing him through Mau∣ritania  and Getulia. At last Marius is sent, who being an upstart himself rai∣sed an army of the meaner sort, and with incredible valour took Capsa a city environed with sands and serpents. He took also Molucha built upon a rocky hil, and inaccessible. Shortly after he overthrowes not only Iugurtha, but also Boc∣chus king of Mauritania, who laid claim to Numidia as being next in bloud: this Bocchus had in his army 60000 horse; the fight continued three dayes: at last by the help of a great storme of raine, which so moistned the African targets and weapons that they were made unserviceable, the Romans prevai∣led. This battell was fought near Cirtha the ancient towne and court of Masa∣nissa. Bocchus to ingratiate himself with the Romans, catched Iugurtha by a train and delivered him by Sylla the Legat to Marius. At last this crafty King, who  wont to say, that it were an easie thing to sell Rome if there were a buyer, was carryed chained in Triumph with his two sons before Marius his Chariot, and presently after, was strangled in prison. Marius was the first that ever entred the Senat in a triumphant garment: he was continued divers years in his office be∣cause of the Cimbrick war. The Cimbrians having much of their country overflowed by the sea, were for∣ced 3859. to seek out new plantations. They first fall upon Illyria where they over∣threw Papyrius Carbo the Consul: then they send a Petition to Silanus that they A. U. 642. might have leave to plant themselves some where; their request being denyed, they resolve to plant themselves by force of armes: therefore they fall furiously first upon Silanus, then upon Manlius, then upon Caepio, and overthrew all their three armies. Then the Tigurius overcame L. Cassius the Consul upon the borders of the Allobroges or Savoyens. Aurelius Scaurus also was beat with his army by the Cimbrians, and himself killed by King Belus for disswading him to passe the Alpes, saying the Romans were invincible. At the river
Rhodanus C. Man∣lius,  and Q. Servilius Caepio, were defeated by the Cimbrians, 80000 Romans were slain, besides 40000 pages, and drudges who carried wood and water for the army. Caepio is condemned at Rome for his temerity to be strangled, and flung over the Scalae Gemoniae, and his whole estate confiscated; his daughters died all miserably after they had been abused; this judgement fell on Caepio for his sacriledge upon the Temple of Tolosa. The Cimbrians having wasted all about Rhodanus, and the Pyrenaeans entred Spain, but were driven out by the Celtiberians: Then returning into France, they joyned their forces with the Teutones, and having divided their army into three parts, haste to crosse the Alpes; Marius being now Consul the third time, sets upon the Teutones at  the foot of the Alpes. His army being pinched with thirst, complained to him, who told them if they were men, they would fight for the river, which was now in the possession of the enemy; upon this they fell furiously on the Teutones, beat them, and got the river, drinking almost as much bloud as water. Of the Teutones and Ambrones were slain 200000 besides 90000 taken; scarse 3000 escaped. Teutobodus their Generall was slain: the women petitioned for their lives, which being refused, they first dash out their childrens brains, then they hang them∣selves. The Cimbrians having beaten Q. Catulus the proconsull from the Alpes, enter Italy: against whom Marius being now the fift time created Consul is sent. 3871. He taking his opportunity with the advantage of the sun and winde, being assisted  by Catulus his forces, falls upon them unawares, and routs them; 140000 of them were slain, 60000 taken. Marius by this victory was honoured with the Con∣sulslip the sixt time; thus the Cimbrians invincible elsewhere, were easily conquered in Italy, being softned by the delights thereof. The Cimbrian women despairing of mercy, killed one another. Marius his triumph was accompanied with a sad dysaster; for Publicins Malleolus murthred his mother; for which wickednesse he was the first that was sowed in a sack and flung into the sea: this Cimbrick war continued 8. years. Strabo thinks these Cimbri to be from the Cimmerii, and others, that both are from Gomer the sonne of Japhet: the Teu∣tones were Westphalians as Melanchthon gathers out of Tacitus and Ptolemie. The  Ambrones dwelt neare the Rhene. About this time the Thracians sometimes the Macedonian tributaries rebelled, wasting Thessalie, and Dalmatia, even to the Adriatic sea. The Scordisci a people most fierce in Thracia, saith Florus, (but Stadius will have them a people in Gallia upon Ister) totally routed the army of Portius Cato. Didius beat them home a∣gain into Thracia. Drusius confined them within Danubius. Minutius wasted them along the river Hebrus, in which many of them were drowned, the yce de∣ceiving them. Piso went as far as Caucasus and Rhodope. Curio entred Dacia on the North side of Danubius. Lucullus marched to Tanais, and the lake Maeo∣tis. These Barbarians were destroyed with fire and sword; many of the cap∣tives  were left alive in misery and pain, having their hands and feet cut off. Licinius Narva Praetor of Sicily, about this time, gave occasion to the slaves to break out again into an open warre. He was commanded to set all the Ingenui at liberty, because of the Cimbrian wars, which he refused to doe; whereupon 30 slaves began the rebellion, and grew quickly into a great body, against whom Titinius a captain of the high way men was sent; whom the slaves slew: and being increased to 6000 made one Salvius a Soothsayer their King: then they lay siege to Morgantina, and beat off Licinius as he was comming to raise the siege. Salvius seeing the Romans run away, made proclamation, that none should be killed who  flung down his armes, whereupon he was supplyed with sufficient armes. Athenio a Cilician Astrologer, and captain of the whole legion, joynes himselfe to Sal∣vius who cals himselfe now Tryphon, and makes his regall seat at Tricala, which he fortifieth with wals and trenches, having the command of 40000 men: against him Licinius Lucullus is sent from Rome with 18000. who fals upon the slaves,
kils 20000 of them, in this conflict Athenio was wounded, the rest fly to Tricala which they held out against Lucullus; in the interim, Tryphon dieth. Athenio suc∣ceeds him: against him M. Aquilius collegue to Marius in his fift Consulship is sent, he kils Athenio fighting stoutly, and was wounded himself in the head, he overthrowes the 10000 that were left, and the last 1000 being taken prisoners, were condemned to be thrown to the beasts, which they prevented by killing one another. CHAP. IIII. 1. The civill wars of Rome under Marius, Sylla, Cinna. 2. The Roman wars with Mithridates. C. Marius hitherto the pillar, now the caterpillar of his country, sheathes the conquering sword of Rome into her own bowels, which he had un∣sheathed against her enemies: Having got himself to be made Consull the sixt time by bribery and Apuleius Saturninus Tribune, he endeavoured to renew the  Agrarian lawes, purposely to bring down the nobility, which were a sore in his eye that was an upstart, or new man. He caused A. Nomius the competitor of Saturninus to be murthered, and Metellus Numidicus to be banished, to the great grief of all the nobility: and because he was afraid that Memmius would be chosen Consull, Saturninus by his procurement, caused him to be murther∣ed. Glaucia, who aimed at the Consulship, was a main man for Saturninus; the Senat and people inraged at these murthers, made such a tumult in the forum, that they fell to skirmishing, Marius sided with the strongest party, which was the Senat, and drove Saturninus into the Capitoll where he was besieged, and the Conduit pipes which conveyed water thither cut off; Saturninus openly pro∣fessed, that Marius was the cause of all the trouble. Upon his submission he  with his complices were received into the Curia: but the people breaking in fu∣riously fell upon Saturninus, and tore him in pieces with Saufeius and Tabienus-Glaucia was drawn out of Claudius his house, and slain. Cn. Dolobella with L. Geganius as they thought to escape through the hearb market, were killed also. These incendiaries being slain and their estates confiscated, Cato and Pompey motioned that Metellus should be recalled home, but they were oppo∣sed by Marius, and Furius the Tribune, and honest Rutilius was banished into Smyrna, where he spent his time in study. Metellus being brought back into the city with great honour, so disconten∣ted Marius, that he went to Mithridates king of Pontus, to incense him against  the Romans. This was the sonne of that Mithridates, who for his service a∣gainst Aristonius, was rewarded by the Roman Senat with Phrygia the greater. When he was young he used so many Antidotes fearing the treachery of his governours, that when he was old, he could, not poyson himselfe. He spent 7. years together in hunting, never all that time entring into any house; so fear∣full he was to be murthered: but when he came to reign, he enlarged his Do∣minion by subduing the Scythians, and driving Ariebarzanes the Romans friend out of Cappadocia, whom Sylla restored again: he spake 22 lan∣guages. Livius Drusus Tribune of the people stirred up the Italians against Rome, A. U. 659. they being denyed the priviledges of the city, and understanding Drusus their patron was privately murthered, fell upon C. Servilius the pretor, who was sent as a Legat to the Picentes, Samnites and others, and slew him with divers other Romans. Hereupon Cn. Pompeius the Pretor was sent against the Picentes, with an army which was beat by them. So was Jul. Cesar by the Samnites. Rutili∣us the Consul was slain with 8000 Romans by the
Marsi; which slaughter  Marius repayed with the overthrow of 8000. Marsians. Caepio with his army was overthrown by the Vestini, but Cesar having renewed his forces sub∣dued the Samnites and Lucanians: upon newes of this victory the Senat put off their Souldiers cassock which they had put on in the beginning of this war, and was their habit of mourning, and betook themselves again to the gowne. After this Marius puts 6000 Marsians to the sword, and disarmes 7000. Sylla raiseth the siege from Aeserina where the Romans were shut up. Pompey over∣threw the Picentes. These good successes made the Senat put on their Laticla∣via or white coates imbroidered with studs of purple resembling broad nail∣heads. Cato overcame the Etrusci, Plotius the Vmbri. Pompey took the rich city Asculus, killed 18000 Marsians, took 3000 prisoners, and drove 4000 to the mountains where they died in the snow and yce. The Picentes were utterly defeated, whose Generall Judacilius poysoned himself. Posthumius Albinus Sylla's Legat was in a tumult murthered by the souldiers A. U. 661. which occasioned the death of 18000 Samnites. Cato for extolling his owne acti∣ons above those of Marius, was knocked down by Marius his son. C. Gabinius is killed. The Vestini and Marrucini are plundred, Pompedius and Obsidius Italian Commanders with their whole army are overthrown by Pompeys Legat Sulpicius at Asculus. Pompey caused all the commanders to be whipped and be∣headed, and the servants to be sold. At Rome the Senat and Roman Knights fell out about the Agrarian lawes. Livius the Tribune threated Caepio with death for resisting him, and beat Philip the Consul. But shortly after was so wounded in a tumult, that he was carryed home half dead. Validus was stabbed with a knife; Philip and Caepio were suspected for this murther. Mithridates upon these troubles in Italy, takes occasion to invade Paphlago∣nia, Galatia, and Cappadocia; threatens also Bithynia, and stirres up all the East against the Romans. Sylla then besieging Nola, is chosen to goe against Mithridates, but he resolved to take Nola first; whereupon Marius being now 70 years old, by the help of Sulpitius the Tribune, obtained the charge of this Mithridatick war, and got the act for Sylla to be repealed. The Tribune not content with this, kils Sylla's son in law, and sends to Sylla to deliver up his  Commission and the army: Sylla in a rage hastneth to Rome, skirmisheth with the faction of Marius and Sulpitius, and drives them out of the city. Marius both father and son with 10 more are by the Senat denounced enemies to the State; Sulpitius was betrayed by his servant, and killed; the servant demanding his reward, was made free; but for his treachery to his master was flung downe from the Tarpeian rock. Marius the son goeth over to Africk. Old Marius hiding himself in some Marishes, was by the Minturnians condemned to die, but the executioner being deerred by the majesty of the man, returnes without doing him any hurt. So he sailes over to his son into Africa. Sylla reignes at Rome; his Colleague Q. Pompeius Consul is slain by Cn. Pompeius  the Proconsul, for demanding the army from him. Mithridates in the mean time subdueth Phrygia and Asia, and causeth all the Romans that were found in Asia to be slain in one day. The city Rhodus held out for the Romans, and beat Mithridates by sea. He sends Archelaus into Greece with an army of 120000 men, who subdue Achaia and Athens. But whilest Sylla was about to raise the siege from Athens, the fire of discord breaks out again at Rome under Corn. Cinna and Cn. Octavius Consuls. Cinna would have Marius, and the others banished by Sylla to be recalled; herein Octavius resists him, and drives him out of the city. Marius in the interim returnes from Africa. The army at Nola under Appius Claudius joyned with Cinna; the Italians whose cause Cinna much favoured, unite themselves in a great body to him. So that the army consisted of 30 legions. Cn. Pompeius the father of great Pompey, after much wavering encounters with Sylla under the city wals, where a great-battell was fought. In it were two brothers, the one having killed the other ignorantly,
who as he was stripping his dead corps,  perceived it to be his brother; and with grief stabbed himselfe over his bro∣thers body, so both were burned together in the same pile. Cinna and Marius divide their army into four parts, two whereof were committed to Sertorius and Carbo: after many skirmishes and much slaughter, Cinna is received in∣to the city, and after him Marius. Pompey is struck dead with a thunderclap, his army destroyed by the plague. Octavius is murthered, and his head ex∣posed to the publick view before the Rostra or pleading place, which was a great building within the forum Romanum, and in it a pulpit called Rostra beset with the sterns of ships taken from the enemies. The head of Cn. Antonius was pre∣sented upon Marius his table; C. Cesar, and Fimbria were murthered in their  owne closets at home. Crassus both the father and sonne were slain in the sight of each other. Bebius and Numitor were dragged by the hangmen through the Forum. Catulus killed himselfe. Merula, who was made Jupiters priest, be∣sprinkled his Idoll with his owne bloud: no rich man at that time could escape. 3884. Cinna and Marius create each other Consul, without calling the Comitia or Parliament. But shortly after Marius dieth, being distracted in minde. In these troubles many of the nobility fled to Sylla in Achaia and Asia; who had recovered Athens from Mithridates, and had killed above 200000 of his men, and had taken near as many prisoners. L. Flaccus succeeds Sylla, he was hated of the army for his covetousnesse,  and slain by C. Fimbria who succeeded him. This had good successe against Mithridates, took Pergamus, and almost had taken the King in it. He overthew Ilion the towne; and recovered a great part of Asia from Mithridates. Sylla in the interim overthrew the Thracians wasting Macedonia. Cinna and Papirius Carbo made themselves Consuls for two years: L. Valerius Flaecus, and other peaceable men, sent to Sylla to have peace established; but Cinna raised an ar∣my: and as he was forcing the souldiers to goe on ship-board at Ancona was stoned to death: then Carbo was Consul alone. Sylla took Asia, Bithynia, and Cappadocia from Mithridates. Fimbria being forsaken by his army which 3888. went to Sylla, made his owne servant to kill him. Sylla returnes this answer  by the Legats to the Senat, that he would submit, conditionally the citizens banished by Cinna might be restored. This was resisted by factious Carbo and his crew. Sylla's Legats who were sent with articles of peace, were abused by the Consuls Narbonus and Corn. Scipio Asiaticus, both whom Sylla overcame near Capua, and let Scipio goe without any hurt. So moderate was he both in his victories over his country men, and carefull rather to subdue the common enemy, then to revenge particular wrongs; Pompey the son of him who took As∣culus, having raised an army of Volunteirs, joyned him selfe with Sylla, and so did all the Nobility. Young Marius and Carbo, Consuls, to be revenged on the Senat siding now with Sylla, beset the Curia with souldiers under Damasippus the Pretor; and  killed every one as he came out, and murthers were committed every where in the city. Pontius Telesinus Generall of the Samnites, with an army of 40000 fought so with Sylla at the port Collina, that the city was in danger to have been destroyed utterly; for he said that Italy should never want wolves to de∣vour their liberties, untill the wood that sheltred them were cut down. The fight continued till it was past midnight, at last the Samnites retreated, and Telesinus the next morning was found gasping for life; whose head Sylla caused to be carryed about Praeneste where Marius was; who now despairing tryed to escape, but was prevented and slain. Then Sylla obtained the title of Happy, if there be happinesse in shedding of bloud, for he slew above 70000 in his wars against Marius and Telesinus, by Metellus, Lucullus and the Servilii he over∣threw the armies of Carbo. He killed 8000 of those that yeelded to him, 2000 of those that were Proscripti (whose goods were confiscated, and the persons themselves to be banished) suffred death. Marius his brother was murthered by degrees, first having his hands and feet cut off, then his eyes put out; he kil∣led
all the Prenestinians, he killed Carbo in Sicilie and many other cruell acts hee did, then he was made Dictator; none having had this honour till now, since Hannibals departure out of Italy, which was 120 yeares space: he had 24 fasces or bundles of rods with axes carried before him, hee weakened the Tri∣buniciall power, by debarring them from making Lawes and publick speeches. Hee filled up the Senat with Knights; and killed his friend Lucretius Asella for offering without his consent to demand the Consulship: he encreased the Colledges of Priests and Augures to 15. hee sold the goods of the banished and debarred their children of all honours; hee tooke Nola, and divided the lands of the Samnites, among 47. Regions. By Cn. Pompejus he overcame and slew Domitius that was banished; and Iarbas king of Numidia; hee was severe against the banished and those that received them, that Bastia the wife of Metel∣lus refused to let him in though disguised, wherefore he slew himselfe, besprink∣ling his unthankfull gate with his owne bloud, at last being slighted by the people and Senat having laid downe his Dictatorship 2 yeares after he dyed at Cume of the lowsie disease, and his body was burned honourably in the campus Martius. M. Lepidus would have repealed all his acts; but by Catulus his fellow Consul hee was banished Italy, and dyed in Sardinia. About this time the Roman Capitol, and the Delphic Temple were burned. These Civill broiles at Rome were presaged by fire from Heaven, by unusuall haile and stormes, by the running of Sheep and Oxen out of their stables and folds to the hils and woods, by bloud gushing out of bread, and by the unusuall howling of dogs, and great Earthquakes. CHAP. V. 1. The affaires of Syria under Tigranes. 2. Of Iudea under Alexandra. 3. Of Egypt under Ptolemy Auletes, &c. 4. The Sertorian, Spartic, and Mi∣thridatic war; with Catilius conspiracy. 5. Pompis actions and some Roman passages, about Cicero and Clodius. SYria being now torne in peeces by Civill wars, Aretas reigning in one part, and Antiochus in another, Tygranes King of Armenia is sent for, Mithridates 3891. not being able to assist them, because of his warres with the Romans, and Ptole∣my King of Egypt they durst not trust, as aiming at Syria himselfe. Therefore having subdued the Gordyeans, Atropatenians, and Mesopotamians, crosseth Euphrates and seiseth upon Syria and Phenicia; hee besiegeth Ptolemais with 50000 men, at last hee tooke it, and in it Cleopatra Selene, being banished out of Syria, whom hee slew. Antiochus was driven to a corner of Cilicia, and Tigranes possessed the greater part of Syria for 18 yeares together, in whose time there perished by Earth-quakes there 17000 men, and many towns, a presage of the great change that was at hand, for the whole kingdome of the Seleucidae, was seised upon by the Romans. Alexandra Alexanders widow now reigned in Palestine under whom the Pharisees were so powerfull, that they ruled all and put many good men to death, who did not favour their faction. Alexanders eldest son Hyrcanus was then High Priest. Aristobulus the younger had no command, the Queen sent rich presents to Tigranes whilest he lay before Ptolemais, by which means shee kept her countrey in  quietnesse 9 yeares, but whilest she lay sick, Aristobulus seiseth upon divers Towns and Forts, and so makes himselfe King, causing Hyrcanus to content himselfe with the Priest-hood. In Egyt Lathyrus being dead, another Ptolemy succeeds. He was accounted the son of Lathyrus by a Concubine. Ptolemy the son of Alexander was with Syl∣la, whom he made King of Alexandria, but the Citizens not induring his inso∣lency
killed him the 19 day of his reigne; his brother succeeds, and him they ba∣nished; at last Araletes who called himselfe Bacchus succeeded, famous in nothing but in luxury, and piping, for which he was called Auletes. The valiantest of all those whom Sylla proscribed was Q. Sertorius, whose valour was known both in Africk, the Baleares and the Fortunate Islands, at last Spaine under him rebelled; hee overthrew L. Manlius Proconsul of Gallia, and M. Antonie Legat, by Hirtuleius the Questor; hee took in many townes, and threatned Italy it selfe. But Q. Metellus Pius overthrew Hirtuleius his Army in Betica now called Granata or Granada; and Pompey (who being as yet but Questor, was honoured with Consular authority, a  thing not usuall) recovered Gallia; shortly after Sertorius overcame both Metellus and Perpenna, who within a while lay siege to the Towne Cala∣gurium; which made Sertorius jealous of his friends, many of whom hee put to the sword upon suspicion of treason. Mithridates upon this enters in∣to league with Sertorius by whose helpe hee overthrew M. Aurelius Cotta the Consul neer Chalcedon, 12000 Romans were lost in the Sea fight, 5000 in the land skirmish. Metellus and Pompey were fain to give over the siege of Ca∣lagurium: at last Sertorius being betrayed by some of Antonies and Perpenna's fu∣gitives was slaine at a feast, this Perpenna and Marius were afterward de∣stroyed with their Armies by Pompey, who recovered Spain after 10 years war by the Roman Commanders striving for mastery. Calagurium was starved  and at last burned. The Spartick war followes immediately upon the Sertorian, one Spartacus a Thracian souldier, then a highway-man, at last a Gladiator or Fencer, with 74 A. U. 679. more Fencers being shut up in Capua by Lentulus, broke loose, and betake themselves to the hill Vesuvius, then Claudius Pulcher besets them round, but they suddenly fell upon Claudius his campe and surprised it; the like they did to P. Vorenus Pretor, or chiefe Justice; then they overrun Campania plunder∣ing all, even Nola and Nuceria, Thurus and Metapontum, their Army in∣creased dayly, malecontents from all places flocking to them, for want of better arms they made themselves Targets of twigs covered with beasts skinnes and  swords, and darts of the prisoners iron fetters, they quickly also horsed themselves, their Captaine Spartacus had the Fasces carried before him, which were taken from the Pretors. These Rebels overcame both Lentulus and Cassius, and intended to fall upon Rome; but M. Licinius Crassus first overthrew 30000 of the Gaules and Germans, who assisted Spartacus, then he fell upon Spartacus his owne Army and killed 60000 fugitives; took 6000 prisoners, the rest that thought to escape to Sicily for want of shipping, were seised upon, and killed with Spartacus their Captain. The war was scarce ended, when the Romans were forced to send an Army to suppresse the Dardanians and Scordisci (a people of Pannonia, some say of Thra∣cia) who overrun Macedonia; these Scordisci used to drinke out of dead mens  skuls, against these Ap. Claudius was sent, and Curio Scribonius: ships are also rig∣ged out to suppresse the Cilician Pyrates who much infested the Sea. P. Servilius subdued Cilicia and Pamphilia, took the chief Towns of Lycia, and overcame the Isauri, whence he was called Isauricus; these Isauri are at the foot of Mount Taurus; the first Roman that passed this Mountain was this Servilius. Cononius the Proconsul conquered Dalmatia and after 2 years siege tooke Solone a great City. Mithridates having broke the league he made with Sylla, invaded Cappa∣docia by Tygranes his son in law: against him the two Consuls Licinius Lucullus and Aurelius Cotta are sent. Cotta was worsted and driven into Chalcedon. Mithridates removes thence and sits downe before Cyzicum a rich and popular City in an Island of the same name within the Propontis, so called from the King Cyzicus whom Vlysses killed; this place was an inlet to Asia, but Lucullus comes and raiseth the siege, and drives him into Byzantium. Mithridates lost then also his fleet of 100 ships, with all his provision and furniture; and it's thought, that hee lost by
Sea and land in the siege of Cyzicum above 300000  men, amongst whom Varus dyed, with divers o hers proscribed by Sylla. Yet Mithridates though thus weakened will not yeeld but stirs up the Armenians, I∣berians, Caspians and Albanians against Lucullus, who had now sent to the Se∣nat his Laureat Letters in token of victory; for so Conquerors use to doe. Rich Lucullus, Crassus, and Cn. Pompejus were now Consuls: they restored the Tribunitian power againe, which Sylla had weakned. Cotta a little before had advanced the order of Knighthood; at that time M. Tul. Cicero being Questor drove Verres Pretor of Sicily out of his place by his eloquence, accusing him of oppression: And such corruption was at Rome, that L. Gellius and C. Lentulus Censors, removed 64 Senators from their places. Lucullus in the interim reco∣vers Paphlagonia and Bithynia: invades Pontus, takes the two chief Cities there∣of, kills 30000 of Mithridates his Army, and pursues him to Comana: the crafty King to hinder the Romans from pursuing him, caused money and rich things to be strawed in the way, and so with 2000 horse he escaped to Tigranes, who did not admit him into his presence, but gave order hee should bee used like a King. Mithridates now despairing of himself, sent Bocchus his Evneuch to his Pa∣lace, to kill all his wives sisters, and Concubines, which being done, the Go∣vernours of almost all the Garrisons fell off from him to Lucullus, to whom La∣chares Mithridates his sonne sent a crowne of gold: hee tooke divers Sea towns,  hee pursues Tygranes and defeats his army for refusing to deliver up Mithridates and overthrowes 300000 men being invited by the Grecians, he besiegeth and taketh Tygranocerta lately built: he makes Antiochus the sonne of Cizycenus King of Syria. Mithridates flies to Pontus; Tygranes into the remotest parts of Armenia; whom Lucullus could not pursue because of the winter, but upon a mutiny in Lucullus his Army for want of pay, the souldiers refused to march. Which gave opportunity for Tygranes and Mithridates to renew their Forces. Mithridates slew C. Triarius, Lucullus his Legat, and overthrew his Army, among the dead bodies were found 150 Centurions and 24 Tribunes slaine: the Sea even to Hercules pillars, were so filled with Pyrats by Mithridates  and the the Cretans, that all provision and commerce with Rome was intercepted, till Creet was subdued by Q. Metellus called therefore Creticus, and the Sea scow∣red of Pirates by Pompey, which was done in 40 dayes space, such of the Pirats as escaped had lands assigned them in Cilicia, far from the Sea, that in stead of pi∣racy, they might be exercised in husbandry. Cn. Manilius the Tribune, being assisted by Cicero and Cesar got an act to passe that Pompey should have the charge of the Mithridatick warre; this caused great emulation between Pompy and Lucullus. Pompey accused Lucullus of avarice and profusion, calling him the gowned Xerxes, and he againe accused Pompey of pride and ambition; yet notwithstanding full power is committed to Pompey over all the Roman Armies without Italy, with an ample Commission to de∣clare friends or foes whom he pleased: never had any before him the like power; hee was also the first Roman Generall that ventured over Euphrates: who ha∣ving made a bridge of Boates, falls upon Mithridates suddenly, and routs him in one battell, then pursues him to Colchi; but Ororzes king of Albania and Arte∣cus King of Heberia with 70000 in ambush thought to intrap him; but he under∣standing the plot beset the wood, where they were, and set it on fire, that the ene∣my was forced to submit and give hostages: in the meane while M. Lucullus Go∣vernour of Macedonia overthrowes the Bessi a people in Thracia neer Pontus a∣bout hill Aemus, and made all their country tributary whilest the other L. Lucul∣lus was taking in Nisibis upon Tigris. Pompy being now sure of Mithridates, marcheth against Tigranes his associate who having overthrown the Seleucidae called himselfe King of Kings, hee had 3906. three sonnes by Mithridates his daughter, one of them he slew for rebelling, the other he killed in hunting, for not helping up his Father when hee fell from his horse, but supposing him dead with the fall, took the Crowne from his head, and
set it on his own: the third son Tigranes, rebelled against his father, and being o∣verthrown fled to Phraates King of Parthia, and from him, humbly to Pompy: so did old Tigranes, who prefented him with 6000 talents; and the souldiers with 500 drachms: whereupon he obtained pardon, and the Government of the greater Armenia, conditionally that he did surrender all his late conquered coun∣tries. He surrendred all Syria, from Euphrates to the Sea, which he had taken from Antiochus Eusebes. Young Tigranes obtained the lesser Armenia which he did not long enjoy; for whilest he was conspiring with the Parthians against his Father, hee was apprehended by the Romans, led in triumph, and dyed in pri∣son. Pompey having built Nicopolis in the lesser Armenia, he bestowes the Kingdome of Cappadocia upon Aribarzanes with the Provinces of Sophena and  Gordena, and makes Syria a Province, which he refused to confer upon Antiochus Comagenus, the son of Eusebes, though he petitioned for it. Shortly after this Catalin with Lentulus, Cethegus, and many other discon∣tented Gentlemen conspire against the State. Cicero that year was made Consul, 3909. who by his industry detected the plot, and by his eloquence overthrew it. Lentulus with some noble men are apprehended, imprisoned, and executed by the Consuls command, and Cato's perswasion, though Caesar spoke against it. Catilin being driven out of the City, raised an army in Italy, which was destroyed,  and he fighting stoutly was killed. In this interim Mithridates was betrayed by his sonne Pharnaces, who had got the Armies good will; he fearing to be delivered up by his son to the Romans, attempted to poyson himselfe, but could not, being his body was so used to antidotes. Which is no wonder, for we read of some who have fed altogether on poyson, and could not eat any other food. Galen speaks of an old woman at Athens who lived altogether on Hemlock; and Albertus Magnus knew a maid whose ordinary dyet were Spiders. But Mithridates did by the sword, which he could not by poyson: he was 69 years old when he killed himselfe, he reigned 57. Pharnaces by sending his fathers corps to the enemy, obtained the Kingdome of Bosphorus. Antipater the Idumean about this time fomenting the discord between Hyrca∣nus and his brother Aristobulus about the kingdome of Judea, had drawn thi∣ther 50000 men under Aretas King of Arabia Nabathea, he overthrows Aristobu∣lus in a battell and shuts him up within Jerusalem, during the siege, Onias that holy man was stoned to death by the besiegers, because he would not pray for their successe: therefore God punished them with famine. Aristobulus procured M. Scaurus for 400 talents to raise the siege: he pursues them in the flight and kills 7000 of them, among the rest Antipaters brother who had raised the warre. Pompey was now at Damascus taken lately from Areats by Metellus and Lolli∣us Legats or Lievetenants Generall to Pompey. Aristobulus presents Pompey with  the golden Vine worth 500 talents: the Romans thought that the Jewes in honour of Bacchus kept this Vine. Pompey having heard both the brothers plead dismissed them with a promise that he would shortly visit them; as soone as he had setled the Nabathean affaires; but Aristobulus seiseth on the Castles, and to shelter himself from Pompey, whose anger by this meanes he had procured, hast∣ened to Jerusalem, but fearing lest Pompey who was now marching after him through the woods of Jericho, should overtake him, submitted himselfe, and obtained pardon, Gabinius is sent to Jerusalem to receive the moneys, but is kept out by the souldiers, wherefore Aristobulus is secured, and Jerusalem besieged. Piso Pompey's Legat is received into the City and Palace, but is kept  out of the Temple by the Garrison of Mount Sion. Which hee besiegeth, and the third month takes it, on the day of expiation 12000 of them were slain; Pompey entered into the Holy of Holyes, but medled not with the Treasures: Olymp. 179. Cicer. & An∣ton. Coss. Hee restores Hyrcanus to his Priesthood, but not to the Crowne: hee re∣stores Samaria, Azotus, Pella with other Townes overthrowne by the Jews, to their ancient Inhabitants: hee carryed with him to Rome in chaines A∣ristobulus with his two sonnes, one of which namely
Alexander made an  escape by that way and raised new troubles in Judea, against whom Gabi∣nius is sent, to him Alexander submits and delivers up the Castles hee had taken, all which Gabinius demolished, Alexanders mother being gratious with Gabinius obtained his pardon; and procured 5 Courts of Justice to be erected through Judea in 5 Cities, to wit, in Jerusalem, Gadara, Amathus, Jericho, and Saphora. Pompey having cleared the Sea of Pyrats, overthrown Mithridates, subdued Armenia, and all the neighbour Nations to Egypt, bestowed Gallogrecia or 3891. Gallatia on Dejotarus, Paphlagonia on Attalus, Colch on Aristarchus, and 16000 talents on the Armies: returns to Rome, where with great solemnity and gratulations, he obtains the name of Pompey the great, he enters into a League with Cesar, who having conquered Lusitania in his Pretorship was now Consul, and with M. Crassus; these three divided the Senat into factions, onely Cato with a few others preferred the publick good to their owne private interests. Caesar promotes the Agrarian Lawes, by which the Publick Lands are as∣signed to the common people, and 20000 men are sent to plant. Cicero is banished, his goods plundered, and his house pulled downe by the means of P. Clodius a rich, but a wicked man, who was found in womens ap∣parell in the solemnities of Bona Dea. He by bribery having got himselfe 3913. to bee made Tribune, never rested till Cicero was banished, who with  Caesar accused him for murthering Lentulus and Cethegus, when he was Con∣sul; thus Cicero was forced in the night time to depart the City, and returned not in 16 moneths, after which time he returned, and was received with great joy. About this time Clodius the Tribune got an Act to passe against Cyprus, that the wealth thereof should be brought into the publick treasure: this he did to be revenged on the King of Cyprus, who refused to ransome Clodius when hereto∣fore he was taken prisoner by the Pyrats: the King hearing of this Act poysoned himselfe. Cato is imployed in this businesse, who brings with him to Rome all the wealth of Cyprus. Ptolemy had nothing left him now but Egypt, his bro∣ther being dead, and Cyprus lost; therefore labours earnestly, to make the Ro∣mans his friends: but his power was so small at home that he could not save one Roman, who had ignorantly killed a Cat (a sacred creature among the Egyp∣tians) from punishment: at last for his exactions hee was driven out of his King∣dome by the Alexandrians, who crowned Berenice his eldest daughter, though he had sons, because shee only was legitimate, this Queen shortly after her mar∣riage strangles Cybiofactes her husband for his sordid basenesse; and marries with Archelaus, who called himself the son of Mithridates, whereas he was indeed the son of that Archelaus who warred with Sylla in Greece. CHAP. VI. 1. Caesars exploits in Gallia, Germany, and Britain. 2. The affaires of Rome under Pompy, Crassus and Marcellus. 3. Crassus his miscarriage in Asia. 4. Some passages of Iudea and Egypt. 5. Of Cicero and Cato. C. Iul. Caesar having got 6000 talents from Auletes King of Egypt, to re-in∣throne him, undertakes the Government of Gallia and Illyricum with 4 Legions for 5 years, and to strengthen himselfe the better, bestowes his daughter 3915.  Iulia upon Pompey. He overthrew 47000 Helvetians, who not content with their owne habitations, burnt downe their owne walls, and strive to ob∣tain new Plantations. After this Caesar overthrowes Ariovistus King of the Germans, who refused to come to him being sent for, saying he was a better man then Caesar, and refused to depart out of Gallia, shewing that Caesar had no more power to meddle with his affaires, then hee had to
meddle with Caesars: this stout  answer of the Kings so dismayed the souldiers, that even the chiefest and stoutest of the maine body began to make their last wills: but Caesar bravely roused their drooping spirits by his eloquence: Ariovistus did so beset his ar∣my round with wagons and carts, that no hope there was of flight, multitudes of women were imployed, with their cries and stretched out armes to disswade the souldiers from cowardise, the Germans came in so fast upon the Romans that they had no use of their darts, but fell to their swords hand to hand: the Germans defended their heads with their Targets, but the Romans fell so furiously on, that they plucked their Targets out of their hands, which caused the Germans to flye; in which flight multitudes were killed; Ariovistus escaped over the river Rhene, but  one of his daughters was taken. The Belgae fearing the losse of their liberty, raised an Army of 272000 men, with whom Caesar would not encounter but broke them with delays, and weakened them with often skirmishes; in which he had alwayes the better: he subdued the Soissons in the Province of Rhemes: with the Bellovaci or people of Beau∣vais and the Ambiani also, or people of Amiens in Picardie. These gave Cae∣sar hostages for their fidelity: but the Nervii or those about Tornay, with the Aduatici about Beaumont were not so easily mastered; their liberty was not lost, without the losse of much bloud, both of the Romans and of their own: the Veragri and Seduni inhabiting the Alpes did much trouble Servius Galba his  Winter quarters; after Caesar was gone into Italy, Galba was left there for to secure the passages for Merchants that travelled that way. He by a sudden ir∣ruption put the enemy to flight: Caesar supposing Gallia had been quiet, march∣eth into Illyricum; the countrey being commanded to victuall his Army, rai∣sed great Forces against him, and were assisted by the Osisini, Lexobii, Morini, and others inhabiting the Sea coast of Britaine and Normandie; they also send for aid out of great Britaine over against them: it behoved therefore Caesar to provide shipping, which he did; and though hee was much crossed both with the tides and windes, and unserviceablenesse of his ships, yet partly by the Ro∣man valour, partly by the stratagem of sharp hookes fastned to long poles laid athwart, by which the ropes of the crosse masts was cut, so that the sailes fell down, and could doe no service to the enemy, Caesar got the victory. About the same time Q. Titurius Sabinus subdued the Eburones, or the people of Eu∣reux, and P. Crassus mastered Gasconia not without much expence of bloud. The yeare following Pompey and Crassus being Consuls again, the Germans passed over with a great Army, the Rhene, but were so defeated, that there per∣ished of them partly by the sword, partly by submersion in the river 430000; then did Caesar make a bridge over the Rhene, and drove the Suevi into their woods and bogges, in this interim Cato being angry that Vatinius obtained the 3917. Pretorship which he sued for, endeavoured to hinder the passing of that Act by  which Pompey was made Governour of Spain, Caesar of Gallia and Germany, and Crassus of Syria for 5 years: but the Act passed, Cato was laid in chains, and this Triumvirat ruled all in Rome. Gabinius is sent against the Parthians, with order to restore Ptolemy to his kingdome, and put out Archelaus whom the Egyptians had chosen for their King. Ptolemy remunerates Gabinius with the wealth of Egypt, puts Berenice to death, with the wealthiest men of his king∣dome. Caesar passed over the Sea into great Britain; whose sudden arrivall so affrighted the Inhabitants, that they presently delivered up to him their armes and hostages; hee did not march far at this time into the Island, because a great part of his  Fleet was cast away in a storm, but the second time he came over, hee increased both his Fleet and Army, and drove the Britains all the way before him even into the Calydonian woods in Scotland: he laid in chaines Cingatoriges one of their Kings and so returned with a great booty; in the mean while Aristobulus e∣scaped out of prison, and makes new work for Gabinius by seising upon a Fort
which he could not hold above two dayes. Wherefore he was apprehended and sent back again to Rome with his sonne Antigonus: but Alexander the sonne of Aristobulus raised suddenly an Army in Judea and encountred with Gabinius, but hee lost the day, and withall 10000 Jewes. Gabinius having setled Judea, went against the Nabatheans, and defeated them. But hee was accused at Rome for letting goe Mithridates and Orsanes the sonnes of Phra∣ates, who being banished by their brother Orodes, fled to the Romans for pro∣tection, but he was bribed, and so gave out that these two had made a private e∣scape; he was also accused by Cicero lately returned from his banishment, that hee had oppressed Syria with covetous exactions, and had re-established Ptole∣my  without command from the People, contrary to Sibylla's oracles. Pompey and Caesar tooke Gabinius his part, and made Cicero to defend him, whom he had before accused, so that he got the name of Transsuga, or turne-coat. Gabinius notwith∣standing was condemned by the people, and M. Licinius Crassus put in his place. Crassus more covetous then his Predecessor, robbed the Temple of Jerusalem of 10000 talents, and a golden beam weighing 300 minae. Every mina weighs 12 ounces and a half, which was more then the Roman pound, by 4. drachmes, Hee invaded the Parthians, having no Commission from Rome, and plunder∣ed Mesopotamia. Orodes sent to know why hee broke the peace, hee answer∣ed,  that Seleucia his chiefe City should know the reason. Hereupon Orodes sends to keep Artabazes the sonne of Tygranes from aiding Crassus, who pas∣sing over Euphrates being warned to the contrary was circumvented by the Parthians who laid an ambush for him; there was killed the sonne of Crassus a gallant young man, with many Senators and Consular men; at last Crassus was taken by Surenas the Parthian Generall and killed; they powred melted gold into his motuh, to shew his covetousnesse; for he was wont to say, he was a poor man that could not maintaine an Army in the field: some of the Romans e∣scaped to Carrae a City in Mesopotamia beyond Edessa, where Caracalla also died. Cassius Longinus having recollected the dispersed Forces quelled the insurre∣ctions  of Syria and Judea upon this overthrow, he defeated Antiochus Comagenus and beat the Parthian Army from Antiochia, having slaine their two chiefe Commanders, Osaces and Pacorus. Cicero had now an Army in Cilicia, his own Province, where he tooke in the City Pindevissus, shewing that he deserved to bee called Pindevissinus, as Scipio to be called Africanus, how ever, he was called Impe∣rator Epist. fam. l. 2. epist 10. or Lord Generall. Whilest the state of things went thus in the east; Caesar in the west was much vexed by the Gaules; Ambiorix their Generall had circumvented Cotta and Sabinus Caesars Legats and by the helpe of the Eburones, and Advatici, overthrew the whole Roman Legion, then joining themselves to the Nervii, set upon Q. Cicero's winter quarters, and besieged him: he presently by a letter tyed to a Jave∣lin implores Caesars help, who returns him an answer in Greek fastned to the loope or string of the dart, which the bearer fling within the Fort. The Gaules being 60 thousand strong, left the siege, when they heard of Caesars coming and march directly against him, hee by a counterfeit flight drawes them to a place of disad∣vantage, where he killed multitudes of them, and disarmed the rest. Labienus o∣vercame the Treviri and slew Induciomarus their Leader, Caesar fearing the revolt of the Gaules procured from Pompey, being then at Rome, 3. new Legions, then hee passeth over the Rhene to chastise the Germans, for sending supply to the Treviri; but understanding that the Suevi in the entry of the Forrest Hircynia waited for the Roman Army; hee cut downe a part of the bridge, and erected a Tower, and put a Garrison in it, on the banks, for he feared the want of Corn, see∣ing the Germans were not then addicted to husbandry, and so he pursues Ambi∣orix; who sheltred himselfe in the Forrest of Arden or Arduena, and so he lost his labour. About this time T. Annius Milo killed P. Clodius his Competitor for the Con∣sulship
A. U. 700.  in via Appia which was a street paved by Appius Claudius the Consul reaching from Rome to Brundusium; this murther was done at Bovillae a Town in Latium not farre from Rome, the body of Clodius being brought into the Curia Hostilia, or Councell-house, built by King Tullus Hostilius, was by the incensed multitude burnt with the whole building together, the City honours were taken vi∣olently by those that were strongest, for there were no Magistrates lawfully called, so that they were forced to make Pompey Consul the third time, who began to su∣spect Caesars power, and Caesar envyed Pompey's honours, for the death of Iulia Caesars daughter, dissolved the amity that was between these two great Comman∣ders, Pompey to take off the envy of his greatnesse, chose Q. Scipio for his colleague.  Cicero pleaded for Milo, but not so resolutely as he was wont, because Pompey had filled the room with armed men. Milo was banished and retired himselfe to Mar∣seiles. Caesar was forced to be absent from the City, because of the Gaules rebellions and conspiracies, therefore Pompey past an Act, that Caesar should not be pre∣judiced in his Consulship, though in this he was thwarted by M. Cato: yet Pompey made Marcellus Consul; and Curio Tribune, Caesars greatest enemies: the Gaules thinking that Caesars imployments at home would keep him from coming to the Army, began againe to struggle for their liberty, the Carnutes now called Char∣tres, fell first upon the Roman Factours, killed them; and seised on their Estates.  This murder being committed at Genabum, which some think to be Orleans, o∣thers Gian about Sun-rising, the report of it came by Post that Evening to Averni now called Auvergne, which is 140. miles distant, Vercingitorix Celtillus his son, whose Father ruled over all the Gaules, raised a mighty Army out of divers countreys, pressing all sorts of men to take up Armes under paine of death. Caesar hearing of this preparation, resolves with all speed to prevent the uniting of the enemies Forces. Hee placeth strong Garrisons in all parts bordering upon the ene∣my; through snowie Mountaines he marcheth into the bounds of Auvergne, and had got all his Legions together, before the enemie knew of his coming, he took in three great townes at one clap. At that time Avaricum now called Chasteau neust or Bourges en Berrie was a strong city and chief of the Bituriges; Caesars souldiers being inraged, that the Gauls had burnt down 19 towns round about, purposely to starve the Romans, laid siege to that city, took it by storm; and put all to the sword, men, women, and chil∣dren of 40000 scarce 800 escaped, who went to Vercingitorix. After this Caesar divided his Army, foure Legions hee sent against the Parisians and Senones, whose fore-fathers under Brennus their leader, burnt Rome, and besieged the Ca∣pitol, six legions he conducteth himselfe against the Auverni, or Auvergne, and sits downe before Gergobia now Clermont in Auvergne, within this strong ci∣ty were 80000 men. Here Caesar lost 46 Centurions, by the temerity of his  souldiers venturing too hastily upon the enemy. The Hedui whose countrey now is possessed by the Burgundions, fell off from the Romans, who for their fide∣lity were wont to call them brethren. Whereupon Caesar sends into Germany beyond the Rhene for a supply of Horse and Foot, by whose helpe hee over∣came Vercingtorix, who assisted the Hedui, then he befiegeth Alexia, a city, now a Village in the Dutchie of Burgundie called Alise, and by famine forced them to surrender. There were now flockt together of Gaules 240000 Foot and 8000 Horse, which vast Army after many dayes fight was overthrown by Caesar. Vercingetorix, beholding from the Towne: this great de∣feat of his Army, surrenders all, and so the Hedui return again to the Roman obe∣dience. Labienus had now subdued the Parisians. Caesar in the interim marcheth a∣gainst the Bellovaci, a people that lived about Bayeux, and subdues them. O∣thers being weary of waire submit now themselves to the Romans. Uxellodunum called Cadenac in Quercy held out against Caesar till thirst forced them to yeeld, for there was but one spring
of water that served the Town, which Caesar cut off. He spared their lives, but cut off their hands to witnesse their rebellion. Af∣ter A. M. this he placeth Garrisons every where, so that partly with fear, partly with fair words he brought all Gallia in subjection. About this time died Ptolemy Auletes King of Egypt in the 29 year of his reign, to whom succeeded Ptolemy Dionysius the last King of Egypt, he was now 13 years old, and married his sister Cleopatra, who afterward marryed with M. Antony. CHAP. VII. 1. The fatall civill warre between Caesar and Pompey. 2. Caesars Divers victo∣ries,  in Thessalia, Egypt, Afric, Pontus and Spaine. 3. Pompey's death and Caesars. GAllia being now quieted by the losse of 400000 men besides many more prisoners, Caesar returnes into Italy where he is received with Sacrifices, 3924, joy, and triumphs by all the cities through which he went: an Act passed in the Senat, that Caesar should part with two of his Legions for the Parthian war, which he condescended to; but understanding by Curio the Tribune, (whom Caesar by paying his debts, of an enemy had made his friend) that M. Mar∣cellus the Consul had appointed them for Pompey, and so were retained in Ita∣ly, and withall that it was motioned in the Senat that Caesar should lay down his Commission, and deliver up the Army; hee perceived that his enemies went a∣bout to ruine him; wherefore hee refused to part with his Army, except Pom∣pey might doe the same. This was held reasonable by Curio, but Pompey's friends would not assent; wherefore Caesar is commanded to repair to Rome, as a private man, and to petition for what hee desired, and if he did not by a certain day deliver up his Army, he should be proclaimed enemy to the State. Cae∣sar knowing that Pompey ruled the Senat, and that Marcellus, Lentulus, and Ca∣to his mortall enemies meant to bring all his actions in question if he should come  to Rome as a private man, refuseth to lay down his Commission: therefore is by Marcellus and Lentulus Consuls, denounced enemy to the State, and comman∣ded not to passe the river Rubicon now called Rugum, which divided Italy from Gallia of old. Now begins this fatall War, which was presaged by an eclipse of the Sunne, and caused by the ambition of Pompey, who retained his Armies in Spain all the three years space that he ruled in Rome, and yet could not endure that Caesar should enjoy the like priviledge; he was favoured by the Senat, Caesar by the Army, both presumed on the justice of their cause, but neither of them had any goodnesse or justice, who did sacrifice their countreys safety to their private quarrels. Caesar passeth over Rubicon, and comes to Ariminum, where he ac∣quaints the 5 Cohorts he had with him to be his Guard, of his wrongs, and that he meant to restore the Tribunes that were banished, these five Cohortes were half a Legion, which consisted often Cohortes, every Cohors of three Maniples, and each Maniple of two Centuries or 200. so his guard confisted now of 3000 men. The first Towne Caesar tooke was Auximum or Osimum: which so terrified Rome, that Marcellus and Lentulus the Consuls with the rest of the Magistrates forsooke the city. In the interim Caesar takes 7 Cohortes which were at Sulmo from Lucretius, and procured the 3 Legions which with L. Domitius were at Corfinium, to join with him. Pompey who a little before bragged that if he did but knock the Italian ground with his foot, he should have armed men enough, hearing of Caesars strength and preparations, intends with most of the Senat to leave Italy, therefore they betake themselves to Brundusium a Sea Port in Ca∣labria upon the Hadriatic Sea,
from whence was the ordinary passage into  Greece. Cesar dispatcheth letters to severall places of Italy, complaining of Pompey, and desiring he might be brought to answer Cesars accusations, hee desired the quarrell might be ended without bloud-shedding; for that end, hee attempted to surprise Pompey in Brundusium, but though he set guards upon the harbour, yet Pompey escaped by night; therefore Cesar repaires to Rome, be∣ing now secure, enters the Senat, shews how he is forced to take up Armes in his owne defence. Then hee seiseth upon the Treasury, which Pompey in his sudden flight neglected; and having broken open the doores he taketh 4135 l. weight of Gold, and almost 900000 l. weight of silver: thence he goeth to his Legions at Ariminum, and from thence over the Alpes to Massylia, which shut the gates against him. Hee gives charge to Trebonius with three Legions to take in that city, then he hastes to Spain, which was now subject to L. Afra∣nius, M. Petrejus, and M. Varro, Pompey's three Generalls. These in divers battells he overcame Afranius Petrejus. and M. Varro in the further Spaine yeelded, and delivered up his Legions to Cesar. Cato was driven out of Sicilia by Curio, Cotta out of Sardinia by Valerius; Tubero out of Africa by Varrus. Mas∣sylia also submitteth, which is plundered of all, except life and liberty. Pompey was now Master of the Sea; and gave a check to Cesars victories, for Octa∣vius & Libo Pompey's Legats did circumvent Dolobella and Antonius that were for Cesar, and who were appointed by him to guard the mouth of the Hadriatick Sea. C. Antonius held the Curicttic or Corcyrean shoare, but submitted, and yeelded  up 15 Cohortes to Octavius his Fleet. Libo drove Dolobella from Illyricum or Dalmatia: the Ships also that Basilus sent to help Antonius were catched by the Pompejan Cilicians, with a new trick of ropes made like gins hid under the water. Curio also Cesars Legat, after he had overthrown Varrus in Africa, lost both himselfe and Cesars Army, in a rash battell with Iuba King of Mauritania. Pompey chose Epirus, now Albania, a countrey famous for good horses, to be the seat of the war: and Cesar having made all the Provinces sure behinde him, makes all the speed hee can to encounter with Pompey, therefore ventures in a small Pinnace to crosse the Sea in the midst of Winter, and in a storm;  wherein he shewed more courage then the fearfull Shipmaster, whom he checks for his timidity: Fear not (saith he) thou carryest Cesar. When he came on shoar; and had gathered his Forces together, being impatient of delayes, used all means possible by plundering of Towns, and taking in Forts, to draw Pompey to a bat∣tle, which he warily avoided, hoping by tergiversation to break the courage of Cesars Army, but Pompey's souldiers did interpret his procrastination, cow∣ardise: so that Cesar said truly when hee went to Spaine, that he went against an Army without a Captain: but when he came into Epirus, that he went a∣gainst a Captaine without an Army, for his souldiers were young gallants, and raw in military affaires. Some skirmishes there were between the two Armies.  Cesar fell upon Torquatus and his Legion, being in Garrison, Pompey came with his whole body to rescue him. Whereupon Cesar left the siege to encounter with Pompey, Torquatus follows him from his Garrison in the reare, but Cesars Souldiers perceiving their danger, betooke themselves to their heels; so that Cesar could by no meanes hinder their flight: and if Pompey had not recalled his army from the pursuit, hee had got the day, and the quarrell had been ended, which made Cesar say, that Pompey knew not how to con∣quer. Many Roman Knights were knights were killed, with 30 Centurions, and 4000 common souldiers. Upon this defeat, Cesar makes hast through Epirus into Thessalia in Greece, famous for the Gyants warre against Iupiter; and there chooseth the Pharsali∣an 3924.  fields called also Philippici from the town Philippi close by) for his campa∣nia. Pompey follows after, whose Army consisted of 40000 Foot; in the left wing were 7000 horse; in the right 5000. besides the Auxiliary Forces of the East, with the Nobility, Senators, Pretorian and Consular men. Cesar had not above 30000 Foot, and 1000 horse, but stout souldiers
all. The battell con∣tinued  doubtfull for a while, till the German cohortes fell so furiously upon Pompey's Horse, that they were forced to give ground, and at last betooke themselves to a disordered flight, the Cesarians pursue them with a command from Cesar that they should aim at the Pompejans faces, and withall to spare their fellow citizens. Of the Pompejans were slaine 15000. and 33 Cen∣turions, Pompey himselfe escaped with the two Lentuli, Favonins the Pretorian and his sonne Sextus. Some perswaded him to goe to Parthia, others to his friend King Iuba of Africa, but he chose rather Egypt for his retreat, hoping to be kindly used by young Ptolemy, for old courtesies bestowed by Pompey on him, and his Father; therefore he came first to Larissa, then by Sea to Mity∣lene;  thence he sailed with his wife Cornelia into Egypt, the base King sends to receive Pompey into his own Ship, and a warrant there to kill him, being perswaded thereto by Pothinus the Eunuch, and his Tutor, by Theodotus also, and Achil∣las his Generall; for they feared that Pompeys intertainment would draw all the Roman Forces thither, therefore Achillas and Septimius now a Colonell, but here∣tofore a Captaine in Pompey's his Army, first murthers this brave Comman∣der, and then cuts off his head in the sight of his wife and children; he was 58 years old. Pompey's Generalship was profered to Cicero, which he refused, and betook himselfe privately to Brundusium. Cesar not made insolent with his victory,  gives a generall pardon to all his enemies. At Rome hee was created Dictator though absent, in three dayes he comes to Egypt, where Theodotus presents him Pompeys head and ring, at sight of which he weeped, and checkt the murtherers, then he went to Alexandria, and demanded contribution, the Kings Govern∣ours pretend poverty, Achillas is commanded to dismisse his Army of 20000 men; but hee marcheth with him against Cesar, a battell is fought in which the Kings Fleet is set on fire, the flame whereof consumes a part of the city, and in it, Ptolemies famous librarie of 400000 volumes: in the Isle Pharus was a great fight in which Cesar lost many men, and Pompeys murtherers slain, Cesar himselfe hardly escaped into a cockboat, which with the weight of the  passengers sunk, but he saved himself by swimming with one hand, for the o∣ther in which he held his papers, he was forced to hold above the water; so having swimmed 200 pases hee came safely to his Ship: then hee renewes his Forces, and in a battell overthrowes the Egyptians, in which 20000 are slaine, 12000 with 70 long Ships taken, and the King himselfe was drowned in a boat overset with passengers. So Alexandria being forced to yeeld, Cesar bestowes Egypt on Cleopatra, the Kings body was found in the mudde. Pharnaces the sonne of Mithridates tooke occasion by this Roman dis∣cord to rebell against him. Cesar marcheth, and at the first encounter o∣verthrowes 3925. him, so that hee truly said, I came, I saw, I overcame, Phar∣naces having fled to Bosphorus Cimmerius in the mouth of the lake Meo∣tis, distant from Bosphorus Thracius 500 miles. Here Pharnaces who would have betrayed his Father Mithridates, is betrayed by his friend Asander and murthered. Pompeys faction inraged against Cesar, breakes out in two places; in Africa 3926. under King Iuba, Scipto Pompeys Father in law, and Cato Governour of U∣tica; in Spain, under Cu. Pompejus great Pompeys eldest sonne. At Rome also they began to stir, but Antonius Generall of the Horse to Cesar, appeased the tumult with the murder of 800 citizens: in Africa, Scipio, Iuba and A∣franius  are defeated by Cesar, 10000 men were slaine, and 60 Elephants taken. Cato at Utica killed himselfe, having first read Plato's Book of the immortality of the soule. Iuba hired Petreius to cut his throat, which he did, and then killed himselfe with the same sword. Scipio being kept back by contrary windes from Spain, murthered himselfe on Ship-board. Torquatus also was kil∣led. Cesar commanded Pompeys daughter and his Nephews to bee slaine,
but Cato's sonne, and others that begged for mercy, were pardoned. Cesar upon his returne to Rome, was honoured with four triumphs, answering his four conquests of Gallia, Egypt, Pontus, and Africa, he made a sumptuous feast, and exhibited magnificent shews, he pardoned M. Marcellus upon the Senats intrea∣ty, and called him home from his banishment, for which Act of clemency he is high∣ly commended by Cicero in his incomparable oration for M. Marcellus; but before he could returne he was murthered by Magias his client at Athens. After the war was ended a list was taken of the citizens, and there were not found above 150000 whereas four years before, about the beginning of the war, there were reckoned a∣bove 400000 citizens. Cesar was now made Consul the fourth time. He prepares  for Spain against Pompey's two sonnes, Cn. and Sextus, but both their Fleets were spoiled at Sea, after divers townes were taken by both sides, a great battell was fought near the city Munda, wherein Cesar at first was defeated, but upon a fresh encounter he got the day. Cn. Pompejus fled into Munda, but Cesar making a ram∣pire of dead bodies, took the town, Pompey fled, but was overtaken and killed by Ceronius, the younger brother escaped. T. Labienus that had done so much good service in Gallia for Cesar, but now adhering to Pompey's faction, was slain. The civill war being every where composed, and Cesar returning from Spain was honoured with the fifth triumph, the title of pater patriae, and of perpetuall Dicta∣tor, and that he should be , that is, Holy or inviolable, but he conti∣nued  not long in honour; for he returned from Spain to Rome in October, and a∣bout the Ides or midst of the next March he was slaine, this was not above five months. His great honours, felicity, and pride had procured him envy: for when the Fathers before the Temple of Venus came to confer these honours on him, he sate still in his chair of state, and did not stand up, as hee ought: and though he refused to wear the crown which M. Antonie put on his head, in the Lupercall solemnities, but sent it to Iupiter in the Capitol: yet when one had placed a crown on the head of his Image, hee was content it should remaine there, wherefore he thrust the two Tribunes out of their office, for questioning the man that crowned his image. A plot being then contrived by M. Brutus, C.  Tribonius, C. Cassius, D. Brutus his favourite, and some others, he was murthered in the Curia of Pompey, having received 23. wounds, whereof the second was on∣ly mortall which he had in his brest, his murtherers fled to the Capitoll, resolved to make an act of Oblivion, to fling Cesars body into the Tibris, and to seise up∣on his estate, but they feared the greatnesse of Antonius and Lepidus. Such was the tragicall Catastrophre of this brave Commander; who had fought fifty pitched battels with the common enemies of Rome, besides his many victories in the civill war. He made many wholesome Laws, he reformed the Roman Calender by the help of Sosigenes the Mathematician of Alexandria, he not onely conquered his enemies, but his passions also, in advancing his greatest adversaries to honours  and places of trust. When he took Pompey's cabinet at Pharsalia, and Scipio's at Thapsus, he burned all their Letters without looking into any one of them. Hee who was carried so often in triumphant Chariots, and whom no forraigne force could subdue, is now conquered by a few traitors at home, and carried by three of his meanest servants. So horrid was this murther, that the Sun is said to hide his face from it, by an eclipse: and so far was his death the cause of peace, as his enemies thought, that it presently occasioned more civill wars; and so little were his enemies secured by his murther, that none of all these traitors outlived him a∣bove three years, but all perished miserably, yet deservedly, even some of them with the same sword that wounded him; he was 56 years old when he died.
CHAP. VIII. 1. The affaires of Iudea under Antigonus, and Antipater. 2. The actions of Octavius in his younger yeares. 3. The actions and death of Cassius and Brutus. 4. The actions and end of Sextus Pompejus. 5. The actions of An∣tonius and Lepidus. ARistobulus being sent back in chains to Rome, Cesar in hatred to Pompey sets him free, and gives him the command of two Legions, but being in the way seised upon, by the Pompejans he was poisoned, and lest his sonne Alexander  should make any trouble in Iudea, his head is cut off by Scipio Pompey's Fa∣ther in law at Antioch: but after the death of Pompey, Hyrcanus and Antipa∣ter did good service for Cesar in Egypt, in helping to subdue Ptolemy. Where∣fore Hyrcanus is established in the Pontificat, and Antipater is made Governour of Palestina, whose sonne Phaselus is set over Ierusalem, and Herod the other sonne over Galilee. This Herod caused Ezechias the high way man, with many others to be slaine, which so offended the 70 Elders, that they sent out their warrants to bring him to justice for medling with their authority, hee by the counsell of his Father Antipater, gets him a strong guard of Souldiers, to awe the great Councell of the 70. which made old Simeon (called the just,) rise up and tell the Councell that Herod deserved death, for this his presump∣tion. Which so incensed Herod against them, that hee never was at quiet, till hee had quite overthrowne that Councell, which hee did, as soone as hee was made King, and killed all the 70 except old Simeon, who escaped, being preserved by God, to receive Christ in his armes, and to prophesie of his Salva∣tion. At Rome C. Octavius Cesars nephew by his sisters Daughter Atia, or Accia, being adopted by his Uncles last will, and constituted heir to 9 parts of his estate, 3929. which was called Haeres ex dodrante, resolves to revenge his Uncles death, hee was now about 19 yeares old, and of such parts and hopes, that Cesar meant to have made him his Colleague in the Getic and Parthian warre: the souldiers be∣gin to flock to him amaine, from all parts, both because of their affection to Cesar, and that they saw the brave disposition of Octavius, and because Antonies impotent Government was distastfull to them; as likewise to the Se∣nat and people, who had been also exasperated against Antonie by Cicero's in∣vectives. M. Antonie likewise being madde that Octavius a youth, was pre∣ferred to him, in Cesars will, resolves to crush him betimes; but the people having large legacies left them by Cesar, adhere to Octavius, whom they call Cesar from his Uncles, but now his Fathers name. D. Brutus being designed  Consul, joines his Army with Octavius his Forces; the Senat also sends him the Consular Ornaments, gives him power to make war against Antonie: and ho∣nours him with the title of Imperator or L. Generall. Hirtius also, and Pansa the Consuls conjoyne their Armies with Octavius. M. Brutus seiseth upon Va∣tinius his Army in Greece, and on the Province too for the use of Octavius; and in Epirus wrests the Legions from C. Antenius, Maroks brother. Octavius began his Government upon the death of Iulius Cesar, which was 282 yeares after the death of Alexander; before the birth of Christ 42. and about the 711 yeare of the city: shortly after this C. Trebonius one of Cesars mur∣therers was killed in Asia by Dolobella that succeeded him, this Dolobella was  killed by C. Cassius at Laodicea, D. Brutus being besieged by M. Antonie in Mu∣tina now Modina a Town in Lombardie or Galllia Cisalpina he is assisted by Octa∣vius, Pansa, and Hirtius, the siege raised, and Antonie forced to flie into France; in this fight Pansa and Hirtius lost their lives, but honored with a publick Sepul∣ture. A triumph is appointed for Brutus, but no notice taken of Octavius, for the Pompejan faction began again to bare sway at Rome;
he perceiving how hee was  slighted, and that in scorn he was called childe, sent Cornelius a Centurion with 400 souldiers to the Senat, to demand the Consulship for Octavius in the name of the whole Army: the Senat seeming averse was threatned by Cornelius, who drew his sword, and told them, that if they would not yeeld to Octavius his request, the sword should force them; the messengers returning to Octavius without satisfaction, hee by Letters invites Antonius and Lepidus into Italy with their Forces, who being united into a body, sit downe before Rome, whereupon Octavius is presently made Consul, who banisheth all that had any hand in Cesars death, and accuseth Cassius with the two Bruti of his murther. Plancus Brutus his Colleague, and Asinius Pollio a great Anti-pompejan deliver up both their Ar∣mies to Antonius. D. Brutus is forsaken by Plancus and his souldiers, and is killed by Antonius. Lepidus and Antonius being both proclaimed enemies by the Senat, and Octa∣vius slighted as was said, they had no other way to save themselves but by uni∣ting their Forces, therefore Octavius imbraceth the occasion, and closeth with Antony, who otherways was resolved to join his Forces with Brutus and Cas∣sius who had the command of 17 Legions, but Octavius unworthily banisheth Cicero the eloquent mouth of that glorious City, leaving him as a prey to Antonius his sworne enemy, who sent some of his troopers to murther him, which they did; and placed his head and right hand on the Rostra, to the great grief of the  city; Fulvia Antonies wife, abused the head with all kinde of indignities. In that prosciption of these Triumviri were banished besides knights 130. Senators, and not onely Cicero, but all his family also: but Cicero's sonne was recalled. Cassius in the meane time possesseth Syria, and vexes Judea with taxes. Mali∣chus who had poysoned Antipater, is by his sonne Herod slaine, Hyrcanus not 3930. daring to revenge this death of his friend Malichus, then Cassius takes Rhodes, and Brutus subdues the Lycii, then they passe over with their army to Macedonia where neer Philippy Octavius and Antony fight with them, this second battell was fought with various successe, in that fatall field; the wing in which Brutus was, had the better of Octavius, then sick and not in the camp, but Cassius his wing was  defeated, who fearing Brutus had been in the like condition, forced his own ser∣vant to kill him, the souldier whom Cassius had sent to bring tidings to Brutus, returning too late, found his Generall dead on the ground, wherefore accusing his slownesse to be the cause of Cassius his death, fell upon his own sword. Bru∣tus a few dayes after fought againe; but as his death and overthrow were fore∣told by his evill Genius the night before, so it came to passe. For seeing his Ar∣my defeated, he thrust Stratos sword through his left side, and so died immedi∣ately. Here died the sons of Cato, Hortensius, Lucullus, Drusus, Livius, Quintilius, Varius, and many more brave men. Sextus the son of great Pompey at this time returning from Spain, first seised upon  Messana, then upon all Sicily, to whom there was great concourse both from Italy, and from the Brutian Army. The Senat had restored him to his Fathers estate, and made him Admirall of the Seas, when the Pompejan faction prevailed, now hee receives all fugitives and slaves, and with Piracies infests the Sea, which his Father had cleared, Antonius stayes to settle the Transmarine Provinces, Octavi∣us returnes to Italy, which he findes full of tumults. For Fulvia Antonies wife stirred up the old souldiers against him; and L. Antonius the Consul, Markes bro∣ther accused also Cesar to the souldiers of his unjust dealing with them, and ha∣ving raised an Army, marcheth to Perusia, at this day Perut a city in Hetruria: in which Cesar hesiegeth him, who being forced by famine yeeldeth: and obtains his life, so did Fulvia, and Plancus, and all the souldiers upon submission obtaine  pardon, only the town was thrown down; & so this war ended without bloudshed. Embassadors from all parts repair to M. Antony in Bithynia; among the rest were the prime men of the Jews, with an accusation against Phaselus and Herod: for incroaching upon Hyrcanus his Government, and for banishing unjustly An∣tigonus the son of Aristobulus: but Herod
prevented them by bribing Antonius,  and by the marrying of Hyrcanus his Neece, and so he obtained the title of Te∣trarch: at Tyrus the Jews are some put to death, some imprisoned by Antony, for 3931. accusing Herod again: but the next year Antigonus taking occasion of Antonies dallying with Cleopatra Queen of Egypt, calls into Syria Pacorus the sonne of Orodes King of Parthia, who with force and fraud seised upon Hyrcanus, and Pha∣selus. Herod prevented the plot laid against him: the Parthians took and plun∣dered Jerusalem, and then delivered it over to Antigonus, who cut off Hyrcanus his eares, that he might be incapable of the priesthood. Phaselus dashed out his own braines, to prevent the tortures intended by his enemie. Herod being wea∣ry of following Antonius, takes sail for Rhodes, and from thence to Rome:  there Antony to make his peace with Cesar, marries his sister Octavia, having first put away his wife Fulvia, and betrayes his friend Q. Ruffus to Augustus, against whom he was plotting mischiefe: Therefore Cesar to gratifie Antony, makes Herod King of Judea, and Antigonus for joining with the Parthians, is denounced Traitor. Ventidius and Silon Antonies Legats are commanded to esta∣blish 2393. Olymp. 184 Herod in his Kingdome, but they being bribed by Antigonus in three yeares space did nothing. Sextus Pompejus had now got all Sicily, and hindred provision from coming to Rome, therefore upon the desire of the people, Cesar and Antony conclude a peace with him; and permitted him the Government of Sicilia and Achaja,  and withall recalled divers of the Nobility from banishment: but this peace held not long, for Pompey contrary to the Articles of peace entertained fugitives, and Cesar received Mena who revolted from Pompey with 60 Ships. Him Octavius made Admirall of the same Fleet against Pompey, who had filled the Sea with Pyrats a great battell was fought at Sea; but after Cesar had got the better, hee lost many of his Ships by a storm on Sylacaeum upon the coast of Calabria, a place infamous for Shipwracks: Cesar had also a second losse neer Tauromenium Naufragum Scylaceum. Virg. Aen. 3. a Towne in Sicily; he lost also divers Ships, some whereof where burned by Mena who revolted to Pompey, the same runnigado revolted again to Cesar with 6 Triremes who gave him his life, but never imployed him any more: in the last  Sea fight against Pompey, Agrippa Cesars Admirall took and sunk 103 Ships, of Pompeys, who hardly escaped to Asia with 17. where by command from M. Antony, Titius slew him. Cesar had called Lepidus out of Africa with some Legions to aid him; but the vain man bragged that he and not Cesar had defeated Pompey; threfore hee challengeth Sicily to himselfe, and permits his souldiers to plunder Messana; at which insolencies Cesar being offended, comes into Lepidus his Campe, to ex∣postulate with him, Lepidus commands his guard to knock him down, but hee wrapping his upper garment about his arm, received the blowes without hurt, and having laid hold on the Eagle, puts spur to his horse, and carries it to his owne camp, upon this his Army falls upon Lepidus his quarters, whose Soul∣diers after some small skirmishes revolts to Cesar; Lepidus being forsaken puts off his Generalls habit called Paludamentum or Chlamys, and in mourning submits himself to Cesar, who gave him his life and goods, but degraded him from his honor and charge, and then banished him. Cesar now having 44 Legions un∣der his command, which began to mutiny about their pay, he discharged 20000 of them, restored 30000 slaves to their masters, and crucified 6000 who were master∣lesse: then hee returnes to Rome, where he is honoured with the lesser tri∣umph or ovatio, so called from ovis the Sheepe, sacrificed then by the Conquerour. In the East Ventidus Antonies Legat defeated the Parthians in a great bat∣tell, slew Pacorus, and carried about his head on a pole, that the revolted cities 3933. might see it: but Antony desirous to inlarge his Dominions, would needs with 16 Legions march through Media and Armenia against the Parthians, where hee lost two Legions, and was like to have lost all; had he not hearkned to the coun∣sell of a Roman captive,
who being taken in the Crassian overthrow, came by  night into the Roman campe, and wished them not to march any further, but to re∣turne with all hast through the woods and hills; which they did accordingly, yet were so beset with Parthian Archers, that had they not kneeled, and kept off the the storm of arrowes from their heads, by holding up their Targets they had been all lost; thn Antony returning into Armenia, seiseth upon Artavasdes, the King, puts him in golden chains, and bestows that Kingdome on his son, which he had by his wife, or Concubine rather Cleopatra; but afterward Artaxias recovered his Fathers Kingdome. CHAP. IX. The affaires of the Iewes under Antigonus, Hyrcanus, Herod, and Arche∣laus. 2. The affaires of Rome and Egypt under Antonius and Augustus. 3. The birth of Christ, the life and death of Augustus, and the insu rre∣ctions in Iudea. Iudea, Galilee and Samaria, were now in a combustion, because Herod an Idu∣mean had got the Kingdome. Herod finding small aid in Antonies Legats, makes  a journey to Antony himselfe, who at that time besieged Samosata, a town upon Euphrates, and assisteth him to take it, whereupon he obtaines two Legions un∣der the command of Sosius, to subdue Jerusalem. With these he revengeth the death of his brother Ioseph, and of his six Cohortes who were overthrowne by Machera; which gave occasion to the Galileans to drown all they found of Herods faction in the Sea of Tyberias, and because Pappus had killed his brother Ioseph, and Antigonus cut off his head: Therefore Herod having overcome the Galile∣ans cuts off the head of Pappus, and sends it to Phaeroras his younger brother: After this he besiegeth Jerusalem with 11 Legions and 6000 horse; besides the Syrian Auxiliaries: the Jews stifly held out against the besiegers, and would 3935. not be advised by Sameas a prime man in the Sanhedrin to submit to Herod, till first the lower city and outward Court of the Temple were taken, and at last the rest of the City and Temple was stormed, upon the Fast day the inraged soul∣diers spared neither man, woman, nor childe, so that Herod was forced to hire them to give off, asking them whether they meant to make him a King of bare walls: Herod had used all the meanes he could to make that stiffe-necked people accept him for their King, hee besieged them in three Sabbaticall years, when they could receive no fruites of the earth for their releife; he married with Ma∣riamne the daughter of Alexander Antigonus his brother, he professed the Jewish Religion, he promised them all the happinesse they could desire under any King;  but all this could not move them: so at last hee obtained by force which hee could not by intreaty that kingdome, which at first after the captivity was ruled by Zorobabel, Nehemias, and other Princes, after them by Priests, and the 70 Elders, and at last by the Assamoneans 126 years. Antony by the perswasions and bribes of Herod, first crucified Antigonus and then beheaded him; and because he knew there would be small security for him, so long as any were left alive, that might claime title to the Kingdome, hee in∣vited Hyrcanus home from Babylon; Herod made great shew of love to him, in proffering a share of the Government, in calling him Father, and using him with all civility, till he had set himselfe fast in the saddle, and then destroyes him; he highly esteemed Pollio the Pharisee, and Samias his Disciple, two prime men of  the councell, because they counselled the Jews to submit to Herod, hee bestowes upon Hananelus the Pontificat; but upon the intreatie of Alexandra; (whom notwithstanding he still suspected and persecuted) he took it from him, and con∣ferred it on Aristobulus Mariamnes brother; but being jealous of him also, in the second year of his Pontificat he drowned him, for whilest hee was
swimming, Herod caused two that were swimming with him, as it were in sport, to hold his head under the water, till he was stifled; of this Alexandra complained, and so did Cleopatra who desired a part of the kingdome of Judea; but Herod with his bribes pacified Antony, and frustrated Cleopatra, whom he would have killed, had hee not been disswaded by his friends. M. Antony having wholly devoted himselfe to Cleopatra, and to all licentious∣nesse, and puft up with pride, wealth, and flattery, begins to despise Octavius, he puts away Octavia his sister, he refuseth to part with his triumvirat though the time was expired, hee calls himselfe Father Liber, he desires that Egypt and all the Pro∣vinces even to Euphrates may be conferred on his two sonnes by Cleopatra. Cesar understanding of this after his returning into the City, upon the conquest of Dal∣matia,  and Pannonia, perswades the people to make war against Antony and Cleo∣patra, which was easily assented to; therefore he was made Consul the third time, his Colleague was Messala Corvinus. Antony having subdued Artabanes King of Armenia, and having forced him to deliver up his treasure, which was very great, was now full of money, yet Cesar exceeded him in number of Ships, of good Commanders and souldiers. Plancus, Dolobella and Domitius revolted to Cesar. M. Agrippa in the sight of Antonies Fleet took Leucas a town in Leuca∣dia, Patrae a City in Achaja (famous for the Martyrdome of St. Andrew) and Corinthalso. The two Fleets fought at Actium a promontorie in Epirus, where Augustus after this built a town and called it Nicopolis from his victory; the fight lasted doubtfull two houres, at last Cleopatra takes her flight with 60 fail. Antony follows after; the soudiers seeing this, submitted to Octavius, who pardoned them. The same successe he had by land against Antony the next yeer. Cesar per∣sued Antony and Cleopatra into Alexandria, the war is renewed, but Antonies Fleet revolting; his foot Forces being beaten, and at last all his horfe defeated, he fled into the Palace, and run him selfe through with his own sword, and then fell into the armes of Cleopatra, whom he thought had been killed, and in her bo∣some breathed out his spirit: the Queen courted Augustus with presents, and thinking to gain his love, betrayed to him Pelusium neer Arabia Petrea; but fearing  that Cesar would carry her in triumph; seeing Alexandria and all was lost, shee poysoned her self by applying an Aspe to her Breast; thus ended the Civill War. Herod in this meane time being incensed against the Arabians, for killing his Embassadours, raiseth a great Army, and in two battels utterly defeats them: 3942. then hearing of Antonies death and overthrow, he was much perplexed: fearing lest Cesar would unthrone him, for assisting of Antony; therefore he resolves to repair to him; and to make his peace if possible; but doubting lest Hyrcanus might step into the throne in his absence, he puts him to death upon suspition that he held secret intelligence with Malichas King of Arabia: whereas indeed he wrote him a letter upon the importunity of his daughter Alexandra, only that  he would permit him being now 80 years old, to end his dayes quietly in his countrey, seeing he could not in his owne by reason of Herods jealousie over him: so Herod having secured all at home, repaires to Cesar at Rhodes, to whom sub∣mitting himselfe, and promising him the same measure of service and love he shew∣ed to Antony, and presenting him with 800 talents, he was received into favour, and the kingdome confirmed on him. Cesar returning into the City obtained 3 triumphs, the Illyrian, Naval, and 3943. Egyptian. M. Lepidus the Triumvirs sonne for offering to raise a new warre is put to death; so all things in the Roman Empire being now composed, which now was the twentieth year after the Civill war of Cesar and Pompey; Octavi∣us is honoured with the name of Augustus; and the month Sextilis is name Au∣gust V. C. 725. from him, as Quintilis was called July from Iulius. Dalmatia which held out in rebellion 220 yeares, the Alpes inhabited by barbarous people, Spaine which had been vexed with 200 years war, and all other places submit∣ted 3945. to Augustus: the Parthians also sent back to him the Roman Ensignes, which were taken by Orodes from Crassus, and by Phraates from
Antonius: the  Temple of Ianus which had stood open 200 yeares, was now shut by Augustus being 36 yeares older, it was now shut a second time in his reign, after the sub∣duing of the Cantabrians and Astures in Spain, and of the Salassians in Insubria, 3946. that part of Italy where Millan now stands, Egypt which had stood almost 300 years under the Ptolemies or Lagidae, so called from Lagus father of the first Ptole∣mey, yeelded her neck to the Roman yoake; this generall peace gave way for the birth of the prince of peace now at hand; who came in the fulnesse of time to de∣stroy idolatry, which was now at the hight; for at Rome the Pantheon or Temple was built for all Gods. At Ephesus, Nicea, Nicomedia, & Pergamus. Temples were dedicated to Iulius and Augustus, at Ephesus, the city of Rome is made a goddesse, and sacrifices offered to her; a theater was erected at Jerusalem, and the holy city polluted with the vanities and profanenesse of the Gentiles, as sword-play∣ing and stage-playing. Herod upon suspition murthers his vertuous wife Mari∣amne, and his mother in law Alexandra, with the Sanhedrin of the 72 Senators, and sets up the golden eagle over the porch of the Temple. Augustus took order for furnishing the city yeerly with corn, from Egypt he sent honest and able Proconsuls into all the Provinces, he reformed the Senat, and reduced the number of Senators to 600. Hee gave order to the Priests to transcribe the genuine Bookes of the Sibyls, and to burne the supposititious: he overthrew the house of Vedius Pollio, for feeding his lampreys with mens flesh: hee maintained a strong guard over himselfe, to prevent the mischievous plots  of male-contents, who desired to build themselves upon the ruines of the State; for so many conspiracies were intended against him, that he sometimes resolved to be∣take himself to a private life. Yet of his guard he maintained but three cohortes within the city. He gave liberty to the Jews every where in Asia and Cyrene, to use their own religion. He was so grieved for the losse of Varus with his three le∣gions in Germany; that sometimes he would beat his head against the wall, crying out O Varus, restore the Legions. He would not be called Dominus, or Lord by any. Herod rebuilt Samaria and called it Sebaste from Augustus, he beautified Turris Stratonia and called it Cesaria; he erected many Towers, and placed Garrisons in them to keep the Jews from rebelling, he furnished the country with corn from E∣gypt, in time of famine, he marries the daughter of Simon Boethus, and bestowes on him the Priesthood; e builds a Temple to Cesar near Panea, by the springs of Jordan, and to keep the Jews from stirring at this Idolatry, he remits to them the third part of their tribute, and to make some shew of piety in the midst of his 3953. impieties, in the 18 year of his reign, he inlargeth the Temple with a magnifi∣cent building called the Court of the Gentiles, because they might enter thither, it was 100 cubits long, and 120 high with large porches, and marble pillars, the out∣ward work was 8 years in building, a year and 5 months more were spent in the in∣ward ornaments; it was finished the 28 year of his reign, 9 yeares before Christ assumed the Temple of his body in the Virgines womb: he had 9 wives and many children; he murthered his two sons Aristobulus and Alexander being falsly accu∣sed by Salome his sister, and Antipater their brother by the fathers side, which Antipater was afterward also put to death by Herod: thus was he the butcher of Hyrcanus his father in law, of Alexandra his mother in law, of Mariamne his wife, and of his own 3 sons, so that as Augustus said, it had beene better to be Herods swine, then his son. 3969. Whilest Herod is thus raging against his own bowels, our blessed Redeemer Jesus Christ is born of a pure Virgine; the report of whose birth did so trouble 3971. Herod, that he caused all the Bethlemitish children under two years old to be mur∣thered; and before the expiration of the same year he died, being tortured so long with his rotten body, crawling with wormes before his death, that he would have killed himselfe, had he not been prevented by his friends, he dyed the 70 yeare of his age, and the 34 of his reign; having 5 dayes before murthered his wicked son Antipater, he left the kingdome to Archelaus and the Tetrarchie to Herod Antipas, but Augustus divided the kingdome into two parts, to Archelaus he
gave one part,  to Antipas and Philip the other, Archelaus in the 10 yeare of his reign was accu∣sed before Augustus for his cruelty and tyranny, the Jews in a tumult demanded justice of those that had incensed Herod against Iudas and Mathias two famous Lawyers; Archelaus sent a Tribune to suppresse the tumult, whom they hurt with stones; whereupon he sent his army against them, who at their Paschall solemnity killed 3000 of them. 8000 Jews repair to Rome with a complaint against Arche∣laus, whom they accused for conferring the Pontificat upon unworthy men, and 3982. A. C. 11. such as he pleased; therefore he is banished to Vienna about the twelfth year of Christ, his goods confiscated, and Judea annexed to the Province of Syria, this was done the eleventh year of his raign. Agrippa Augustus his son in law by the help of Tiberius Nero, and Drusus Ger∣manicus brought under the Germans, Pannonians, Dalmatians, and Rhetians. A∣grippa being dead, Tiberius is made fellow Tribune with Augustus, but being offen∣ded at the shining vertues of Cajus and Lucius, having asked leave of Caesar, went to Rhodes, where he remained 8 years: these two Cajus and Lucius were Augustus his nephews. Drusus & Tiberius were his sons in law. Drusus dyed in the 30 year of his life: Tiberius undertook his charge in Germany, which he made a stipendiary pro∣vince. Cajus Caesar Augustus his nephew by Livia being wounded in Armenia, where he spent most of his time, returned in his old age to Italy, where he dyed at Lycia or Limyra, his brother Lucius in his journey to Spain dyed at Massylia.  Tiberius therefore with his brother Agrippa are adopted by Augustus: but Agrip∣pa was afterward rejected, so in Tiberius alone remained the hope of succession, he subdued utterly the Dalmatians, Marcomans, Pannonians, and other barbarous na∣tions: but Quintilius Varus being too secure was defeated by the Germans, under Arminius their Captain; which overthrow so troubled Augustus, that he appointed watch and ward over all the city, and out of sorrow suffered his hairs and beard to overgrow, yet this Arminius was quelled by Tiberius, who beyond the Rhene de∣stroyed all with fire and sword. Augustus sends his nephew Germanicus the son of Drusus into Germany, and ap∣points Tiberius for Illyricum; but at Nola falling sick he recals Tiberius now in his journey, with whom he had secret conference a long time. He desired his friends to give him a Plaudite, if he had acted his part wel on the stage of Mortality; so having bid farewell to Livia his wife, who (as it's thought) poysoned him with figs, he departed the 76 year of his life, the 57 year of his Empire, & 44 years after the A∣ctian war. He was a moderate wise, and fortunate Prince; he added to the Empire 3985. V. C. 766. A. C. 14. Egypt, Pannonia, Aquitania, Rhetia, the Vindelici neighbours of Rhetia, with all the Sea ports of Pontus: he subdued the Germans, the Daci: he recovered Ar∣menia from the Parthians; he was honoured with gifts from Scythia and Judia: he made Galatia a Province; he made Rome marble, which before was brick; he erected a stately porch and Bibliothec in his Palatine house; he appointed watch∣men, who all night went about, to keep the city from firing: he went into all the Provinces himself except Africa and Sardinia: he despised the title of Lord, and slighted all Libels cast out against him. He was mercifull to his enemies, for hee made Cornelius Consul, though he plotted to murther him. He loved Mecaenas deerly, even when he called him carnifex or Butcher, and upon that word from him rose up, and would not pronounce the sentence of condemnation against some traitors. He was modest in apparell, wearing no other, but what his wife, sister, daughters and neeces made. He was temperate in his dyet, sparing in wine, an honourer and lover of learning, he was a good scholar himself, and wrote divers tractats, he left a breviary of the whole Empire, a list of all the souldiers in pay, of the money in the treasury, and of the sums that were due. He erected an Altar in the Capitoll (to God the first begotten) sending to the Pythian oracle to know of his successour; he was answered, that an Hebrew child stopped his mouth, and commanded him to return again to hell. Whereupon the Gentile oracles ceased, darknesse giving place to light. In the 42 year, or as others say in the 41. year of his reign Christ was born, Quirinus, or as the Evangelist saith, Cyrenius being Pre∣sident of Syria, who was afterward sent to confiscate Archelaus his goods that
reigned in Judea, Idumea, and Samaria, as his brother Herod Antipas in Galilee and Peraea; their mother was Marthace a Samaritan. Philip was Tetrarch of Tra∣chonitis and Batanaea. The insurrection of the Jews against Archelaus, gave occasion to Iudas, Simon and other ambitious spirits, under pretence of liberty to set up a King of their own, but they were quickly suppressed by Quintilius Varus who afterward was killed in Germany; he with three legions, and Arabians Auxiliaries appeased them, and cru∣cified about 2000 of the rebels. Much about this time Christ being 12. yeares of age disputed with the Doctors in the Temple. Iudas a Galilean because of the Ro∣man 3982. A. C. 11. taxes perswaded the Jews to deny the payment thereof, teaching that they were a free people, and that no mortall should call himself Prince or Lord. Hence began the Sect of the Zelotes, which maintained this doctrine with their lives, forcing men by the sword to embrace it, in maintaining of which they were so stiffe, that no torments could force them nor their children to recant. CHAP. X. The life and death of Tiberius and Sejanus, with their cruelties. 2. The baptism, life, and death, resurrection and ascension of Christ. 3. How the Gospell began to  spread. TIberius the son of Livia, and son in law to Augustus married with Iulia the daughter of Augustus whom afterward he starved with hunger: his former 3985. A. C. 14. wife which he divorced was Agrippina daughter to that Atticus, to whom Cicero wrote his book of Epistles; he had 2 years before Augustus his death, adop∣ted Germanicus his brother Drusus son, he concealed the death of Augustus, till he had made away with young Agrippa his onely nephew left, who might have hin∣dred his succession: he made shew of unwillingnesse to accept the Empire, shew∣ing truly yet dissemblingly, what a dangerous beast it was, but this was onely to  sound the Senators affections towards him, that so he might ruine them; and in∣deed he caught many simple meaning men, with his bait of dissimulation, therefore not without cause did his Tutor perceiving his sanguinary disposition, whilest he was young call him clay tempered with bloud; and because of his intemperate drink∣ing he was nick named Caldius Biberius Mero, for Claudius Tiberius Nero: and Augu∣stus did foresee his nature, when he said, the Romans should live miserably under such thin Iaws; he was learned, but cruell and covetous, of a dissembling nature, frowning on those whom he loved, and fawning on those whom he hated: he was better at ex∣temporary, then premeditate counsels. Out of his pretended modesty, he would not at first be called Emperor, nor Pater Patriae, and because he knew that the armies would have had Germanicus to be Emperor, which he modestly refused, he submit∣ted himself to the Senates election; he passed by injurious language, saying that in a free State tongues should be free. In all things he submitted himselfe to the Senate, and speaking against heavy taxes, he said: that good shepheards use to shaer, not to flay their sheep. He was severe against adultery and robbery, and insurrections, and either suppressed or restrained the abuse of Sanctuaries. At a certain Funerall one cryed out aloud, desiring the dead corps to tell Au∣gustus that his legacies which he left to the people were not paid, by Tiberius, who presently apprehends the party, and having paid him his share commands him to be slain, and then to report the truth to his father Augustus. He reduced the king∣dome of Cappadocia after the death of old Archelaus into the form of a Province. The fourth year of Tiberius, Germanicus triumphed over divers German nations, between the Rhene and Albis now called Elbe or Elve; Drusus Caesars son is sent A. C. 17. 3988. to Germany to be trained up in the wars, and to appease the Germans, now at civil wars amongst themselves. At this time 12 cities of Asia were overthrown with earthquakes; of these he repaired Philadelphia, Magnesia, and Apollonia. Ger∣manicus
in the East endeavoured to re-enthrone Vonon the Parthian, thrust out by Artabanus, but could not prevail. He made Zeno King Polemons son of Pontus Go∣vernour of Armenia, shortly after he is poisoned at Antioch by Piso, being secretly 3990. A. C. 19. incouraged to commit this wickednesse by Livia Augusta. Germanicus was much lamented being a Prince, milde to his enemies, and curteous to his friends; but Piso murthered himself at Rome. About the 21 year of Christ the image of Ianus fell down at Rome, Tiberius de∣stroyed the spurious books of the Sibyls, he drove out of the city the wanton so∣lemnities of the Egyptian Isis, as also the Jewish religion, because the wife of Sa∣turninus had intercepted great sums of mony, conveyed to Jerusalem; the Jewes were some banished, some killed, he would not yeeld that Armini∣us  the Roman enemy should be poysoned, shewing that the Romans used not to suppresse their enemies by treachery, but by valour. Yet this Arminius was shortly after slaine, by the treachery of his friends. Caesar now being rid of Germanicus, began openly to shew his truculent nature, he maintained Valerius Gratus President of Palestina in his covetousnesse; who had changed four High Priests in a short time, to wit, Annas, Ismael, Eleazer, and Simon, and had now set up Caiphas, no lesse cruell then Tiberius. Aelius Sejanus heretofore the catamite of Apicius the glutton, who wrote a book centies HS. of glutony, and having found upon the casting up of his accompts but 100000 Sestertia left for his kitchin, hanged himself; I say this Catamite but now stale and out of date, is by Tiberius advanced to great honours, and power, purposely to cir∣cumvent and ruine all good men. He used to suborne false witnesses, to entrap ho∣nest men, and especially if they were wealthy; so that no good man could live in Rome at that time with any security: the Senat was brought into such a servil con∣dition, that they durst not contradict or deny any thing, though never so unjust, that Caesar or Sejanus would have done. Drusus Tiberius his only son is poyson∣ed by Sejanus his means; because upon a quarrell between them, Drusus strook him 3994. A. C. 23. on the Face, who never left till he had made Livia with whom Sejanus committed adultery, poyson her husband, upon promises that he would marry her, and that she should have a share in the government: this murther was concealed 8. years toge∣ther.  Sejanus seeing this murder succeeds so well, resolves to make away with Ger∣manicus sons, who were to succeed next into the Empire: he could not worke any thing upon Agrippinas chastity, therefore he goes about to accuse her and her 3 sons of treason: he also falsly accused and condemned Silius their friend, as if he intended to poyson the Emperour; but he prevented his tortures by his volun∣tary death, and self-murther. Dolobella desired and deserved the honour of a tri∣umph, for suppressing Tacfaronas, who by the help of the King of the Garaman∣tes, committed great outrages in Africa; but Sejanus denyed him this honour, and conferred it on Iunius Blesus, his uncle, who had not defeated and killed the enemy as Dolobella did: he countenanceth and rewardeth informers, he animates the son to accuse the father. Q. Vibius Cerenus was falsly accused by his own son, that he meant to raise war in Gallia, and to destroy the Prince. Cecilius Cornutus, once Pretor, being also falsly accused of sending many to raise a rebellion, killed himself. Cremutius Cordus was accused for praysing M. Brutus in his Annales which he published, and for saying that Cassius was the last of the Romans, who after he had cleered him self, went out of the Senate and ended his life by absti∣nence. Order was given by the Senate that the Aediles should burn his books, which notwithstanding were preserved. About this time Poppaeus Sabinus subdued the High-land Thracians for refu∣sing to muster their best souldiers for the service of the Romans. Sejanus petition∣eth  Caesar that he might marry with Livia, which being denyed him, he perswadeth him to remove himself from the City tumults, and to solace himselfe with a pri∣vate and quiet life in some pleasant place far from Rome. By this means he knew that his own power should be the greater; that no accesse could be had to the Em∣perour, nor no letters sent but by the souldiers, which were at his devotion: hee made shew of friendship to Agrippina, and told her that
she should beware of eating  or drinking with her father in law, who meant to poyson her, but she not knowing how to dissemble, could not be perswaded at table, either to eat or drink; or be cheerful. Tiberius commending the goodnesse of the Apples that were set down be∣fore him, gave one of them to his daughter in law, which she would not taste, but delivered it to one of the waiters. Caesar pretending to dedicate a Temple to Iupiter at Capua, and another to Augustus at Nola, removed to Campania, purposely to be far from the City, that so the suspition of his cruelties and oppression might be concealed, in respect of place, though not of deeds: that he might make his majesty more terrible by that great distance; and to avoid his mothers company, whom he had made his colleague in his government: therefore he shut him self up in the Isle of Capreae, where hee stayed not long, being recalled by the people thence, upon the fal of an Amphithea∣ter at Fidenae, where 50000 men were slain. He having shewed himselfe to the people, returned again to the Island, where he remained 11. years; in all which time there were no Presidents of the Provinces, nor Tribunes of the souldiers changed. Spain and Syria were some years without Cousular Legats, or Leivete∣nant Deputies, he suffered Artabanus the Parthian to possesse Armenia, the Daci∣ans and Sarmatians to wast Mesia and the Germans to spoil Gallia, to the great dishonour and danger of the Empire. The beginning of the year was polluted by the shamelesse murther of Titius Sabinus an honorable Gentleman, for his affection to Germanicus, and his family, he  was entrapped by Latiaris and others to speake some words in commendation of Germanicus, the afflictions of whose family he bewayled; as also the misgovern∣ment of Sejanus. Vpon this he is presently accused, condemned, and haled to Ti∣beris with his garment turned over his head, where he was drowned, though his dog in the water strove to keep his masters body from sinking, but in vain, this was done on the Calends of January: not long after died Iulia Augusta, or Livia Ti∣berius his mother; who neither did visit her in her sicknesse, nor with his presence honour her funerall, on which he would suffer no cost to be bestowed as the Senat had intended; she being gone who held in the exorbitances of Tiberius and Sejanus;  now a gate is opened for all wickednesse and oppression. Men durst not visit or confer with their neighbours and friends, for fear of suspition. Agrippina is accused of plotting with the Army, wherefore she is banished, her eye beat out by a Cen∣turion, and at last famished to death. Nero and Drusus her sons are also accused as enemies, and both starved with hunger, Nero in Pontia an Island in the Tyrrhen Sea, and Drusus in the Palace. Whilest the world groanes under the tyranny of Tiberius, Iohn Baptist the son 3999. A. C. 28. of Zacharias the High Priest preacheth repentance to the Jewes, and baptizeth them, shewing that the Lambe of God was comming to take away the sinnes of the world, & who should baptize them with water and with the Holy Ghost. Then he baptizeth Christ in Jordan, who being declared by the voice of God from heaven, and by the sitting of the Holy Ghost upon him in the form of a dove, was carried 4000. A. C. 29. into the wildernesse to be tempted by Satan, whom having foiled he goeth to Ga∣lilee; and chooseth his Disciples, with whom he goeth to Cana, and there at a mar∣riage turneth water into wine: thence to Jerusalem, and at the Feast of Easter purgeth the Temple of buyers and sellers: from thence he goeth again into Gali∣lee, when he understood that Iohn was cast into prison by Herod Antipas, for re∣proving 4001. A. C. 30. his incest with his brother Philips wife, taxing the ingratitude of his country, he goeth to Capernaum, where he heals a Rulers son, Peters mother in law, with many others, thence going about into other cities, he preacheth the Go∣spell, and worketh miracles. The next year he went up to the Feast of Easter: then he cured him that lay at 4002. A. C. 31. the pool of Bethesda 38 years. He vindicates his Disciples from breaking the Sab∣bath. He sends abroad his Apostles to preach and cure diseases. He heals the Cen∣turions servant, and restores the widows son at Naim to life: so he did the daugh∣ter of Iairus, he casteth out divels, and rebuketh the windes. In the mean time Herod at the intreaty of Herodias, beheadeth Iohn
Baptist, for which cruelty he was justly  punished with the terrour of an evill conscience, thinking Christ had been then ri∣sen again from the dead, and with the losse of his Army, defeated by Aretas king of Arabia. Easter drawing neer Christ retires to the Desart, where he fed 5000 4003. A. C. 32. men, besides women and children, with five barly loaves and two fishes, having left twelve baskets full of crums; upon this they would have made him king; shortly after he fed 4000 men with seven loaves. He foretels his Disciples of their persecutions and deaths. Then he transfigured himself on mount Thabor; and af∣ter that he informes his Apostles of the nature of his kingdome, and that they should not lord it over others, as worldly kings doe over their subjects. About the end of his third year, Christ went up to Jerusalem to the Feast of Tabernacles; then he sendeth abroad 70 other Disciples to preach and work mi∣racles:  he sharply reproveth the corrupt manners of the Jews. Then he raiseth La∣zarus being 4 days dead: Whereupon multitudes follow him riding to Jerusalem, 4004. A. C. 33. with olive branches and palms in their hands. Then he whipt the buyers and sel∣lers out of the Temple. Caiphas and his father in law Annas, hired Iudas to betray his Master; which he did for 30 peeces of silver, in the night time whilest Christ was at his devotion: who with his word made the souldiers that came to appre∣hend him, fall back to the ground. Then being carried to the High Priest, he was accused by him, and the Elders of sedition; Pilat would have absolved him, but durst not; fearing the displeasure of Tiberius; therefore he condemned him to be crucified, for saying he was a king. But the miracles at his death, and his glorious  Resurrection the 3. day, his 40 days conversation with his Disciples, and his a∣scension to heaven, shew; that he was a king indeed; but not of this world. There∣fore the better to advance his spirituall kingdome, eleven days after his ascension, on the day of Pentecost, he sends downe on his Apostles assembled in an upper roome, the Holy Ghost in form of cloven firy tongues, so that they all began to speak divers languages, preaching Christ; so that at Peters first Sermon 3000. afterward 5000 were converted, the Priests and Elders storming at this, impri∣soned and whipt the Apostles, and stoned Steven; but to no purpose: for the Go∣spell still increased, and Saul the great persecutor is converted, and becomes a fer∣vent preacher; so in 7 yeers space was confirmed the covenant made to Abraham & his posterity: which now Peter, Paul, Iohn, Philip, and Barnabas: began to communi∣cate 4005. A. C. 34. to the Gentiles: and so according to Daniels Prophecy the 70 weeks are finished the dayly sacrifice ended; sin is abolished and everlasting righteousnesse established. At Rome such cruelties were exercised by Sejanus, that many brave men killed themselves: his flatterers sacrificed to him, as well as to Tiberius, and swore by his Genius. So great was his power, that Tiberius grew jealous of him; therefore he sent letters privately to the Senat, to imprison Sejanus, which was done according∣ly, by Regulus the Consul, and Laco captain of the watch. His Images are broken down and melted. He was flung down from the top of the Gemonian ladders, and  his body dragged up and down the streets by the people 3 days together: his chil∣dren were condemned to die. His daughter which was promised to Claudius his son, is first defloured by the hangman, then strangled; for it was not lawfull to put a virgin to death. All his friends were either slain, or banished, or disgraced; and his body flung at last into Tibris. After his death Tiberius was more cruell then be∣fore, by which it appeared that Sejanus was but the instrument of his cruelty. The Statue of liberty notwithstanding is erected in the Forum; a presage that Rome should be ere long freed from Tiberius his tyranny; who being desired by Gallus Asinius whom he had condemned to dy, that he would hasten his death he answer∣ed: I am not yet friends with you. The reasons that moved Tiberius to destroy his favorite were many. viz. danger∣ous words from Sejanus against the Prince: his causing of him to retire to Capreae: his great power: his marriage with Livia Drusus widow: his ruining of the house of Germanicus: his great train of servants: his desire to be Tribune; and for that he held Drusus prisoner, and C. Caesar at his mercy: and yet Tiberius suspected and hated Cajus: at last he dyed, the 78 year of his age, having reigned 23. Some thinke he was poysoned by Cajus; others, that he was stifled by Macro Colonell of the
Guards and Cajus his creature. Which Tiberius perceived when he told Macro, that he did well to look towards the Sun rising. Tiberius was a wicked Prince, hated and feared of his people; and so fearfull himselfe by reason of his guilty consci∣ence, that he trembled still when it thundred; so that then usually he wore a bay garland, he was wont to call King Priamus happy, for surviving all his children. His body was carryed by the Souldiers to Rome, and there solemnly burned: The peo∣ple cursing him, and wishing the Mines or Gods of the dead, not to admit his soule in the company of the just. CHAP. XI. 1. The life and death of Caligula, and of the Roman and Iewish affaires under him. 2. The life and death of Claudius, and of all the memorable accidents in Rome, Parthia, Iudea, and elsewhere under him. 3. Of Agrippa and Antipas. C. Caesar Caligula so called from the buskin or shoe he wore in the campe, 4008. where he was born, was begot of Germanicus the son of Drusus; his mother was Agrippina Augustus his Neece; the daughter of Agrippa. His succes∣sion was joyfull to Rome, wearied with the insolencies of Tiberius: & because of the great love the City bore to Germanicus poysoned by Piso, whose death was much  lamented by the Romans. His parents and brothers were murthered by Tiberius. It was said of Caligula, that he was a good servant, but a bad master; for he was very obsequious to Tiberius. At first he shewed some tokens of goodnesse by cal∣ling home the banished and condemned Citizens, and freely pardoning them. By giving full power to the Senat to determine all matters without appeal to him. He slighted the information of a plot intended against him; saying, he feared no plots, having never wronged any man hitherto. He banished Antipas to Lions with his concubin Herodias, being accused of oppression by Agrippa. But he was an enemy to Christ, in persecuting him in his members, whom Tibe∣rius would have honoured as a God, when he desired the Senat to admit him a∣mong  their Gods. Cajus also commanded his own image, with thoseof the heathen Gods to be erected in the Temple of Jerusalem. He persecuted the Jews, & rejected their Petition, and Philo their agent: he bestowed on Herod Agrippa golden fet∣ters 4010. in lieu of his iron ones, because he wished the sudden death of Tiberius who im∣prisoned him, and the succession of Caligula; then made him king over Philips and Lsinias tetrarchy: he erects a temple to himself, and in it his own image, which he clothed dayly in the same habit he went in himself: he would make shew of conference with Iupiter, as if he had been his equall. He appointed Priests and solemne sacrifices for himself. He commanded Petronius President of Judaea to de∣dicate the Temple of Jerusalem to his deity: which upon the Jews importunity  Petronius refused to doe; wherefore he is condemned to dye by Cajus. But before he heard of this sentence Cajus was slain. He threatned destruction to the Jews of Alexandria being accused by Appion the Grammarian; but Philo pleaded for their innocency, and comforted them with the assurance of Gods assistance when mans help is furthest off; which fell out to be true upon the death of this monster, who spared not his own brother Tiberius, whom he murthers treacherously by a Tri∣bune. He caused M. Silanus his father in law to cut his own throat: he deflowred 4011. A. C. 40. his three sisters: he banished Agrippina and Livilla, he murthered Macro and his wife Ennia: Having condemned at one time some Gauls, and some Greeks, he brag∣ged that he had subdued Gallograecia. This tyrants whole pleasure was in shedding of bloud, and tormenting of men with lingring deaths, commanding them so to be slain that they might feele them∣selves dye. His wish was, that all the Romans had but one neck that he might strike it off at one blow. Whose common phrase was, Let them hate me so they fear me. He complained that in his time there were no publick calamities, as fire, pestilence, fa∣mine, earthquakes. All kind
of carnall pollution he exercised publikely in his pa∣lace.  He spent above a 100 and 20000 Sestertia in one yeer idly; that being spent he raiseth intolerable taxes, and persecutes all rich men for their wealth & fils the city with bawdy houses for gain. He threatens Germany & Britanny with war: he made a bridge of ships over the Bay of Baae almost four miles long. He threatned Gallia with a war, but imployed his souldiers to gather and fill their helmets with shels and pible stones, returning in triumph to Rome for plundering Neptune. He brag∣ged that he turned Sea into Land, and day into night, when he built his bridge and beset it on both sides with torches in the dark. He intended to have murthered all his chief Senators and Knights, and then to remove to Alexandria or Antium; for in his closet were found two scroles containing the names of the chief Senators and Knights, the one he called the sword, the other, the dagger; he had also a great chest full of all sort of poysons, which being cast into the Sea poisoned the fish. But he was suddenly cut off himself by Chaerea Cassius, and Corn. Sabinus Tribunes, who gave him 30 wounds; stabbed his wife Caesonia, and beat out the braines of his 4012. A. C. 41. young daughter. He lived 29 yeares, and reigned or raged rather 3 years and 10 moneths. In the mean while the Gospell spreads. Paul confuteth the Jews in their Syna∣gogues: he is commanded the 3 year of his Apostleship to preach to the Gentiles; and so is carryed by Barnabas to Cilicia; & Peter is sent to Cornelius whom he con∣verts with his whole family. But Satan bestirs himselfe to hinder the worke of Christ, and causeth the Dragon with 7 heads and 10 horns to oppose the woman. About this time Pilat being thrust out of his office by Vitellius the Governour of Judea, murthers himself. And Caiphas was forced to resign the Priesthood to Io∣nathan the son of Annas. Antipas and Herodias dyed miserably, and in want; he was banished for keeping correspondency with the Parthian, his Tetrarchy is given to Agrippa his accuser; so that now he hath Judea, Samaria and Caesarea subject to him. So hatefull was the misgovernment of Tiberius, that the Senat met in the Capi∣tol, 4012. A. C. 41. to abolish the Caesarean family, and to assert their former liberty. But the souldiers made Claudius the son of Drusus and Uncle to Caligula Emperor, as he was hiding of himself. For which favour he promised to each souldier 40 Sester∣tia,  which may be about 350 crownes. He was but a simple and foolish man, other∣wayes he had not escaped the cruelty of his Vncle Tiberius, nor the fury of his brothers son Caligula: and this benefit his folly afforded to the State; that he be∣ing of a timerous and flexible nature, suffered himself to be ruled by wise men. Who caused him for example sake put Chaerea, (who was also called Cassius,) to death. Sabinus the other Tribune killed himself. He repealed all the Acts of Ca∣jus: he restored the Senat to their authority: he mitigated the rigour of some laws: he caused those slaves to be made free, who in their sicknesse were neglected or exposed by their Masters; and he took away the power of life and death which they had over the slaves: he punished the ingratitude of manuwissed servants  with the losse of their liberty. He was a lover of learning, and learned him selfe both in Greek and Latin histories. He was not such a monster as Caligula, who would have abolished Homer and Virgil. He confined the Roman bounds, East∣ward with Euphrates, Northward with the Rhene, and Danubius, and Southward, with the Mauritanians: He went in person, and subdued the Britains, and added the Orcades to the Roman Empire. Agrippa used all means to make the Jews faithfull to him, at Jerusalem he was a strict observer of the Jewish Religion: he removed first Theophilus, then Simon from the Priesthood, and conferred it upon Mathias the brother of Ionathan: he hung up in the Temple of Jerusalem the golden fetters sent him by Cajus. And to please  the Jews he beheaded Iames the brother of Iohn, and imprisoned Peter, intending 4013. 4014. A. C. 43. to murther him at Easter; but an angel delivered him. The 3 yeare of Claudius at Antioch Christs followers were called Christians. Agrippa in the midst of his glory at Caesarea, whilest the people in flattery called him God, was so struck with a loathsome disease, that in 5 days he died, being consumed with lice and vermin, the 44. year of Christ, to whom succeeded Cuspius Fadus in
Judaea. For Agrip∣pa's  son was not yet fit for government. The famine foretold by Agabus, about this time was great, every where, but Helena queen of Adiabene a country in As∣syria helped the Christians with money to buy corn: Then it was that Theudas a false. Messias, raised 400 Jews against the Romans, but the tumult was quickly ap∣peased, the rout routed, and he killed: Then Matthew wrote his Gospell. Paul and Barnabas converted Sergius Paulus the Roman Pro-consul in Cyprus to the Faith. And struck Elymas the Sorcerer with blindnesse. Then was Paul caught into the third Heaven, and shortly after he with Barnabas preach the Gospell through all Asia. So doe Iudas and Sylvanus. At Rome Claudius is in danger of his life by the tumultuous people, for  want of corn, so that he incouraged the Merchants, and provided ships for im∣portation of provision. He repaired Ostia the port town to Rome, built by Anous Martius. Hee made the great Aquaeducts called from him Aquae Claudiae, fur∣nishing the City with water, whose springs were 40 miles off. But he was unhap∣py in his wife Messalina, an insatiable beast, committing uncleannesse without shame or moderation with people of both sexes: which occasioned Claudius to give himself also to unlawfull pleasures and lusts: and whilest he was at Ostia with his Concubines, she at Rome publickly marryed with C. Silius: for which cause hee put her to death: and withall abolished all strange religions in Italy, and suppressed the Druides, and advanced the ancient Aruspices. In Parthia were great civill wars. Gotharzes intending to kill his brother Arta∣banus invaded the kingdome. The Parthians fearing his cruelty set up his other brother Bardanes; who having raised an army meant to march as soon as he had taken Seleucia, which he was then besieging: But in the mean while Go∣tharzes strengthened himselfe, and Meherdates King of Assyria did seise upon Armenia. But shortly after common danger made the brothers friends. Bardanes is hindred by Vibius Marsus Legat of Syria, from Armenia: he was afterward killed by his own followers, as he was hunting. Gotharzes for his riotousnesse is hated of the Parthians, who weary of his tyranny, send private petitions to Clau∣dius, beseeching him to establish Meherdates the son of Phraates, in his Fathers dignity. Whereas the secular solemnities were wont to be acted but once in 100 years, 40 18. A. C. 47. which is the age of a man; yet Claudius caused them to be proclaimed sixty eight, others say sixty three years after they had been acted by Augustus. About this time Claudius placeth a King over the Cherusci, a people in Germany, who was descended of Arminius, but bred in Italy. He sends Corbulo to suppresse the re∣belling Frisians. The Hedui in Gallia (now the seat of the Burgundians) had the priviledge of Senators in Rome. The army being purged and mustered, which was called in Rome condere lustrum; and was performed every fift year, there were found at this time 69 hundred, and 44 thousand Citizens. Messalina being dead, Claudius his free men ruled there; chiefly Posidio his Eunuch; Polybius, whom he set between the Consuls; Pallas, whom he honoured with Pretorian robes, and Narcissus his Secretary. When he complained of the poverty of his Exchequer, it was answered, that he should be rich enough, if his Liberti or Free-men would admit him into their company. These tyrannised over the people, and caused the old man to fall in love with his brothers daughter Iulia Agrippina. Pallas the maker of this incestuous match having had the use of her body, caused Claudius to adopt her son by Domitius Aenobarbus; he was called Nero, & became both son and 40 21. A. C. 51. son in law to Claudius, to the overthrow of Germanicus, whom he begot of Messa∣lina. This Agrippina sent a Colonie to that City of the Vbii, which from her was called Colonia Agrippina. Upon a second tumult of the people for want of corn, Claudius hardly escaped with his life. In his reign, saith Pliny, was seen the Phoe∣nix in Egypt; but Tacitus will have it in the reign of Tiberius, which was the 34 year of Christ, shortly after his resurrection, who is the true Phoenix. But I have elsewhere proved that the Phaenix is no fabulous bird. Exercit. in Gene. Fado being Governour of Judaea of a Jew became a Gentile, under his succes∣sor Ventidius; an impudent souldier, shewing
his naked genitals in derision to the  Jews, raised such a sedition at the feast of unleavened beard, that in it 20000 Jews were slain. Meherdates hoping by the help of Cajus Cassius to obtain Par∣thia, and failing of that aid which was promised by the Adiabent and Edessens, fell into the hands of Gotarzes; who cut off his ears, after Gotarzes succeeded Vono∣nes who lived obscurely; his son Vologeses succeeded. The Jews and Samari∣tans inveterate enemies, were animated by their Governours, Cumanus president of Judaea, and Felix of Samaria, to molest each other by inroades, which they did, sometimes spoiling and killing each other in ambushes, sometimes in open battell. But Quadratus the Governour of Syria set the Province at quietnesse, and revenged the death of the Roman souldiers, then being authorised by Claudius  to punish the Procurators if guilty. He condemned Cumanus, but advanced Felix into the Tribunall among the Judges, though both were equally guilty. Cuma∣nus is sent to Rome with Ananias the High Priest, and Ananus the Captain. Claudius the 12 year of his reign bestowed Iurea and Trachonitis on Agrip∣pa the younger. Felix presuming on his brother Palla's greatnesse intised Drusilla from her husbands bed, and marryed her. Aziri king of Emesa was her husband. About this time Claudius banisheth the Jews out of the City, for raising tumults 4020. against the Christians. With them Aquila and Priscilla of Jewes now made Christians, are forced to fly to Corinth; where Paul met them, having preached in Macedonia to the Philippians and Thessalonians. At Athens Paul converted or 4020. A. C. 50. at least confirmed Dionysius the Areopagite, in the Faith by his doctrine and mi∣racles. From thence he wrote to the Thessalonians, at Corinth he found Silas and Timothy returned from Macedonia, and being much opposed he preached the Gospell to the Greeks. In the 13. year of Claudius a Sow brought forth a Pig, having the sharpe talons of an hawke. Which portended Nero that shortly succeeded, for he was a rapacious tyrant, and the sonne of a Strumpet. Agrippina being affrighted at a speech let fall from Claudius in his drink, which was, that it was fatall for him to bear with his wives lewdnesse, and then punish them, shee infused poyson into a Mushrome, in which he delighted  much, and because he had then a loosenesse, which might hinder the operation of the poyson, she procured Xenophon the Physitian to thrust a feather down his throat dipt in strong poison; pretending it would make him vomit: so he dyed in the 64 year of his age, having reigned 13 years and 9 moneths. Shee 4025. A. C. 55. concealed his death, till Nero his son in law had strengthened himself in the Empire. In his time Helena Queen of Adiabene was converted: so was Ezates the King, and Abbas king of Edessa. Philip the Apostle was crucified at Hierapolis in Asia for preaching Christ, and then was stoned to death. Simon Magus was ho∣noured with a Statue, and the title of Holy God. And yet the Mathematicians were driven out of the City, for their juggling tricks; and who a greater juggler then Simon Magus? Paul escaped stoning at Lystra. Peter restores dead Tabitha to life. In the Aegean Sea there started up an Island of 30 Stades. Claudius caused the lake Fucinus now called Lago do Marso to be drawn dry, by the dayly toile of 30000 workmen, but to no purpose. In his time also departed the Virgin Mary, being 59 years old. Peters wife was martyred; and the Synod of the Apostles held the 16. year after Christs resurrection, and the 8. year of Claudius his reigne. CHAP. XII. 1. The wicked life and death of Nero. 2. The affairs of Germany, Britain, Par∣thia, and Armenia at that time. 3. The miserable condition of Iudaea, Galilee, &c. NEro the last and worst of all the Caesars (for he outrun Caligula his Vncle in 4025. A. C. 55▪ all kinde of wickednesse) began his reign the 55 year of Christ, he being
then 17 years of age he commits the government of all things to his mother. He solemnised the Funerals of Claudius. He made great shew of a vertuous Prince for 5 years, promising he would be another Augustus. He either remitted or mi∣tigated heavy taxes. When being desired to subscribe to the condemnation of one, who was to suffer; his answer was: I wish I could not write. Burrhus was his tu∣tor for military affaires, Seneca for Philosophy and Oratory: In his childhood he learned all the liberall Arts. But his Mother kept him back from the study of Philosophy, affirming (but foolishly, and like her selfe) that it was repugnant to princely Government: and that Seneca might make his own Oratory the more ad∣mired by Nero, he hindred him from reading the ancient Orators; therefore he applyed himself to painting, graving, singing, and versifying. Under Nero Pontus was made a Province, he began to shake off his mother for reproving his doating upon Acte the freed woman. He removed Pallas her fa∣vorite, and match maker with Claudius, from all Government; and being jealous of Britannicus the true son of Claudius, who was now 14 years old, and of a to∣wardly disposition, and whom Agrippina threatned to establish in the Empire, Nero by the help of Locusta a naughty woman, poysoned him; who falling down dead at the drinking thereof, made all at the table amazed: but Nero, as if he knew nothing, gave out that he was subject to the Falling sicknesse. But the same night he caused his body to be burned, and to be buried in Campus Martius; at which time thete were such storms and showres, that the people took this for an evill presage: he rewarded Locusta. Then he went about in servill apparell, among the bawdy houses, where he received many a knock, which he bore patiently, because he would not discover himself. He allowed to Valerius Massala, and other decayed gentlemen yearly stipends. Wars between the Romans and the Parthians increased dayly, under Domitius Corbulus about Armenia, which had been conquered by Lucullus and Pompey, but now fallen off. At last Tiridates King thereof was by the help of Antiochus Comagenus, and Pharasmenus forced to yeeld to Cor∣bulo after he had taken Ataxata the chiefe City, and evened it with the ground. After this Nero being taken with the love of Poppaea first made her his Con∣cubine 4033. A. C. 63. (her husband Salvius Otho consenting to it) then he marryed her, having first murthered his own wife Octavia the daughter of Claudius. About this time the Frisian Embassadours at Rome, perceiving that in Pompeys Amphitheater the Embassadours of those Nations who were faithfull to Rome, sat among the Senators; they also sat down, saying that no nation was more faithfull to Rome then the German, which was taken well by the spectators. About the same time also the Hermunduri quarrelling with the Catti, both being German people a∣bout Salt pits, the Catti were overthrown. Poppaea often solicited Nero to make away his mother, as if she intended his death. Therefore he put her in a ship  that could easily fall a sunder in the Sea; but having escaped that danger, he cau∣sed Anicetus his freed man to murther her. At which horrid act the Sunne so∣dainly was darkened, and at Rome a woman was brought to bed of a Snake, and Nero himself tortured with an evill conscience, and with the ghastly sights of his mothers ghost, persuing him with whips and firebrands; he gave himselfe after this to all uncleannesse, and cruelty: For he caused himself to be marryed in the manner and apparrell of a Virgin. Upon the sight of a Comet, he caused many of the Nobility to be murthered, saying, that Comets usually portend Mortality. He used to fish with golden nets, and to wash himself in pretious ointments. He used to sing to the harp, and to be still exercised in the race of chariots. But in the  midst of his jollity, whilest Paulinus was taking in of Mona or Anglesey, the Bri∣tains invade the Roman Colony at Camalodunum or Maldon in Essex, where 70000 Romans and their associates were killed, but Paulinus returning with an ar∣my of 10000 killed 80000 Britains. His successour Turpilianus lived idly without acting any thing. At Rome 400 slaves are killed, because Pedianus the town Praefect was mur∣thered by a slave. Burrhus is poysoned by
Nero, by which Seneca's power was  much weakened. Pallas also is poysoned; Octavia's head is brought into the city by Anicetus who killed Agrippina, and great solemnity is used in the Temples; the base and degenerated Senat in the interim applauding and flattering Nero in all his actions. Caesennius Paetus who basely yeelded Armenia to Volgeses the Par∣thian, was pardoned by Nero. But Corbulus forced Tiridates to lay down his re∣gal diadem at the feet of Nero's image, and to receive it from Caesars hand. Ne∣ro also was the first that persecuted the Christians openly in the 10 year of his reign. Paul is accused by the Jews before the Deputy of Achaja, and is by him absolved. From thence he went to Ephesus, then to Jerusalem, and then at An∣tioch he told Peter, that none should be compelled to Judaism who had sub∣mitted themselves to Christ: having confirmed the Disciples through Galatia and Phrygia, he returneth to Ephesus where he layeth his hands on the 12 men whom Apolles had baptized; and they spake with firy tongues. Then he disputed in the school of Tyrannus, and by handkerchers and aprons he wrought mira∣cles confirming the Gospell in Asia. So that the books of Exorcists were burned, and the worship of Diana at Ephesus overthrowne; at which Demetrius the Silver-smith stormed, and raised a tumult, out of which Paul escaped, and went to Macedonia, leaving there Timothy, to whom he wrote an Epistle, and another to Titus Bishop of Crete. After this he wrote to the Corinthians from Philippi, 4024. he thought to have returned to Ephesus, but being in danger of the Jews, goeth  again to Macedonia. Thence by Titus and Luke he writes again to the Corinthi∣ans, and from thence to the Romans. In his journey at Troas he restores Enty∣chus to life, then at Jerusalem he was set upon by the Jews, but was rescued by Claudus Lysias: and comforted by Christ himselfe. Hee pleads before Claudius, Felix and Drusilla. But Felix is afrighted at the last judgement; being guilty of the murther of Ionathan the High Priest, and of his own inconti∣nent life. Felix having set up Ismael a tyrant in Ionathans Pontificall chair, and having 4026. delivered over Paul bound to his successour Portius Festus, to please the Jewes whom he had offended; he is called home to Rome, where he had justly suffered for his misgovernment, but that his brother Pallas by his greatnesse protected him. Festus sends Paul to Rome, as himself desired, whither he arrived the next year after his shipwrack, and is committed to the charge of Afranius Bur∣rhus. He lived two years in his own house with his keeper: in which time he con∣verted some Jews. From thence he wrote to the Galatians and Ephesians. He 4028. sends abroad divers Disciples; cals Timothy and Mark out of Asia: He wrote to the Philippians by Epaphroditus, to the Colossians, and to Philemon by Tychi∣cus, shewing that he hoped to be set free by Nero, who troubled not himself with any religion, but with that of the goddesse Syria. By Timothy also Paul wrote to the Hebrews: being delivered out of the mouth of the Lion, and dismissed after two years confinement by Nero. He goeth to Asia with Luke, who then wrote the Acts of the Apostles: he taught also in Macedonia, Italy, Spain, and other places. Peter was at this time in Rome, who came thither the second year of Clau∣dius. Here he wrote his two Epistles. Paul returns again to Rome, and is beheaded by Nero. He had familiarity with Seneca. Peter with his prayers overcame Simon 4038. A. C. 68. Magus, who offering to fly in the air by his Magick, fell down and broke his neck. Peter is crucified, and many Christians killed upon suspicion that they had set the City on fire, which was done by Nero himself. Who whilest the City was on flames sung the Iliades of Troy. Many Christians were covered with wild Beasts skins, and cast to dogs to be torn by them; some were burned; Lucan the Poet, 4036.  and Seneca the Philosopher were slain with many other worthy and innocent men, as if they had been conscious of Piso's conspiracy. Petronius Arbiter was killed also. This tyrant banished Rufus Musonius the Philosopher with many other brave men; and killed his own wife Poppaea being great with child, with a kick of his foot. There did die also in one Autumn 30000 of the Plague. After this he crowned Tiridates, and killed Corbulo that conquered him; he went to Greece where he acted the
Stage-player, and then attempted to cut the Isthmus of Peloponnesus. So having wasted the treasure, he fals to exactions and rapine, permitting no rich man to enjoy his own. He spoiled all trading: hee de∣stroyed all his kindred; but the world being weary of 14 years slavery under such a monster, began to cast off the yoak. Wherefore the Gaules under Iulius Vindex, and Spain under Galba revolted: the news of which being brought to him at Na∣ples, he swounded. He had heard of Vindex his revolt the same day he killed his mother. But when he heard that the other armies were fallen off, that Galba was marching against him, that he was proclaimed Traitor by the Senat, that he was condemned to have his head set in a fork, and whipt to death; about midnight he stole out of the city, with Sporus his Eunuch (to whom he marryed himself, af∣ter the death of Poppaea) and a few more, hee being also afrighted with an earthquake, and the gastly apparitions of those he murthered, cries out, have I neither friend nor foe left? and so fals on his sword, and Epaphroditus dispatch∣eth 4039. A. C. 69. him the 33 year of his life and the 9 month; the 13 year of his reign and 8 month. In Judea Ananias the son of Annas the High Priest put to death with many o∣thers, Iames the son of Alphaeus and brother of our Lord, after he had been Bishop of Jerusalem 30 years. Ananias being deposed for his lewdnesse, Agrippa sets up Iesus the son of Damnaeus, and shortly after another Iesus sonne of Gamaliel, which caused civill quarrels. Albinus governed Iudea a while tyrannically, to whom succeeded Gessius Florus, as great an oppressour as the former; who laughed at the Iews Petition which they preferred to Gallus Deputy of Syria, against him. Florus exasperated the Iews by his sacriledge, and they him by railing and upbraid∣ing speeches, denying to deliver up the chief authors as was demanded, where∣fore the souldiers plundered the city and killed divers. The Iewes finding no re∣dresse of their oppressions, about the 12 year of Nero, fell upon the castle Massada, and killed all the Romans in it. Eleazer Nephew of Anna the High Priest who 4038. mocked Christ, perswaded the Priests not to sacrifice any more for Caesar. Agrip∣pa's garrison of horse is driven out of the city, and the Roman Garrison contrary to faith and promise murthered. Ananias the Priest, with divers others are killed for  perswading them to moderation. Upon the sabbath day 20000 Iews are slain at Cesarea. At Alexandria 50000 Iews were destroyed; the Greeks and the Syrians that dwelt among the Jews went to wrack. Thus began the war that utterly ruined the Jewish nation, presaged some yeers before by the Sword comet hanging over the city a whole year; by a sudden light that shined in the Temple for half an hower at Easter; by the brazen east gate of the Temple, which flew open of it self, and a voice was heard, saying: Depart hence. Armed men were seen in the air. One Iesus the son of Ananus for divers years cryed out woe to Ierusalem, and with this woe in 4033. his mouth he dyed. Gallus Governour of Syria, came afore Jerusalem with an Army, but was repul∣sed  with the losse of 5000 foot, and 1000 horse. The Jews encouraged with this successe, leavy new Forces, choose new Commanders, and commit the care of both Galilees to Ananus the Priest, and Iosephus the son of Matthias. But the Christi∣ans got out of Judea by times, fearing the sudden ruine of that countrey. Vespa∣sian famous for his successe in Britanny and Germany, is sent by Nero into Syria. His son Titus was his Legat or Deputy. Sepphoris the chiefe city of Galilee, opened their gates to Vespasian: there quickly he got an army of 60000 out of Aegypt, Syria, and the neighbouring places. Iosephs Forces being too weake to make resistance, Gadara is taken, then Japha where 15000 Galileans are slain, the Samaritans on Mount Garizim are defeated by Sextus Cerealis, where they  lost 11000 and 600. Jotapata after a long siege under Iosephus, was taken by Vespasi∣an with the losse of 40000 Jews the 13 year of Nero. Iosephus yeelds himself to Ve∣spasian, and isby him kindly used. Ioppe, Tiberias, Tarichea are taken. So great was the slaughter of Galileans, that the whole Lake of Gennasereth was infected with the dead bodies. Above 30000 were sold, 6000 are sent to Nero, to dig the Isthmus. Ti∣tus his horse was slain under him, but having backt an other, he killed his enemy. Galilee being subdued Vespasian intends to fall upon
Judea, but resolves to de∣fer  the siege of Jerusalem, because he understood by some fugitives, that they were like to destroy one another within the city, which now was the nest of all unclean birds, and the sink of theeves and rogues, which had no fear of God before them. The rich went to wrack, the High Priest Ananus was thrust out, and one Phanneas an ignorant clown put in his place. The people are incensed against the Zelotes, who seemed to be most eager for their law. Now the Temple is become a den of theeves, and receptacle of all the seditious rout. The Zelotes are besieged, who in the night let in 20000 Idumeans, they fall to skirmishing so fiercely that 8000 were found dead the next morning. Ananus the High Priest, and most of the prime citizens are killed, besides 12000 of the meanner sort. Ve∣spasian  in the mean time subdues Peraea driving the Inhabitants before him to Iordan. Whom Placidus the Tribune destroyed. 15000 were slaine by the sword, besides unknown multitudes which were drowned in Iordan, and in the dead Sea. But as Vespasian was preparing to set downe before Ierusalem, newes are brought of Nero's death, which somewhat retarded the war. CHAP. XIII. 1. The affairs of Rome under Galba, Otho, Vitellius, Vespasian, Titus and Do∣mitian.  2. The utter destruction of Ierusalem, and slavery imposed on the ob∣stinate Iews. 3. Some passages of Parthia, Armenia, and other parts. SErgius Galba in Spain was chosen Emperor by the souldiers, and confirmed by the Senat. He had been Commander over the German and Spanish Forces, but 4038. A. C. 71. V. C. 824. so severe, that when he came into the campe, they used to say: Souldiers learn to fight, this is Galba, not Getulicus. He was infamous for sodomy, gluttony and co∣vetousnesse. When the souldiers demanded of him a donative, he answered that, Hee used to choose, not to buy souldiers. Which speech was very distastfull, for the souldiers used to receive from their Generalls donatives or military rewards,  which was either Adorea a measure of corn, or a chain, or a bracelet, or horse∣trappings, or hasta para, a spear without an iron point; or else garlands. There∣fore as Galba was never too well loved by the souldiers, so now hee is extreamly hated; and so much the more, because he was now altogether ruled by Cornelius Laco, Ti. Vinius, and Icelus, all three infamous; the first for pride, the second for covetousnesse, and the third for sluggishnesse. These three in scorn were called Gal∣ba's pedagogues or tutors. He was slain by the souldiers in the Forum, as hee came to appease the tumult of Otho's Legions, who would have him to be Em∣perour, His head was cut off by a private souldier, and carryed about on a pole, that Otho might see it; but he desired rather to see the head of Licinius Piso  whom Galba had adopted, and thought to have made him his successour in the Empire. This head also was brought to Otho; and Galba's three tutors were killed. Thus ended Galba being 73 years old, and having reigned 7 months: the Senat would have erected a statue for him, but Vespasian hindered it, because he had heard that Galba had employed some souldiers to murther him in Iudaea. Otho succeeded, but reigned not above three months, he perceiving that Galba preferred Piso to him; partly by bribes, partly by fair words, induced the souldi∣ers being angry with Galba, to murther him, and then to confer the Empire on him∣self. But shortly after hearing that Vitellius was made Emperor in Germany by his souldiers: he resolved to end the controversie in a battell. Three battels were  fought, in which Otho had the better: But in the fourth he was defeated; and then out of impatience, he slew himself, the 38 year of his age, to the great grief of the people, who had great hopes of his good government. He was so well be∣loved of his souldiers, that divers of them, looking on his dead body killed them∣selves▪ in his younger years (its thought) he was Nero's Catamit, & rival for Poppaea. Aulus Vitellius returning victor to Rome, was saluted Emperor by the Senat. In his younger dayes Tiberius made use of him
for his body, Cajus for his skill in  charrioting, Claudius and Nero for his cunning in dicing. He was so poor, when e was sent to Galba to Germany, that he was fain to let out his house and to shut up his wife and children in a hired chamber: he was so kinde to the souldiers, that they chose him Emperour, but when he was viewing the dead bodies in the camp where Otho's army was defeated, he let fall an unsavoury word more unpleasing to the ear, then the dead carcasses were to the eye: A slain enemy smels well, but a citizen better. He made himself perpetuall Consul: he was a notorious glutton. His brother Vitellius bestowed a supper on him, at which besides other cheer there were 7000 birds and 2000 fishes. He barborously murthered Sabinus Vespasians brother, with all the Flavians in the Temple of the Capitoll, by setting it on fire  whilest they were in it; wherefore the Syrian, and Pannonian, and Maesian souldiers fel off from him to Vespasian. As the Spanish had done before to Galba, the Praetori∣an to Otho, and and the German to Vitellius; who had used all meanes possible to keep the souldiers fast to him, but in vain; wherefore seeing himself circumven∣ted by his enemies, and forsaken by his friends, he hid himself, in the palace, but being drawn out thence, was carried about naked, with his hands bound behinde him, and with the point of a sword his chin held up, that all might see his impu∣dent face, which the people defaced with dung and dirt, and so is dragged to the 4040. Gemonian ladders, and there is beat to death with innumerable blowes. Having lived 57 years, and reigned 8 moneths, he with his son and brother are drowned in Tiber. In this civill war Cremona was burnt and sackt after it had stood 286 years, no thing was left untouched, but the Temple of Mephitis or goddesse of stin, which stood without the wall. In the ciy were killed 50000. In Iudaea fire and sword raged every where, chiefly at Ierusalem. One Iohannes sonne of Livius, and one Simon, two seditious ring-leaders filled the Temple with bloud and dead bodies. Vespasian understanding the good successe his Army had in Italy against the Vitellians, made hast homeward, and leaves his son Titus, with some choice Regiments to subdue Ierusalem; almost subdued by intestine wars. The short but furious storm of civill war being overblown, there succeeds a sudden serenity under Flavius Vespasianus, who had been Deputy in Germany un∣der Claudius: and had fought 30 battels with the Britains. One time being in Ne∣ro's company he was like to have been killed by him, because he gave no better ear to his musick whilest he was singing: as he was concealing of himself from Nero's fury, the government of Iudaea, with an army is conferred on him. Whilest Otho and Vitellius were tearing the Roman State in peeces, he was incouraged by his friends to undertake the Empire, which he refused, till Tiberius Alexander presi∣dent of Egypt, had revolted to him with his Legions; whose example others follow∣ed: and so at last being perswaded by Mucianus promising him the aid of his Army,  he resolved to venture: the armies of Egypt, Iudaea, Syria, swear allegiance to him. Sohemus, Antiochus, Agrippa, all powerfull Princes and Commanders; Queen Berenice also with all the Provinces of Asia and Achaia proffer their assistance; be∣sides he is animated by the priests, Aruspices, and divers prodigies, chiefly of a cypresse tree which fell down, and the next day rose up again of it self in his ground, more green and fragrant then before. Antonius primus also a stout Commander under Galba, having the command of the 7. Legion, submits to Vespasian, with ma∣ny other Legions. Iulius Sabinus who had named himself Caesar, lay hid 9 years together under ground in a cave with his wife, by whom he had two sons, this vain man with an army of male-contents, set upon the Sequanians, and is beat by them; in his flight he set the village on fire, where he hid him self a while, so that it was thought he had burnt himself, till now that he was found, and put to death for his folly. Ierusalem in the mean time is torn with three factions, to wit, of Simons and Iohns who had the wals and city, and of Eleazars in the Temple. Which Iohn got possession of, by cutting off Eleazars Forces. Titus sat down before the wals; 4401. the besiegers made divers
sallies, but were still beat back with losse: the famine within was great; for being the time of unleavened bread, multitudes of people had flocked thither. So great was the famine, that from the midst of Aprill to the first of July, there dyed within the wals above 700000: some were glad to eat their own execrements, some their own children. Many fled out of the city, of which number 2000 in one night had their bellyes ript by the souldiers, thinking they had hid their gold there. At last the city being intrenched round about was taken the 8. of August. And two dayes after the Temple (which Titus would have saved but could not) was burned with multitudes of people in it. In one porch there were burned 6000. there dyed in all 11 hundred 1000. Of Captives there were taken 97000 as Iosephus who was present, witnesseth. Titus levelled all with the  ground, except a few towers, which hee let stand to witnesse to posterity, the strength of that place. He burned and destroyed by wild beasts 2500 cap∣tives. Titus returning to Rome had the honour of a Triumph bestowed on his father and him: in this triumph was carryed the golden table, & golden candlestick and the Law, which was laid up afterward in the palace. The two chief actors in the rebelli∣on, Simon and Iohn, were both beheaded in the Forum. Caecilius Bassus took the two castles Herodion and Machaerus, partly by storm, partly by surrender. He siew 3000 that fled into the woods: all the land of Judaea was sold by Caesar, except Emaus, which was bestowed upon 800 souldiers for their habitation. The di∣drachma  or 15 l. of our money, which by the law was payable to the Temple by every Jew above 20 years old, is commanded to be brought every year into the Capitoll: the castle Massada which held out last, under Eleazer nephew of Iu∣das Galilaeus, who had 1000 souldiers in it, was set on fire by Flavius Sylva; the garrison within being desperate killed one another, except some children, and two women that hid themselves. So likewise divers Jews having fled to Egypt, suffer∣ed all kind of tortures rather then they would acknowledge Caesar for their Lord, who were notwithstanding slaves to their own wills and wickednesse. This obsti∣nacy made Vespasian destroy the Jewish Temple at Heliopolis, which had stood 333 years, since it was built by Onias. The Jews of Cyrene being seduced by one Iona∣thas  an impostor incurred the displeasure of Catullus the Governour, who slew 3000 of them; and accused as many more of rebellion both at Rome and Alexan∣dria amongst whom was Iosephus the historian, but this tyrant miserably died shortly after. The Alani, a people originally Scythian, about this time breaking through the Caspian straigths, which are narrow passages eight miles in length through rocks, but scarse the breadth of a cart. Fall upon Media and Armenia with fire and sword, so that Tiridates king of Armenia hardly escaped. Vespasian denyed to aid the Parthians in this case, being they were not under the protection of Rome. King Vologeses in his letter to Vespasian cals himselfe king of kings. Which vain title Vespasian reproves not, but returns it modestly to him in his answer. Now was Achaja, Licia, Rhodus, Byzantium, Samos, Thracia, Cilicia, Comagene made Pro∣vinces. In his time divers Cities were overthrown with earthquakes, which he re∣stored. Not long before his death appeared a Comet, which he merrily said por∣tended not his death, but rather the Parthian Kings, who wore long hair. Vespasian was a wise and moderate Prince. He set all things aright which were a∣misse. In his time the Temple of Ianus is shut, which is now the sixt time, since the beginning of Rome. In 120 triumphs, never was it known that the Father and son triumphed in the same chariot till now. Neither since the beginning of the Em∣pire, had any Emperor a son which succeeded him, till Vespasian. He passed by  many wrongs, he never delighted in any mans death, but sometimes wept, when the sentence of death was pronounced. He loved learned men, and appointed yeerly stipends out of the Exchequer for Rhetoricians of both languages. He placed many Garrisons in Cappadocia to keep out the incursions of barbarous na∣tions: by day he suffered the gates of his Palace to stand open without any guard. He was not moved with the scoffs of Demetrius Cynicus, but slighted them, saying; I use not to kill barking dogs. Only he was taxed for using so
many wayes to raise  money, which he excused, by shewing how the Treasures had been exhausted by the loosnesse of his predecessors: which made him sell pardons sometimes, and use his officers like spunges. When Titus reproved him for laying a tax upon urine, holding the money to his nose, he told him that the money did not smell, though the urine did. In his time Linus Bishop of Rome was martyred. He dyed of a flux, but would dye standing, as it became an Emperor, he was 69 years old. Titus called also Vespasian, the delight of mankinde, from his goodnesse so 4050. A. C. 80. V. C. 830. named, was excellent both in literature and armes; in all vertues he exceeded his father. In his younger years he was riotously and wantonly given, spending much time idlely with Queen Berenice, that many were afraid he would have proved another Nero; but on a sudden he so reformed himself and his Court, that he put away Berenice, and all about him that were lewdly affected. He never took any thing by oppression, and yet no Prince more munificent. He never suffered any Petitioner to depart without hope, saying: No man ought to depart out of the Princes presence with a sad countenance. He confirmd all favours granted by his superiors to any, by one Edict. Whereas the former Emperors gave new Patents for every particular favour, as if they had been the first doners. One night at sup∣per calling to mind that he had not granted any favour that day, to any man, he cryes out: Alas friends we have lost a day. He was so mild that not only did he pardon two prime men, that conspired against him; but at a publick shew he made  them sit down by him, and calling for a sword, to try the edge of it, delivers it first to the one, then to the other; saying: Powers are given by fate, and in vaine doe men attempt any great action, out of fear to lose, or hope to obtain. When he understood that his brother Domitian intended treason against him, he told him weeping, that he needed not seek to obtain that by treachery, which he was to have of him willingly; and the rather because he had already made him his colleague in the Empire. He banished all informers; and relieved those that were oppressed, chiefly those of Herculanum and Pompeii, which two townes were overthrown with an Earthquake and the eruption of the hill Vesuvius, which in Titus his time flamed out 3 dayes and nights together. Where the older Pliny lost his life in venturing too nere to search the cause. The ashes of this burning darkened the Sun, and were carryed as far as Rome, Africa, Syria, and Egypt. Titus to the great grief of all good men dyed shortly after, the Provinces grieving as if they had lost a Father. It was thought that Domitian poysoned him, he lived 39 years, 5 months and 25 dayes. 4052. A. C. 82. Flavius Domitianus making more hast then good speed to be Emperor, caused his brother to be stretched out for dead, before the breath was out of his body. In the beginning of his Government, he gave himself to catching and killing of gnats and flies, as if he had wanted imployment: so that one asking if Caesar had any company with him, it was answered by Vibius Crispus, not so much as a flye. He re∣pudiated his wife, and then received her again. There was in him a strange med∣ly of vice and vertue; till at last his vices prevailed. He forbad the gelding of boys; he suppressed private stage-playes and Libels, punishing the Libellers. He thrust Caecilius Rufinus out of the Senat because he delighted in dancing. He suffered not whores to inherit: he punished informers, saying; that not to punish such, were to incourage them. He was at first liberall and abhorred basenesse: he was so skilfull in arching, that e could shoot his arrowes between ones fingers stretched out, and not hurt them. He was carefull in repairing of decayed Liberaries, and supplying of them with coppies from Alexandria and elsewhere. But he was of a cruell and fierce nature, given to lust also and wantonnesse, which he shewed in his younger  years, whilest his father and brother were absent in Judaea, for then he used to com∣mit adultery with noble mens wives. Astrologers had foretold Domitian, that he should be murthered; which made him fierce, and suspitious of almost every man. He never loved any man but in shew, and his pride was such, that with Caligla he assumed the title of Lord and God. His hatred to the Jews, made him rage also against Christians, for under him was the second persecution, in which Iohn the Evangelist
was banished to the Isle  Pathmos where he wrote his Revelation: understanding that one of the seed of David should be universall King, he caused all of that seed to be sought out and killed. He either banished, or disgraced, or murthered the prime men of the Se∣nat. He slew his neerest kinsmen, upon pretence that they favoured Christianity. Under him Clemens, lost his life; immediately followed thundering for 8 months, so often, that he cryed out, Let it now strike, whom it will. The Capitoll with the tops of some other buildings, and his own chamber were thunder-struck. His treasury being exhausted, he gave himself to rapine and exortion. He intended once to have disbanded divers regiments and garrisons, to lessen his charges, but fearing the incursion of barbarous nations, he changed his minde, resolving to maintain them with the spoil of his people. He so affrighted the Senators, that he got from them a great sum of money; for he invited them to a funerall supper, at which all the waiters and servants were so disguised with visard; that in their gastly looks they represented Hobgoblins and Ghosts; which so affrighted the Senators that they looked for present death. He committed incest with his brother Titus his daughter Iulia. L. Antonius who had the charge of High Germany, being pro∣voked by his wicked life, and some distastfull language, revolted; but Domitian having overthrown him by Norbanus Appius, and L. Maximus, grew more in∣solent and cruell then ever. It's thought that he poysoned that excellent man Iu∣lius Agricola, father in law to Tacitus the historian; though he seemed to be sorry  for his death. This Agricola subdued the Britains, and by his fleet was the first that discovered it to be an Island. He also subdued the Orcades: for which good services he was highly extolled by the people, and Domitius his false conquests, and reall triumph were cryed down; for though his armies were beat in Maesia, Dacia, Germany, and Pannonia, yet he bragged that he had subdued his enemies, and hi∣red divers multitudes, which gave out they were his captives, to the end he might obtain a triumph: this love of the people hastned Agricola's death. Domitian being hated of all men, was murthered by Parthenius his chamber∣lain, Stephen his Steward, and Domitia his wife, who loved Paris the Stage-player 4067. better then her husband: these hired some freed men, who with many wounds  killed him. Domitia found in his closet a list of divers whom Domitian meant to murther, among which she found her own name; but before he was killed, Ner∣va's friends had got his consent to accept of the Empire, lest the souldiers should mutiny: he reigned 15 years, and lived 45. The Senat ordered that his body should not be carryed in a bed or hearse, but in a common beer, and that his name should be every where razed. His death was foretold by Proculus in Germany: and the same houre that Domitian was killed at Rome, Apollonius (at Ephesus) got up on a high stone, and cryed out, saying; Well done Stephen, kill the mur∣therer. Not long before his death, a Crow upon the Capitoll spoke in Greek; all shall be well. In Domitian's time, the Picts out of Scythia setled themselves in  Scotland. Dionysius the Areopagite preached the Gospell to the Parisians. Then did the Ebionites or Pythagorian Christians, (commanding abstinence from all flesh, and confounding Law with Gospell,) begin to broach their heresies, as also the Nicolaitans urging community of wives. These Tertullian cals the Patriarchs of hereticks.
The Second Book OF THE SECOND PART, INTREATING Of the times from NERVA the ROMAN EMPEROR, till the Reign of CONSTANTINE alone, containing 233 Yeares. CHAP. I. 1. Of the Roman affaires under Nerva, Trajan and Adrian. 2. Of the affaires of Iews, and Christians during that time. COccjus Nerva a good but a short-lived Prince, whose justice was such in publick, that he was not afraid to spend his life in 4067. A. C. 100. private: he repealed the unjust acts of Domitian calling home the exiled, and restoring every man to his own again. Some think he was born in Narnia a City of Umbria; some in Crete.  The first Emperor of a stranger. He was saluted Emperor both by the Senat and Army, yet was doubtfull to accept it, till he was assured by Parthenius that Domitian was dead. He melted all the golden and silver Images of Domitian, and converted them to money. He suffered no man to be accused or troubled for religion. In Domitians time it was lawfull for any man to accuse another; which made Fronto say, that it was ill living under that Prince where nothing was lawful, but worse under him where all things were law∣full. By vertue of Nerva's edict. Iohn the Evangelist returns to his Episcopall charge at Ephesus. Where he publisheth his Revelation and Gospell against Cerinthus who denyed Christs Divinity: and his three Epistles also, though some have questioned the two last, but injuriously. In his Epistles, by the Anti∣christs  that were come, he means Simon Magus and Menander, (being Sama∣ritans and affectors of Divine honor) with the Nicolaitans, Cerinthians, and Ebi∣onites. Nerva also took off many publick sines, he provided carefully for the poor, that there might be no beggers in Italy, he was so loath to burthen his people with taxes, that he would rather make use of his own revenews. Though Calphurnius Crassus for his treason in labouring to draw the armies from Caesar deserved death, yet he only banished him to Tarentum. The souldiers (but against Nerva's will) killed Petronius, Steven and Parthenius the murtherers of Domitian; they first cut off Petronius his genitals, and flung them  in his face, Casperius Aelianus bought his own pardon for a great sum, and out of his insolency caused Nerva to thank the souldiers publickly, for killing the three traitors, perceivng how needfull a stout, and strong bodyed man was to rule; he neglecting his own kindred publickly adopted Trajan a Spaniard to be his heir and successour, preferring vertue to kindred or country: therefore Trajan is first made Caesar, then Emperour, with him he lived 3 months. He dyed of a Feaver the 65 year of his life, having reigned one year and 4 moneths. His death was
accompanyed with an Eclipse of the Sun. Cor. Tacitus commended him in a Fune∣rall oration. M. Vlpius Trajarus being at Colen received the Ensignes of the Empire sent 4069. him from Rome. He was a man endowed with piety, wisdom, valour, and all o∣ther princely vertues; and a great lover of learned men. He delivered his sword to the Captain of the Guard, willing him to use it for him, if he did well, but against him if otherwise. He told the Senat one day that he had a command sent him from Iupiter to maintain the ancient religions of Rome, which were now weakned by the increasing of Christianity, for many of their Temples lay desolate, and few sacrifices were offered. Therefore now began a new persecution against Christi∣ans.  Simeon the son of Cleophas our Saviours kinsman, and Bishop of Jerusalem, was there crucified being 120 years old. Ignatius Bishop of Antioch, at Rome was flung to the wild Beasts. Clemens Bishop of Rome, whom Paul mentions in 4079. his Epistle to the Philippians, was beheaded; though some think he suffered before this time. Trajan did not directly persecute the Christians for their Religion, but because they were accused for Magicians in that they wrought so many miracles. 2. Because they had their meetings and conventicles, against which severe laws were made. 3. Because they had so many jars and contentions amongst themselves, by which they might occasion commotions in the City; and indeed these jars were caused by the heretiques. Yet Pliny the younger Proconsul then of Bithy∣nia in his Epistle to Trajan, writes that he found no fault in Christians, but only that they met to sing hymnes to Christ before day, whom they worshipped for their God. And that they bound themselves by Sacraments not to steal, or com∣mit adultery, or any such wickednesse. Therefore Trajan wrote back, that such as were accused should be spared if they would worship the Roman Gods. By which the heat of persecution was abated. About this time dyed Iohn the Apostle being nigh 100 years of age. Trajan had 5 years war with Decibalus King of Dacia, which now is Transyl∣vania and Nalachia. This war began in Domitians time, at last Trajan subdued the Daci, but with great losse, for there wanted linnen to bind up the wounds of  those that were hurt; so that Trajan was fain to tear his own robes. Decibalus being killed, the countrey beyond the Rhene was made a Province. In his time Arabia Petraea was taken. At Rome Trajan exhibited sports or spectacles, wherein 10000 wild beasts were slain, and as many gladiators did fight. He made war upon Armenia and Parthia, because the Armenian held his crown of the Parthi∣an, and not of him. He recovered Armenia, and killed Pharnaces their King. Divers kings did homage to him. He subdued a great part of Persia, with Baby∣lon, Seleucia, Edessa and Ctesiphon. He made Assyria, Armenia, and Meso∣potamia Provinces. He built a Fleet in the red Sea, to goe for Judaea; therefore 4081. the Senat gave him the title of Optimus: and appointed him as many triumphs as  he pleased: but Trajan was punished at Antioch with an Earthquake, for mur∣thering of Ignatius bishop thereof, multitudes of people were destroyed there. The city being then full, because of the Emperors aboad there. Trajan having escaped out of a window, was so affrighted, that for a great while, he durst not lye with∣in doores. The next spring Trajan renews the Parthian war, and that he might incourage his souldiers, he went on foot before them. But as he was preparing for his voyage many places fell off from him; divers of his Garrisons destroyed. A∣gainst these rebels Lucius Quietus, and Maximus, are sent. Maximus is killed. Lu∣cius recovers Nisibis and Edessa. Seleucia is taken by his Deputies, and burned.  He set a King over the Parthians. But as he was fighting against the Agarens his Army was forced to give off, being beaten with thunder, lightning, and whirle∣windes. He was infested with swarmes of flies, that he could not keep them off from his meat and drink. Shortly after this he fell sick, being poysoned, and dy∣ed 4088. in Cilicia the 64 year of his age, having reigned 19 years 6 months and 15 days. After whose death, the Parthians returned to their own Government. He erected many stately buildings at Rome, setting his name every where, for which cause he was in scoff called Wall-flower.
About the 18 year of Trajan, the Jews began again to rebell: in Cyrene they murther Greeks and Romans promiscuously: the like they did in Egypt and A∣lexandria. In Cyprus they slew about 240000. they cut many by the middle, and many they flung to wilde beasts, and such was their madnesse, that they eat mans flesh. But they were shortly after subdued by Lucius and Turban: and it was made death for a Jew to enter Cyprus. So barbarous were these Jews, that they girded themselves with the guts yet bleeding of those they slew, and clothed themselves with their skins. The ashes of Trajans body were translated from that town of Cilicia where he dyed, called Silinus, and from him Trajanopolis, and brought to Rome with great solemnity, where he was buried alone, being against the laws of the 12 Tables for any to be buried in the City. His ashes were buried  under that magnificent pillar which he caused to be erected the 15 year of his reign, with his statue on the top thereof. This pillar is yet extant, and in stead of Trajan now stands S. Peter in brasse richly gilt, by Sixtus Quintus then bishop of Rome. Trajan after his death was defiled; and called Dacicus from his victories over the Daci, which were engraven on his pillar. The Senat used to salute every Emperor newly made with these words: Happier then Augustus, better then Trajan. P. Aelius Adrianus, the son of Adrian the Senator, who was cousin german to 4088. A. C. 118. Trajan, was by him adopted, or at least given out so by Plotina Trajans wife, and was now Governour of Syria, who for his own worth and neernesse to Trajan, was  saluted Emperor: that he might not be kept back from Rome, he quitted all beyond Euphrates, contenting himself with the ancient bounds of the Empire. He sent for Iulius Severus out of Britain into Syria to chastise the turbulent Jews, whose Captain Bencochad, that is, the son of the Star (alluding to that Prophesie, A Star shall arise out of Iacob) called himself the Messias, to make his power the greater. He held in Judaea for some years 50 castles, 980 Villages, and fortified the town Bethoron, whence he sallied out divers times upon the Romans. But Adri∣an returning into Syria besiged Bethoron 3 years and a half: at last took it by storm, and in it Captain Bencochab, but indeed Bencozba the son of a Lye, as the  deluded Jews now called him. The number of them that dyed by the plague, fa∣mine and sword, was 500000 men. This fellow was a pestilent enemy of the Christians, murthering them, where ever he found them. But Hadrian rebuilt Hie∣rusalem, and called it Aelia by his name, in which he permitted Christians to dwell, but not the Jews; yea he made it death for any ew, either to goe neer it, or to look on it: only such as paid a great sum of money, were permitted to goe thi∣ther and bewaile it. The Temple of Iupiter Capitolinus was now built, where Salomons Temple stood. Therefore the town was now called Aeliaa Capitolina. The Jews also were forbid to circumcise themselves: all their strong Forts were oaerthrown. Adrian being confirmed in the Empire, he made away those whose greatnesse he suspected, chiefly Celsus, Nigrinus, Palme, and Lucius, being four eminent Consular men. Having quieted all in the East, returns to Rome, and remits many debts due to the Exchequer, and withall the sum of money which was used to be presented to the Victor called aurum coronarium, in lieu of the golden coro∣nets, which of old they wont to give him. Psamatosseris whom Trajan had made king of Parthia was slighted by them, and so by Hadrian was made king of the next bordering countries. He was very courteous, affable, and familiar with his friends, chiefly when they were sick. He still kept the souldiers in exercise, ever in time of peace, and used to feed with them on cheese, lard, and pusca; which was a drink made of vinegar and water. In this he imitated Scipio Aemilianus,  Metellus, and Trajan. Being more desirous of peace then war, and finding the Bri∣tains still molested by the Scots and Picts, he built a wall 80 miles long, to keep them out. He killed his crabbed wife, for saying shee had taken a course, that hee should never have any children to the destruction of mankinde. He killed also Apol∣lodorus an Architect for finding fault with his errours in building. He was of a various yetcunning and
dissembling nature. He seldome kept his promise. He  was still inquisitive of mens secrets, he was also lasciviously given, but quick wit∣ted, and ready at answers. He had skill almost in all Arts; and had a rare memory, and a strong body; for he used to goe about the Provinces on foot, and to outwalk his followers. He reduced all Manufactures into Companies or Cor∣porations. He could not indure that any should professe an Art, wherein he was not exquisite, and therefore would hire some for money to give off their profes∣sion. He would goe bare headed in the coldest weather. He loved his horse Bory∣sthenes so well, that he erected a monument for him, with an Epitaph. He was affable to the meanest. He was carefull of the poor, and would not suffer Ma∣sters either to kill, or sell their slaves to Fencers nor Panders. He advanced what  he could the Romish superstition, but persecuted the Christian religion. Which Aristides the Philosopher, and Quadratus the Bishop, both Athenians, defended by their apologies: whereby his rigour was somewhat tempered. He had adop∣ted Aelius whom he called Caesar before he was Emperor, but he died; there∣fore he made Aurelius Antonius his successor▪ called afterward Pius for rescuing divers Senators from the fury of Adrian, who killed Servianus his sisters hus∣band, and his nephew Fuscus for finding fault with his adopting of Antonius. When Servianus was to dye, he prayed that Adrian might wish for death, and not obtaine it; which fell out to be so, for he was tortured with a lingring disease, that he wished his friends to kill him, and offered divers times to kill himself, had he not been hindred; at last, he destroyed himself with abstinence; disputing and doubting whither his soul should goe; he cryed out against Physitians, saying, 4104. Many Physitians had killed the King: His bones were laid up in that great building erected by him, and called Moles Adriani; now the castle of S. Angelo. He lived 72 years, and reigned 21 and 11 months. Similis the captain of his guard, having got leave to spend the remainder of his life privately in the country, lived there 7 yeares, after he had resigned his place; and caused this Epitaph to be en∣graven on his tombe: Here lyeth Similis who spent many yeares but lived on∣ly seven. In Adrians time lived the heretick Carpocrates, author of the Adamites and Gno∣sticks, so called from their supposed knowledge above others. Under him also was Eustachium called Placidus before his baptism, martyred; he had done good service under Vespasian against the Jews, and under Trajan against the Daci. He was first cast to the Lions, but they spared him, at last he was burned in a hot bra∣sen Bull. In his time was Nicomedia overthrown with an Earthquake, so were Nicopolis, Nicaea, and Caesarea. He called the city Uscuduma in Mysia, from his owne name Adrianopolis. To vex the Jews he set over one of the gates of Ae∣lia the picture of a Hog; a creature hated by them, and by which he would re∣present their hoggish qualities; then it was as some think that the candidates of the Empire, began to be called Caesars; though some were called so before. And about this time Aquila of Pontus was converted to Christianity; but being reproved for spending too much time in Astrology: he circumcised himselfe, and became a Jew, and translated the Bible in Greeke, but cor∣ruptly. CHAP. II. 1. The Roman affairs under Antoninus Pius, Antoninus Philosophus, and Com∣dus. 2. The affairs of the Christians, and of forraign Nations at that time. ANtonius was surnamed Pius by the Senat, for his acts of piety in building of 4109. A. C. 139. Temples, advancing of Priests, honoring of learning, assigning large Sala∣ries throughout the Provinces to Philosophers and Rhetoricians; in sparing and pardoning all criminals in the beginning of his reign, saying; that he ought not to begin his reign with bloud; in preserving Adrian from killing of himselfe, and in maintaining the Empire in peace and plenty all his life. He was a just, mild
and  learned Prince, who as he advanced men of parts, so he hated idle drones, and discountenanced needlesse Artists by abridging them of their maintenance. He was indeed another Numa Pompilius: Only out of the common error of these times, he did not much favour the Christians. Yet he was content to tolerate them, being pacified by the apologies of Iustin Martyr and others. He honoured the Senate, and they him. He would not give way that all the Acts of Adrian should be repealed: there was but one Senator in all his time banished, namely Atilius Trajanus who for affecting to be King was proscribed by the Senat. He forbad burying of the dead within cities. His aboad was most in the city, for the greater ease of Embassadors: he seldom made progresses, shewing how chargeable and troublesome the Princs removall was to the country though his attendants were but few. Antoninus his father Aurelius was a Transalpin Gaul. Arrius Antoninus his Grandfather by the mother had been twice Consul. He was comely in his perso∣nage, but more in his conditions. So great was his authority that the Indians, Bactrians, and Hircanians made him Judge of their differences. He appeased all sedition, not with cruelty but gravity: he quited the Jewes, Britains, Mores, Da∣ci and Germans. He placed a King over the Lazi a people in Scythia. He kept off by his bare letters the Parthian King from Armenia. In no Princes time was there lesse bloud shed then in his, whose saying was the same with that of Scipio's: I had rather save one subject, then kill 10000 enemies. In times of dearth he reli∣ved  the poor out of his own store. When he came to see Omulus his house, he in∣quired whence he had his marble pillars. Omulus answered, that in another mans house he should be both deaf and dumb; with which answer he was well pleased. He rebuilt divers towns overthrown with Earthquakes. In his time Pope Sixtus suffered Martyrdome, not by any edict from the Prince, but by the malice of the Senat against Christianity. Then sprung up Va∣lentinus the heretick, with his spawn of Canies, Sethites, and Ophites, or Snake∣worshippers. As also Cerdon and his scholar Marcion whom Polycarpus called the divels first begotten sonne: and Apelles who gave Christ a sideriall or aeriall body.  Pope Telesphorus with some others were martyred. So was his successor Pope Hi∣ginius. Antoninus dyed the 70 year of his life, and 23 of his Empire. In his time was seen in Arabia a mained Serpent, which eat up his own tail; 4 Lions so tame that they suffered themselves to bee taken; and barly grew upon some trees. Marcus Antoninus Philosophus being adopted by Pius & approved by the Senat, succeeded Emperor, to whom he joins his brother Lucius Verus as his Colleague; so now two Emperors reign together. Marcus was every way an excellent Prince, both for armes, and learning; who used to frequent the Philosophy Schooles, after he was Emperor: but Lucius was given to delights and luxury; which Mar∣cus by his goodnesse covered as much as he could; and lest his vices should be  too much observed, living in Rome in the eye of the world; he got him to under∣take the Parthian war against Vologesus, who had defeated the Roman Army, and molested Syria; but Lucius at Antioch and Daphne, gave him self over whole∣ly to his pleasures, and committed the care of the war to his Deputies, among which Avidius Cassius defeated Vologesus, took Seleucia upon Hydaspes with 400000 men, and burned the town: he took also Ctesiphon, and demolished Volo∣gesus his houses. The Parthian war being ended, and Armenia setled, Lucius after 5 years re∣turnes to Rome, where with his brother he was carryed in triumph. He brought from Parthia not only Mimicks, Stage-players, Fidlers, and Jugglers great store;  but the Plague too; which at Babylon brake out of a golden chest: which a soul∣dier took out of Apollo's Temple, when the chest was opened such a pestiferous vapour burst forth, as multitudes were infected by it. At Rome they died so fast, that the dead were carryed out by cart-loades. After this Marcus and Lucius goe against the Germans; who had all conspired against the Roman Empire; but when they came to Aquileja, Embassadors met them from all
parts petitioning,  that they might be pardoned for their defection. Lucius would have gone back, but Marcus would not, fearing that this repentance of the Barbarians was coun∣terfeit, only to keep off the Roman Armies from their countreys: so having pas∣sed 4140. A. C. 170. the Alpes, and fortified Italy, ey quieted Pannonia. Lucius longing to be at Rome again returnes, but in the way being taken with an Apoplexy speechlesse, dyed the third day, having reigned with Marcus 11. years, some think he was poy∣soned by Faustina, the wife of Marcus. Marcus undertakes alone the war against the Marcomanni or Moravians with their confederates, and because the plague had destroyed many, therefore as in the Punic war, so now use is made of slaves, gladiators, and robbers; and that hee  might not oppresse the Provinces with taxes▪ he sold or pawned all the Jewels, plate, and rich utinsels of the Court, to make money; which he redeemed againe (when the war was ended) of those that were willing to part with their bargain. In two years he quite overthrew the Marcoman faction with the Jaziges or Transil∣vanians. He also miraculously overcame the Quadi, that is▪ the Suevans and Po∣lonians. For the Roman army being like to perish for want of water in a dry and barren ground, by reason they were beset round about by the enem, the captain of the Guard told the Prince that there was in the army a legion of Christians, who used to obtain any thing they asked of their God; immediately they were desired to pray, and no sooner had they prayed, but a great shower of rain refreshed the  Roman army, and the Barbarians were overthrown with thundering and light∣ning, so that they who remained alive, did either yeeld or flye; after which victo∣ry the Christians were favoured by the Emperor, divers of them advanced, and their accusers punished. So that the fourth great persecution is now ended, parly by the constancy of Polycarpus, Pius, and Anicetus, and divers other martyrs, partly by the second apology of Iustin, partly by plagues, famine, earthquakes, rebellion, and conspirations, and partly by this strange defeat of the Barbarians, at the prayers of the Christian Legion, which ever after was called The thundering Legion. Whilest Marcus was making Provinces of Marcomannia and Sarmata, Avidius Cassius giving out that Marcus Antoninus was dead, rebelled in the East, drawing all within Mount Taurus to his faction: Wherefore the Emperor makes an ex∣pedition into the East, the souldiers finding he was alive, fell upon Cassius and his son, and killed them both, his head was brought to Antoninus, but he no ways re∣joycing at the sight, commanded it to be buried. He pardoned Antioch, and the other cities that adhered to him: he was highly beloved of all the East parts. E∣gypt did honour him for his Philosophy. His wife Faustina infamous for adultery, dyed suddenly neer the hill Taurus, whom the Emperor commended and concealed her faults, for by her means he got the Empire; therefore being wished by some to put her away for her adulteries, answered: If I devorce my wife, I should re∣store  her dowry. At Athens he gave annuall stipends to professours of all sciences, at Rome he gav gowns to the souldiers, saying those cities flourished most where Philosophers were rulers, or rulers Philosophers. He was much addicted to Sto∣icall Philosophy, he was very moderate both in rewards and punishments. He was never without good Lawyers about him; he desired to hear what the people said of him, that he might amend what was amisse. He hated cruelty, therefore would not suffer the gladiators to fight with sharp swords. He thought it more reasonable that he should follow the advice of his friends being many, then that they should fol∣low his being but one. He suffered not men and women to bath together▪ nor did he permit riding or coaching within cities, he was still present at their Parliaments, and never departed till the fathers gave him leave. The Sarmatians, Marcomans and their neighbours rebelled again; so that Mar∣cus was fain to be there in person. After three years war he subdued them, shortly 4151. A. C. 181. after he fell sick, and dyed the 19 year of his Empire, of his life the 58. to the great grief of all good men, a happy Emperor, had he been childlesse, for his son Commodus was a wicked Prince. When Marcus was asked to whom he would re∣commend his son, answered: if he be good to God and you. He was
offended  when his friends weeped for him in his sicknesse, wishing them rather to weep for the publick caamities. In his time Lucius king of the Britains was converted to Christianity, by those whom Pope Eleutherius sent thither to preach. Lucian the great enemy of Christianity, was then torn by dogs. Then Montanus the he∣retique with his Maximilla and Priscilla, began to divulge their false prophesies, these were the authors of the Cataphrygian heretiques, which lived about Phry∣gia. Montanus called himself the Paraclet that was promised. Tatianus then liv'd; he was ather of the Encratites, that is continent; for they abhorred marriage and wine, hence they are called Aquarii and Hydro-parastaae, with divers other here∣tiques. Then was Pope Aniceius martyred and Soter his successor, with many other Christians. Commodus succeeded, who by reason of his wicked conditions and his mothers loosenesse, was thought to be the sonne of a Sword-player, rather then of Verus, 4151. A. C. 181. such an excellent Father, and this suspicion grew the rather, because he delighted much in sword-playing, even openly upon the Theater, and in the Amphitheaters he used to fight with wild Beasts. He murthered many of the Senators, and such as excelled in vertue and nobility; he shewed his cruelty at 12 years of age in cau∣sing the man that was washing him in the warm bath to be flung into the fiery fur∣nace, because the water in which he washed was hotter then ordinarily. He gave himselfe to all kind of luxury and uncleannesse. He set none but the worst men o∣ver the Provinces. He became so hatefull, that his own sister Lucilla conspired his  death, with Quadratus, and Tarentenus captain of the guard; Claudius Pompeja∣nus who was imployed to kill him, comming into his chamber drew his sword, saying, this sword the Senat sends you. But before he could doe any thing, hee with the rest of the conspirators were laid hold on and killed. Lucilla was first banished, then executed. So was Crispina Augusta, and the whole family of the Quintilians with many more. After this Commodus was wary into what company he came, he would suffer none to speak to him, but by Perennius captain of the Guard, who knowing the length of his Masters foot, counselled him to take his pleasures, and hee would look to the managing of affaires. In his time Vulpius Marcellus overthrew those  Britains that came over Adrians wall. The plague was so hot at Rome that there dyed oftentimes 2000 a day. Commodus in the interim with 300 Concubins, and 300 Sodomites in the Palace gave himself to feasting and riotousnesse. But Peren∣nius having got the power into his hands, made his sonnes Generals over the Illy∣rian armies, and got them with bribes to alienate the souldiers from the Emper∣or, whom he meant himself to murther. This plot was detected by one in the ha∣bit of a Philosopher; who with a staffe in his hand, and a powch hanging from his shoulder, being half naked, runs to Commodus as he was sitting in the Theater, and tels him it was not a fit time for him to solace himself with publick shewes, when Perennius his naked sword was hanging over him. Perennius presently caused the man to be apprehended, and burned for a mad dangerous fellow, but afterward mo∣ny was brought to Commodus having the image of Perennius. Hereupon com∣mand was privately given to cut off Perennius and his son, which was done accor∣dingly. But Cleander a worse favourite succeeded. He of a servant became the Cap∣tain of the Guard, and High Chamberlain to Commodus, who did what he could to aleniate both the souldiers and people from the Emperor, he exposed all places of honor and trust to sale. He both called home the banished, and preferred them to great places. He killed Byrrus who had marryed Commodus his sister, because he complained to his brother that Cleander affected the Empire▪ He murthered also many others, that disliked his ways. Commodus in the mean while gave himselfe to his pleasures taking no notice of his favourites oppressions. One time whilest Commodus in the Suburbs was sporting and delight∣ing himself, the people in a tumultuous way came with a petition against Cleander, for buying up all the corne, which occasioned both the plague and famine at Rome, Cleander commanded the guard to fall upon them, who killed and wounded many of the unarmed multitude driving them
within  the city gates, the people within fall on the souldiers, and what with stones from the tops of the houses, what by other means, multitudes of them were killed, the ci∣ty being all in an uproar, Fadilla the Emperors eldest sister came weeping, and tearing her hair and garments to the Emperor, telling him that he and his Empire would be suddenly ruined if Cleander and his complics were not punished; the Emperor having understood the truth of things, which had been concealed from him till now, sent presently for Cleander, whose head being cut off, he caused to be set on a high pole, and shewed to the people, at sight of which they were appea∣sed, and the souldiers that fought for him, affrighted. Such was the peoples ha∣tred against Cleander, that they murthered all his friends and children with their mothers, and having dragged their bodies through the streets, flung them into privies. It's said that Cleander begot those children of Commodus his concubins. Then the Emperor though fearfull of plots returns to the city. In his time many monsters were born, the Temple of Peace into which many rich men had sent their wealth for security, was burned to the ground; this was held a sad presage of wars and miseries, which fell out true; for many stately edi∣fices in the city were consumed with fire; so was the Temple of Vesta, the Pal∣ladium that was brought from Troy and kept hid all this while, was now seene whilest the Vestall Nuns did rescue it from the flames, and carryed it publickly to the Emperors Court. He no wayes troubled with these disasters runs on in  his vain courses, and would in stead of Commodus be called Hercules Amazonius Exsuperans; and presented himself to the people in the Lions skin, and carrying Hercules his club. He changed the names of the months, & called them by his own names and titles. He caused his statues to be set up, which after his death the peo∣ple overthrew, and set up the statue of liberty. He fought openly in the Amphi∣theaters with wild Beasts, which he caused to be brought thither from all parts: he killed 100 lions, so skilfull he was in arching that he never missed. He shewed himself one time naked among the gladiators, sometimes he would shew himselfe in womens apparell; he caused all the criples about the City to be assembled in one place, and cloathing them like Gyants representing serpents feet; he played the  part of Iupiter, shooting at them his arrows. He had set downe in a booke the names of those he meant to murther, among which was Marcia his concubine, for giving of him good counsell; Laetus Captain of the Guard, with many other rich men, whose wealth he meant to bestow upon his souldiers and gladiators, but the book being found Marcia poysons him; and let it might fail, Narcissus strangled him; the Senat upon the report of his death, proclaims him an enemy to God and men, razeth hisname, and throws down his Statues. The Capitoll in his time was set on fire by thunder, in which the Bibloethec with the records, and other writings were burned. Then it was that Pantenny preached Christ to the Indians, and there found S. Matthews Gospell brought  thither by Bartholomew the Apostle. Victor Bishop of Rome excommunicates the Eastern Churches for observing Easter with Polycarpus on the 14 day of the Moon; which rashnesse is reproved by Irenaeus Bishop of Lions. Theodotion sets out a new Greek translation of the Bible, which is the third. The Christians lived quietly all his time, for Martia whom he so loved did much favour them. He reigned 12 years and 9 months, he lived 31 years and 4 months. In his time, they found out a trick at Rome, to kill men, by shooting at them poysoned needles out of secret places.
CHAP. III. The affaires of Rome under Pertinax, Didius, and Severus. 2. Severus his actions in the East, and in Britain. 3. The Christian affaires during that time. COmmodus being dead, it was divulged abroad by Martia, Laetus, and Ele∣ctus who was High Chamberlain, that the Prince dyed of an Apoplexy, 4164. A. C. 194. to which he was subject in his drunkennesse. And they resolve to fix the Empire on Publius Helvius Pertinax who had been Consul and Governour of Maesia, Dacia, and Syria. He was an Italian born, a brave Commander, and one of those to whom Marcus committed the care of his son Commodus. In the night time Laetus, Electus, and some others brought news to Pertinax▪ being in his bed, of the death of Commodus, and that he was fittest in respect of his age, valor and good services to the State; he at first feared they came to mock, and then to mur∣ther him; but finding their sincerity, accepts their counsell and advice, Laetus and Electus prepare the Army to receive Pertinax, who no sooner came, but he was with joyfull acclamations saluted Emperor and Augustus by the people first, then by the souldiers: and so having taken the Oath of allegiance, they follow the Em∣peror to his Palace with bayes on their heads. The next morning Pertinax went to the Senat; but would not have the fire or other ensignes of Principality carryed before him, till he obtained the Senats approbation, which he doubted, being of mean parentage in comparison of the former Emperors: but the whole Senat unaminously salutes him Emperor, which honour he desired to avoid, beseeching the Fathers that they would confer it on Glabrio the noblest of all the Patricii. But Glabrio refused it, so that Pertinax was forced to sit down in the chair of state, who having made a speech, and offered sacrifice went home. At the bruit of Pertinax his being Emperor, all good men rejoyced, the barba∣rous Nations sent Embassadours to congratulate. The people found that he would  prove a Father more then an Emperor. For he bound up the hands of the soul∣diers from plundering and robbing; he bestowed all the wast ground in Italy on those that would take paines to improve them. He sold the goods of Commodus with his boys and Concubines, and the money he raised by the sale (which was great) he bestowed on the souldiers for a donative. He lessened the Emperors charges, cutting off superfluous expenses. He shewed himself mild and affable to all; he would not have the Senat call his son Caesar till he deserved it. But he was not so bountifull as affable. The souldiers repine at his strictnesse, being accustomed to rapine, oppression; and lust. Wherefore they resolve to make him away; and choose another: Therefore they suddenly rush into the Pallace;  the good old Emperor was wished by his friends to fly and hide himself, till the people were in condition to rescue him, which he thought did not consist with his honour, but confiding in his owne worth and innocency, presented himself to the souldiers, whom by his grave speech and presence he so moved, that they were turning back, till one more bloudy then the rest, thrust his spear into his brest, who praying to Iupiter the revenger, and covering his face with his robe fell downe dead, having received many wounds. Some thinke that Laetus who made him Emperor gave him his deaths wound. He lived 67 yeares, and reigned almost 3 months: the Senat deified him; and buried him honourably. Didius Iulianus nobly born, and very rich, but ambitious, bought the Empire which the souldiers profered to sell to him that gave most. Flavius Sulpitianus Fa∣ther  in law to Pertinax offered a large sum for it, which they refused, because of his affinity with Pertinax. Therefore Iulian by them is chosen, who promiseth to set up again all the statues of Commodus which were cast down, and to give them the same priviledges they had under him: wherefore they gave him the name of Commo∣dus, they conveyed him to his Court, through the streets, but covered their heads with their targets, because of the stones flung on them from the tops of the houses;
the people, in stead of acclamations, saluted him and them with imprecations, for buying and selling the Empire. Didius gave himself wholly to his pleasures and riotousnesse; hee failed also in his promises to the souldiers, for he could not pay the promised sum, out of the treasure which was exhausted by Commodus, nor out of his own Estate, which came short of what he bragged; therefore the souldiers began to dislike him: the people did continually rail at him; and sends to Niger then Consul and Governour of Syria, that he would accept the Em∣pire. He being in good hope to obtain what was proferred (seeing that Didius was hated both by the people and souldiers) assembles the Syrian Army, which loved him well, because his government was gentle and pleasant, in that he gave way to shews and plays, wherein the Syrians delighted: he askes their advice; they all with one voice salute him Augustus, puts on his Emperiall robes, and carrying the fire before, they convey him to the Temple at Antioch. Embassadours from all the Easte in parts repair thither to congratulate, proffering their assistance; but Niger thinking himself secure, gave himself to his delights, and neglected the opportunity of repairing to Rome, wherefore Severus an African, a stout and crafty man, being Governour of Pannonia, and perceiving in what condition the Empire was in, and being incouraged by his dream, wherein he thought that the horse whch carryed Pertinax through the via sacra, flung him down, and sub mitted his back to Severus; he I say by faire promises and bribes, obtains the good will of the Northern Armies, assuring them, that he intended to revenge the death of Pertinax, by whose name he would be called, and exhorts them to make hast with him to Rome, the Imperiall Seat, that they may first seise on it. The armies having saluted Severus Emperor; he loseth no time, but with all 4164. A. C. 184. speed, enters Italy, before any there knew his intention. All the Cities living in long peace, and being affrighted at the greatnesse of his armies, opened their gates, and proclaimed him Emperor, Iulian hearing of Severus his approach, raiseth mony for the souldiers, which they took from him as a debt, not as a gift: and seeing that he was hated by the people, slighted by the souldiers, and despised by the Senat, he wrote letters to Severus, proffering to make him his Colleague  in the Empite. But when he saw that all forsooke him, desired the Senat to take the Government from him, and bestow it on Severus, which they did, and with∣all gave charge to a Tribune to put him to death, which he had bought with so much money. Didus being slain, Severus sends for the Pretorian Guard which Didus lived 60 years, and reigned 66 days. murthered Pertinax, wishing them to leave their Arms behind, and to come only with bayes in a triumphing manner to rejoyce with him; they did accordingly, suspecting nothing; but upon the Emperors command, they were incompassed round by the Army, stript naked, and chekt for their murthering of Pertinax, and banished 100 miles from the City. He might have killed them all, but would not begin his reign with bloud. Severus coming to Rome was received by the Senat and people, with joyfull acclamations. He distributes large gifts among the people and souldiers, makes large promises of his good Government, but some of the old Senators suspected the Fox. Who having stayed a while in the City, prepares to march into the East against Niger, who was sporting himselfe at Antioch. Great preparations are made both by Sea and Land. But fearing lest Albinus then Governour of the Britains, who was a Patrician and Commander of warlike Nations not far from Italy, might in his absence invade the Empire, thought it his best way to invite him by his letters, to share with him in the Government, and to commit the care of the City to him; which Albinus willingly accepts. Thus Severus having made all sure behinde him, marcheth against Niger, with whom he had divers battels, in the Hellespont, at Cizycus an Island in Propontis, at Nicomedia in Bythinia upon Pontus over against Thracia, and in Cilicia, at last he quite defeated him; and caused his head to be carryed about the Camp on a pole. He banished his wife and children, and at last murthered them. So he did kill those Senators and men of note that adhered to Niger. He beat down the wals of Byzantium, and turned it to a village, he punished Antioch, Palestina, Arabia, the Parthians, and all the other
places which sided with Niger. After this, returning to Rome, he made warre upon Albinus, who in the first conflict got the better of Severus: who having recrui∣ted, his Forces being now 50000 strong, at Lions encounters again with Albinus; whom after a long and doubtfull skirmish, he at last defeated: but he was fain to tear his robes, and run furiously upon his souldiers with his naked sword, as they were flying away, or else he had lost the day. Albinus is brought to him sorely wounded, whose head he caused to be cut off, and sent to Rome with letters, expo∣stulating with the Senat for their affection to his enemy: many of his favourers both in Spain and France he put to death, and inriched his coffers with their confis∣cated estates. He murthered without any inditement 43 of the Nobility: he cast Nar∣cissus to the Lyons for strangling of Commodus, whom in hatred of the Senat, he sti∣led God: he calls himself the son of Marcus, and brother of Commodus, and called his son Bassianus by the name of Antoninus. He extinguished Albinus his whole race. Whilest Severus was busie in these civill wars, the Parthians seised upon Me∣sopotamia, against them he sends a great Army, takes Seleucia and Babylon; and Ctesiphon also, where the Parthian Kings used to wi, and in it 100000 men, but for want of provision he was fain to quit this place again. He laid siege also to Atra a strong and well walled City in Mesopotamia standing on a high hill; but by reason the place was so strong, the Inhabitants so resolute, the air so intem∣perate, and the sicknesse in the Army so great, he was forced to raise the siege. In  this expedition he kils Laetus for being too well beloved of the souldiers, as also Iulius Crispus for reciting some verses in Virgil, which he thought reflected on him: Many other brave men he put to death on frivolous pretences. Plautianus was his great favorite, without whom he acted not any thing; this man being raised from nothing to that greatnesse, that he ruled all, even the Emperor himself; made it death for any man to look on him whilest he passed through the streets. People were commanded to swear by his fortune. Severus honoured his daughter Plautilla with the marriage of his own son Antoninus; more wealth was bestowed on the Bride, then might suffice 50 queens: his ambition was such, that he aimed to be Em∣peror, therefore imployes one Saturninus a Tribune, to murther him and his son  Antoninus in their chambers; but Saturninus discovered the Plot to Severus. Plautianus is sent for, hoping the Princes had been dispatched, but found them both alive, who having accused and reproved him, caused him instantly to be slain. Plautilla is banished with her child, and afterward both killed by Antoninus, who with his brother Geta, began already to tyrannise over the people. Severus his Government was so rigid and cruell, that he was truly called Se∣verus, and Pertinax. He was a great punisher of theeves and robbers; he flung to the wild Beasts one Bulas a Captain of the High-way-men. His last expe∣dition he makes into Britain, where he lost, partly by the unwholesomenesse of the waters, and partly by the Caledonii about 50000 men. But he at last forced them to lay down arms: his son riding behind him, had almost killed him, if he had not lookt back, and with his stern looks affrighted him, whom he only at that time re∣proved. The Britans rebelled, & the souldiers mutined, who would have made his son Emperor, against whom Severus is carryed in his Litter, being then ill of the Gout; whose presence made all submit; he caused all the Authors of that sediti∣on to be put to death, except his son; and sitting in his chair of State bid the soul∣diers Buchanan. l. 4 makes this wall 80 miles distant from Hadrians. take notice, that the head commanded, not the feet. He repaired or enlarged Hadrians wall, which before was 80. now is 130 miles long. He dyed at York being 66 years old, in the 18 year of his reign; his two sonnes being reconciled, car∣ried his ashes in an alablaster urn to Rome. Thus dyed he, whose cruelty made Rome wish he had not been born, and whose unworthy successours made them 4184. A. C. 212. wish he had not dyed. In his time lived Theodotus a Tanner at Constantinople, who denyed Christs Divinity, he rejected the Gospell and Revelation of St. Iohn, wherefore he with his Disciples were called Alogi, that is, without the Word or reason: there was another Theodotus about that time, affirming Christ to be inferiour to Melchise∣dec; then sprung up the Melchisedecian hereticks, affirming Melchisedec to be an angell. Then lived the Praxeani or Patropassiani, so called from Praxeas the
Author, who affirmed the Father to have suffered on the Crosse. The Christians were falsly accused for worshipping an Asses head; and for being enemies to Mo∣narchy. Hence Victor was martyred with divers others: the Patrician hereticks affirmed that Satan was the Author of mans Body. Lenides Father of Origen then suffered; young Origen could scarse be kept back from suffering with his Father, whom by his letters he exhorts to constancy. This is that Origen who gelded himself and wrote the Hexaplon or Six-fold Exposition of the Bible distinguished into six columnes. The 1. Hebrew in Hebrew letters. The 2. Hebrew in Greek letters, the 3. the Septuagints Interpretation, 4. that of Aquila, 5. of Symmachus, 6. of Theodotion. Then also suffered for Christ, Philip Governour of Egypt, Irenae∣us Bishop of Lions, and many more which made up the fift, or as some say, the 6 per∣secution. Then was Narcissus B. of Jerusalem falsly accused of adultery, and his 3 accusers strangely by God punished, the one by fire, the other by a loathsome dis∣ease, the third with blindnesse. CHAP. IV. The Roman affaires under Caracalla, Macrinus, Heliogabalus, and Alexander, 2. The affaires of Christians, Persians, and others during that time. THe ashes of Severus being brought into the City by his two sons in great pompe, and interred in great solemnity, he was deified by the Senat, to whom 4184. A. C. 212. succeeded his two sons Co-Emperors; but Caracalla his eldest son by Mar∣tia, began his reign with the bloud of his brother Geta, the son of Iulia, whom he murthered in his Mothers arms; after the murther he runs into the camp, perswading the souldiers to protect him, for he had escaped a great danger, his brother ha∣ving an intent to kill him; which was false. He likewise slew his fathers Physitians, for preserving him so long alive: he was called Caracalla from the barbarian gar∣ment he wore. He marryed his mother in law Iulia, she animating him thereto,  and shewing him that he might lawfully doe it, being Emperor; who was to give laws, not to receive any. He caused to be put to death all that favoured his brother Geta, 20000 at least, besides Papinianus captain of the Guard, for saying, that it was easier to commit paricide, then to excuse it. Because the Alexandrians called him Oedipus, and his wife Iocaste, he gave the city to the plundering of the souldiers, who murthered there multitudes of all sorts. He burned Aristotles books, because he thought that he had a hand in poysoning his scholar Alexander. He regarded none but the souldiers, feeding them still with money. When Iulia told him, that he was too prodigall; he laid his hand on his sword, saying: I shall never lack money, so long as this is with me. He delighted much in Necromancy and conjuring; one time calling up the Ghost of Commodus, he heard a voice, saying: Goe to thy pu∣nishment. Under pretence of making a league with Abgarus King of the Osroeni a people between Syria and Mesopotamia, he cast him into prison, and seised on his countrey. The Armenians fell from him. He would doe any servill work with the souldiers, he slighted the Senat: he coyned false mony, and offered the sword that killed his brother to Serapis the Aegyptian God, which sword afterward was melted with lightning. He took great pleasure in fencing, and killing of wild beasts. In France he caused many officers to be put to death. In Germany he killed ma∣ny thousands, and then called himself Germanicus. In Asia he fell upon the Par∣thians, pretending that Artabanus had denyed to marry his daughter to him accor∣ding  to promise, and took the city Arbela in Persia; and overthrew the Par∣thian Kings Sepulchers, casting away their bones. At last amongst his own soul∣diers, whom he so much trusted, as hee was asing of him selfe, betweene Carre and Edessa, he is slaine by Macrinus whom he had made captain of the Guard. The Emperor having received letters from Rome, as he was at his sports, gave them to Macrinus to read, among these he found one, written by some sooth∣sayers to the Prince, wishing him to beware of
Macrinus, for he aimed at the  Empire. Macrinus knowing in what danger he was, if Bassianus should know of this letter; hirs one Martialis to kill him; which he did; the souldiers pur∣sued this Martialis on horse back as he was flying▪ and with their arrows shot him dead. Macrinus hearing that the Emperor was slain, came weeping over the 4188. A. C. 218. dead corps, as if he had known nothing. Serapion of Alexandria foretold that Macrinus should succeed to Bassianus; this Serapion Antoninus killed af∣ter the lions had spared him. He lived 29 years, and reigned 6 years two moneths. In Caracall's time the Tertullianists sprung up who taught the traduction of soules, and that after death they were converted into divels▪ Origen (called Adamantinus for his indefatigable pains,) writes divers books, and visits the See  of Rome. The Christians enjoy rest from persecution, for Antoninus had sucked the breasts of a Christian, who in his youth promised much goodnesse, and was so tender hearted, that he wept, when he heard of any that were to be flung to wild beasts; but when he was Emperor, God made him a scourge to the Romans who had shed the innocent bloud of many Christians. Opilius Macrinus an African, as untoward in conditions, as he was in counte∣nance, was made Emperor by the Syrian Armies, and confirmed by the Senat, 4188. A. C. 218. not out of any affection to him, but out of hatred to Bassianus, being guilty, both of paricide, incest, and all kind of wickednesse. He made war with the Parthians,  but being worsted was fain to buy his peace; that he might give himself over to his pleasures at Antioch, whence he banished Iulia Augusta for some harsh words she had let fall against him, and afterward procured her death: as he did of all o∣thers who repined at his birth and Government. For his cruelty he was called Ma∣cellinus from macellum a shambles, for his house was little better. Therefore for his cruelty, voluptuousnesse, and parcimony toward the souldiers, he was hated by them. He used to burn adulterers alive, binding fast their bodies together. He inclosed two souldiers into two oxen, their heads sticking out, that they might speak and breath, & so there they remained till they dyed: for a rape committed on their hostesse. He called Diadumenus his son, Antoninus, knowing how grateful that name was to the souldiers, & made him Caesar, and his colleague in the Empire. But Mesia Iulia's sister, which was the wife of Severus, had two daughters Soaemis Concubine of Bassianus, who of her begot Heliogabalus and Mammaea, the mother of Alexander. Severus begot of her by Varius Marcellus. This Maesia by bribing the souldiers, got them to fall off from Macrinus to her son Heliogabalus. Macrinus sent Iulian to destroy both the mother and son, but the souldiers killed Iulian, & adhered to Heli∣ogabalus, whereupon a battell was fought, in which both Macrinus and his son were slain. He used to punish informers with death, if they failed in their proofs, if not, he rewarded them; but still with disgrace: he lived 54 years, and reigned 14 months. Varius Antoninus Heliogabalus was elected Emperor, with no lesse applause then 4189. A. C. 219. rejected with indignation. He was called Varius because some think Varius Mar∣cellus  was his father; Antoninus from Bassianus, who by Soaemis was said to be his father, and Heliogabalus, or as it is in ancient coines Elagabalus, from the name of the Idol, whose Priest he was, either from the Hebrew El-Gebal, the God Gebal, or from  the sun, and the Syriac Gabal, which signifieth Bounds or Confines, be∣cause the Sun bounds or confines the year, by his motion in the Ecliptick. This Idol was a statue of a triangular figure, representing the Sun whose Priest he was. He loved his mother so well, that he was altogether ruled by her. He set up the ser∣vice of his Syrian God upon Mount Palatine, intending to have him worshipped every where. He exposed all honours to sale. He put Pomponius Bassus and many other worthy men to death, for prying into his manners. He marryed Bassus his  wife, then repudiated her for having one spot in her fair body. Then he marryed with Aquila Severa a vestall Virgin, and afterward marryed himself to men, as if he had been a woman. He sacrificed men to his Idol: he fed his dogs with goose livers: his Palace was a meer bawdy house, he never spent lesse on a supper, then 30 l. weight of silver. He caused 10 thousand pound weight of Cobwebs from all parts of Rome to be brought to him, by that shewing the greatnesse of the city. He caused himself to be drawn into his Court, by 4
great dogs, & never would wag  any where without 600 Chariots, shewing that the Persian King never travelled with lesse then 10000 Camels: he spent whole dayes together among roses and sweet oyntments: he sent yearly presents to his flatterers, to wit, vessels full of snakes and scorpions, and boxes full of flies, calling them tame Bees: he wore no shoes but what were beset with rich jewels: he used to have tame Lions and Leo∣pards at his table: he marryed his Idol of the Sun to the Palladium or Image of Pallas, which he caused to be brought into his chamber; then divorced them be∣cause she was armed, and made a match between his Idol and Vrania, which re∣presented the Moon; which Idol was consecrated by Dido, and held in much ve∣neration by the Africans; this Vrania had a great dowry conferred on her; and Festivall dayes appointed through all Italy for joy of this marriage betweene the Sun and Moon. This Image of the Sun he translated from the City, into the Temple which he built in the Suburbs, with great solemnity he himselfe going backward before the Chariots, causing all the way to be strowed with the dust of gold; then assembling multitudes of people together from a high tower, he flung down amongst them gold and silver plate, and other rich things, which occasioned a great destruction, people treading down one another. When Heliogabalus saw that the Senats affection was more set upon Alexander his cousin German, whom they had made Caesar, then on himself; he adopts him, but shortly after repenting, indeavoured to murther him, because he would not  follow and approve of his wicked courses; wherefore the souldiers intended to cut off this young Sardanapalus, for so they called him; yet for this time they spared him, upon hopes he would reform (being yet but young) and put away from him his evill Counsellors, but he grew rather worse; and sought to murther Alex∣ander: wherefore the souldiers fell furiously upon his followers, and parasites, cut them in peeces, and slew the Tyrant in the privy, where he went to hide himselfe; whose body was dragged up and down, and flung at last into the river being fa∣stened to a great stone. His mother, with whom he used to commit incest was slain with him; and an Act made, that never henceforth any woman should be suffered 4193. A. C. 223. to come into the Senat: for her son was wont to bring her thither. He lived 18  years, and tyrannized almost 4. From the manner of his death, and place of bury∣all, he was called Tractitius and Tiberinus, he gave way to the rebuilding of Ni∣copolis or Emaus in Palestina, upon the intreaty of Iulius Africanus a learned Christian. He thought to have abolished all religions except that of his Idol, or else to transfer all religions, even the Christian to Mount Palatine. Aurelius Alexander, by birth a Syrian, was son to Varius, and Mammaea, he would neither be adored nor flattered, nor take upon him the name of Autoninus or Mag∣nus; 4193. A. C. 223. yet for his strict life & Government, he was called by the souldiers Severus. He countenanced Christians. His mother was a Christian, and a great lover of Ori∣gen. He was much addicted to learning and learned men. He kept the souldiers  in awe by paying them duly, and disbanding the refractory, sometimes by whole Legions together, knowing that poverty made souldiers desperate, and due pay kept them in awe. He suffered none of Heliogabalus his preferring to stay in their places: and never bestowed. preferment but on those that seemed to be unwilling. He cared not for rich apparell, saying that Principality consisted in vertue, not in ornaments. He was milde, curteous, and affable. He would have had all offices, trades, and callings, masters and servants, to wear distinct appa∣rell. He repaired all Cities demolished with Earth-quakes, but would bestow no gold on Temples▪ shewing that it was needlesse there. He forbad the use or abuse rather of Evnuchs. He admitted no magistrate, but such as the people approved  off, knowing that mens estates and lives depended on them. He assigned salaries for all publick officers. He suffered no place to be bought, saying: he that buys must sell. He caused one to be stifled with smoak, for selling promises of preferment: the Executioner in the meane time crying, He is punished with smoak that sold smoak. He had in his private chappell the Images of Christ, Abraham, Apol∣lonius, and Orpheus. He would have built a Temple for Christ, but that he feared the Gentile Temples then would be forsaken. He made
much of that Christian  sentence, Doe to all men, as you would have all men doe to you. Understanding that one Camillus sought to be Emperor, and to make a rebellion, he thanked him for affecting that charge, which good men did avoid, then did he make him his Colleague, clothed him richly, and made him undertake the managing of the wars with him, till he was weary, and so upon his desire was dismissed, and sent safely home. The Christians had got a publike place to exercise in, which the Cookes challenged did belong to them. Severus told them, that it was a place fitter for the worship of God, then the dressing of meat. Artaxerxes the Persian King came into the field with a mighty Army in which were 700 Elephants, 1800 hooked Chariots. He having subdued the Parthian King Artabaus, and united both Kingdomes: he demanded restitution of all the  Asiatick countries, which of old belonged to the Persian Monarchy. Severus re∣turned him this answer, that he were best make much of what he had in possessi∣on, and not meddle with the Roman confines, lest he buy his demanded purchase at too dear a rate. This answer not being satisfactory, but injuries increasing day∣ly, a battell was fought, in which the Romans took 300 Elephants, 200 Cha∣riots, and defeated 100 and 80 thousand horse, and Mesopotamia was recovered; the Persians redeemed their Captives, and never durst in 40 years space take the field again: the Romans also lost many of their men in this battell. They had also good successe in Armenia, Mauritania, and Illyricum. The enemies lands were bestowed on the souldiers that were left to guard the borders, and on their sonnes, if they proved souldiers. After this, when Severus had quelled the rebelling Germans, and had commanded the disbanding of some seditious Legions, he was murther∣ed with his mother Mammaea by the German souldiers who could not indure to be curbed, having injoyed so much liberty under Heliogabalus: this murther was committed by the instigation of Maximinus that barbarous Thracian, pretending that his exactions upon the Provinces, caused by his covetous mother, were in∣supportable. One of the Druidae soretold him this fatall stroke, by wishing him to beware of the souldiers. He dyed neer Mentz in Germany, in the year of his life 29. of his Empire 13. His chief Counsellors were Vlpianus the great Lawyer, and  Iulius Paulus. Vlpian was a great enemy to Christians, causing many of them to be put to death; but he himselfe was killed in the night by the Praetorian Guard. Pope Callistus was flung into a deep well and drowned. Calpodius the Presbyter then suffered; so did Hyppolitus a learned Christian. Under Vlpian Governour of the City, the Sect of Valesians then flourished; who after the example of Origen gelded themselves; therefore were called Eunuchs: then was Ori∣gen excommunicate for his errors. Caecilia the Virgin was then martyred. Hierom about this time translated the Hebrew Bible into Latine; because there was great altercation about the LXXs Translation, being then three editi∣ons; to wit, Origens, Lucians the Martyr, and that of Hesychius. Then Grego∣rius  Thaumaturgus so called, and Magnus too, for his great learning and won∣ders, was martyred. Hee was Bishop of Neocaesaria, the scholar of Ori∣gen; his name before was Theodorius; then Ammonius a Christian Philosopher professed publickly at Alexandria; then were there common buriall places made without the City for Christians, called Coemeteria, Areae, Tumbae, Cata∣tumbae, Cryptae, &c.
CHAP. V. The Roman affaires under Maximinus, Philip, Decius, Gallus, Valerian, Ga∣lienus and others. 2. The Christian and forraign affairs of those times. MAximinus a Thracian, whose father was a Goth, and his mother an Alan, 4026. A. C. 236. or Scythian; was the first that without the Senats decree, by the souldiers was made Emperor; to whom he joined his son for his Colleague: he be∣ing conscious of his mean parentage, hated the Senat and Nobility, whom he mur∣thered at his pleasure, and all those that knew his originall: he murthered at one time 4000, at another time in Germany beyond the Rhene, hee plundered and burned the countrey for 400 miles together, killing multitudes of people: thence he intended to make war against the Sarmatians, and to reduce all those Northern countries to the Roman obedience; but neither the Romans nor Armies could in∣dure his cruelty; therefore in Africa the souldiers in a sudden tumult made old Gordianus being now 80 years of age Emperor, against his will, he was Deputy Consul of Africa; the army having killed Maximinus his Procurator, put upon Gordian the Imperiall robe, and saluted him with his son by the name of Augu∣stus: he was brought to Carthage in great pompe, whence he wrote to the Se∣nat,  how he was forcibly elected Emperor. The Senat out of hatred to Maximinus, 4028. A. C. 238. approved his election, gave order to destroy all Maximinus his friends; they declare him and his son enemies to the State; and Letters are directed to all the Pro∣vinces, to shake off their allegiance: which inraged Maximinus: he bribed the souldiers, and makes hast for Rome. Capellianus a Commander under Maximinus in Africa, raised an army against Gordianus. The old Emperor sends his son with sufficient forces to encounter him: the skirmish was hot, in which young Gordian was killed; as soone as the Father hears of his sons death, knowing the cruelty and strength of Maximinus, and the perfidiousnesse with the weaknesse of the Africans, he strangles himself. Then did Capellianus either banish or murther all that were of Gordianus his side.  He robs the Temples, plunders the cities, and gives the spoile to the souldiers: when the Senat heard of this, they erected two Emperors, to wit, Maximus Papienus the city Captain, and Clodius Balbinus, of an ancient and noble Family, to whom they join the young nephew of Gordian by his sister. Maximus marched forth with an army, Balbinus stayed in the city to appease the tumults; for the Senators fell upon the Pretorian guard for prying into their secrets, and the Guard fall upon the people; fire and sword rageth through the city, nei∣ther could the tumult be appeased till young Gordian was presented to the people. When Maximinus had entred Italy, his army was pinched with famine, all the provision of the countrey being carried into strong Towns and Garrisons. Aqui∣leja shuts the gates against him: he besiegeth it round; but the Inhabitants made stout resistance, continually annoying the souldiers with darts, stones, fire-brands, burning pitch and brimstone; and when their Engines grew uselesse for want of strings or cords, the women made strings of their hairs. Maximinus being mad that he could doe no good upon the town, thinking it had been the lasinesse or cowardise of the souldiers, put many of the Commanders to death, which so exa∣sperated the souldiers, that whilest Maximinus and his son in the heat of the day were resting in the tent, they rush in and killed them both, saying: Of a naughty  brood, one whelp is not to be left alive. Their heads on long poles were caried about Aquileja to be seen, and thence to Rome, to the great joy of the people and Senat, which had sacrificed to their Gods, that Maximinus should never return a∣live. Thus dyed he who of a shepheard, and then of a foot-boy to Severus became Emperor. His nimblenesse in running, keeping pace with Severus his horse, made him a Tribune, his son was a comely youth, but haughty and wicked, permitting men to kisse his knees and feet: their bodyes were flung into the river, and their
heads disgracefully used, then burnt in Campus Martius, the people stiling him Cy∣clops, Bsisiris, Antaeus. He raised the sixt persecution against Christians, out of malice to Alexanders Family, because many of them professed Christianity, and to palliate this cruelty, it was given out that the Gods had sent divers earthquakes lately for tolerating Christianity, and neglecting their service. Then was Pontianus Bishop of Rome martyred, and within a month his successor Anterus with many others, chiefly Clergy men. Maximus and Balbinus striving for superiority, the former standing upon his va∣lour, 4209. A. C. 239. the latter on his nobility, gave occasion to the souldiers who loved neither of  them, (because chosen by the Senat,) to murther them both. Whereupon Gordi∣anus is proclaimed Augustus being 13 years old, or as others say 16. His short reign was presaged by a great earthquake, and such an eclipse of the Sun, that they were ain to burn candles by day: he suppressed the faction of Africa raised a∣gainst him by Sabinianus; then marryed with the daughter of Misitheus a wise and learned man, whose advise he alwayes used. After this he openeth the Temple of Ianus, and denounceth war against Sapores the Parthian King, who had inva∣ded Mesopotamia. He goeth into Maesia, subdues his enemies in Thracia, drives the Persians out of Antiochia, and takes many other townes from the enemy: he fils all the Garrisons and frontier Towns with provision; but after the death of Misitheus his father in law, he was slighted by the army for his youth, and one Phi∣lip  is appointed to be his tutor, and Governor; who insulting over the young Prince, first thrust him quite out of Government, then gave way to murther him, which was done by nine assasinats, who all of them afterward slew themselves, with the same swords that murthered the, r Lord. This was the end of Gordian the third, in the 20 or 22 year of his age, having reigned 6 years. This priviledge the Senat be∣stowed upon his family that none of them should bee called to publick offices or imployments against their wills. This Epitaph was set up for him on the confines of Persia in Latin, Greek, Persian, Hebrew, and Aegyptian letters Divus, Gordianus nqueror of the Persians, Goths, Sarmatian, subduer of the the Roman seditions, con∣querour  of the Germans, but not of the Philips. About this time Helcyonides suf∣fered Martyrdom, whose brests were first cut off, and flung to wilde beasts, then she was tortured with fire, and at last beheaded. Philip the Arabian of obscure parentage succeeded with his son Saturninus, whom now he cals Philip: he made peace with the Persian, built Philippopolis in Arabia, made a great Pan for water beyond Tibris where water was scarse, and celebrated the thousand year of the city with secular sports, in which were shewed to the people all sorts of wild beasts, as Lions, Leopards, Tigers, Elephants, &c. which Gordian had provided for his Persian triumph. But such multitudes of torches there were in the night time that a great part of the city took fire; Philip was the first Emperor that was baptized, but was not admitted to the Communion, till he had publickly made confession of his former sins, his son was so grave, that he was never observed to laugh. Philip having sent Decius against the rebelling Pannonians, was by him stript both of his life and Empire. For Philip hearing that Decius was made Emperor by the Pannonian souldiers, left his son in the city, and marcheth against him with an army, the battell was fought at Verona, in which Phi∣lip 4220. A. C. 250. is slain and his army defeated; upon the news of this, his son is slain at Rome being 12 years old, they reigned 6 years. About this time the Arabian heresie, concerning the dying or sleeping of the souls with their bodies, and their rising again the last day, was refuted by a Synod held in Arabia, and by Origen who disputed against them. Then did Cyprian suc∣ceed  Donatus in the Bishoprick of Carthage: who scoffingly was nicknamed Caprian by his adversaries. The Christians in Alexandria, are persecuted, among the rest, Apollonia the Virgin, who suffered all her teeth to be beat out, her jaws bro∣ken, and at last to be burned, rather then she would blaspheme. The Helcesaites de∣nying Pauls writings, and holding mentall faith sufficient, without orall confession, are refued by Origen.
Decius a Pannonian born, is with his son Decius confirmed in the Empire by the Senat. In their reign was a great persecution. Babylas was martyed at Antioch, Alex∣ander at Jerusalem, Fabianus at Rome, all Bishops. Babylas did first see his 3 sonnes martyred, exhorting them to constancie, then suffered himself, his wife looking on, who buryed their dead bodies. He had wars with the Goths or Getes of whom 4222. A. C. 252. he killed 30000. but shortly after his sonne was killed, and he himselfe driven by the Goths into a lake where he was drowned, nor could his body bee found after∣ward: they reigned two years. In the great and seventh persecution, which was a∣bout their time, Paul, (and after his example) others retired for security into the wil∣dernesse, whence begun the order of Anachorites to increase; then also did Gre∣gorius  Thaumaturgus retire into the desart. Gallus after the death of Decius and his son was chosen Emperor by the souldi∣ers and confirmed by the Senat. It's thought that they both lost their lives by his treachery: he concluded a dishonourable peace with the Goths, making him∣selfe their Pensioner: then he went to Rome with his son Volusianus whom hee made Caesar, and his Colleague in the Empire: hee adopted Decius his other sonne, and then murthered him: his cruelty against Christians, and his care∣lesse government drew in the Scythians, Goths, Burgundians, and Persians, who wasted the borders of the Empire lying neer them: besides the plague from Aethi∣opia raged 15 years through the Empire. Emilianus Generall to Gallus, in one bat∣tell  defeated the Goths. Whereupon he was made Emperor by the souldiers, which Gallus understanding, marched with his son against him; but they were both slain in the second year of their reign, and Emilianus 3 months after was killed by his soul∣diers 4224. A. C. 254. in the 40 year of his age. About this time Novatus and his sectaries lived, who called themselves Cathari, that is, Puritans, they denyed hope of pardon to those that fell in time of perse∣cution: he was condemned by a Synod of 60 Bishops called by Pope Cornelius; and so he was by Cyprian and by the Bishops of Africa. Sabellius then taught that there was but one person of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost. Origen about this time died being 68 years old, who at Alexandria had indured divers tortures for  Christ, at last offered incense to the Idol, to avoid the abusing of his body by a Black more; for which act he spent the rest of his time in weeping, and silence, refusing to Preach or write any more: not long before this, in the time of De∣cius seven young men at Ephesus, to avoid the persecution fled into a cave, where being shut up by their persecutors, slept in the Lord; hence they were cal∣led The seven sleepers; then Pionius Bishop of Smyrna, Agatha the Virgin, and ma∣ny others were martyred. Pope Cornelius also suffered martyrdom about that time. Lucius Valerianus being now aged is made Emperor in Rhetia: his son Gallie∣nus 4231. A. C. 261. is made Caesar. Valerian had gone with much credit through all degrees of honor, at first he was a great friend of the Christians, till he was perverted by a cer∣tain Magician of Egypt: who brought him to exercise diabolicall arts, to sacri∣fice men and children, and persecute the Christians. For which impieties the whole Empire is punished with famine, plagues and war; the Scythians and Marco∣mans break in upon Macedonia and Greece: the Goths and Burgundians upon I∣taly, the Scythians and Persians rage in Asia. Valerian having left the Govern∣ment of the West to Gallienus, makes an expedition into the East against the Per∣sians who had taken Antiochia and Caesarea: he did what he could to keep out the Scythians, but in vain, for they brake in with such multitudes, that they burnt and sackt Trapezus, Chalcedon, Nicomedia, Nicaea, and many other towns, carrying away infinite booties and numbers of people. At last finding his army wa∣sted  with sicknesse, and that he was not able to encounter with Sapores the Persian, he offered to buy his peace, but Macrinus his Aegyptian witch, who had in∣censed him against the Christians, betrayes him to Sapores, who so long as hee lived used him as his foot-stoole when he took horse, at last flead him alive; his sonne Gallienus deified him after his death, whom he neglected in his life. For he rejoyced when he heard his Father was dead; that being freed from a censor, he might give himselfe to his pleasures, leaving the East at randome,
which  was invaded by Macrinus, or Macrianus, with his two sonnes Macrinus and Quietus. So weary were the souldiers of Gallienus, and so giddy headed, that in his time they chose no lesse then 30 Emperors, every army setting up their own Generall. The Gauls & Germans were driven out of Italy, with their Emperor by Gallienus. Ingenuus is overthrown by him at Mursia, and whole Cities left desolate. Regilia∣nus is defeated also by Gallienus, and Piso in Thessaly by Valens, is killed and he by the souldiers shortly after. Aurelius in Illyricum overthrowes Macrianus, who came thither out of Asia with 44000 men: he with his son Macrinus were both killed, and 30000 of his souldiers became prisoners to Aurelius. His other son Quietus and Balista, were defeated and slain by Odenatus. Thus was Maerianus punished with his two sons, for his treachery against Valerian, and the Christians: and Gallienus for his favour to them began again to flourish: he proclaimed peace through all the Provinces, and permitted Christians to have their meetings in their Cameteria. Aemilianus Governour of Egypt and Thebais for his cruelty against Christians, was in a conflict taken prisoner by Theodotus, Gallienus his Generall, sent to Rome, and there strangled in prison: he had been made Emperor by the souldiers, who so tyrannised that Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, was glad to fly with many more to the Desarts of Arabia: where in stead of preaching, he spent his time in writing. Causoleus brother to Theodotus defeated Trebellius, whom the Isaurians a people in the lesser Asia had made Emperor. Yet henceforth they shook  off the Roman yoak, trusting to the naturall strength of their country, more then to their men. In Gallienus his time Posthumus rebelled in Gallia, and armed the Franci a peo∣ple neer the Rhene, not known or named before this time in any Historian. He governed with great moderation for 10 years, at last was slain by his souldiers. In his time also besides the misery of war, there were divers earthquakes, and such darknesse for many dayes together, that people dyed with fear. So great was the plague at Rome and Achaja, that 5000 dyed in one day. Macedonia is o∣verrun by the Gothes; Asia by the Scythians, who spoiled and burned the Tem∣ple  of Diana; Sicilia by the slaves; Gallia and Spain by the Francs. Saloninus Gallienus his son is killed by Posthumius, and Gallienus himself wounded; his fa∣ther a prisoner and slave in Persia. Yet for all this Gallienus must triumph at Rome over the Persians by whom his father was beaten; so that scoffingly a∣mong the Persian captives at Rome, inquiry was made for Valerian the Em∣perour. The valour and fidelity of Odenatus, Generall of Gallienus in the East, is re∣markable; for when all seemed to be lost, he raiseth an army, takes in Nisibis and Mesopotamia, defeates Sapores, and makes him fly, seiseth on all his treasures and Concubines, sends the captive Persian Nobility to Rome, to be insulted o∣ver; in requittall of which good service, he makes Odenatus his Colleague, in  his Empire, cals him Augustus, and on his money stampt his victories. In the mean while the Scythians returning home with their booties and captives, were most ofthem drowned by shipwrack. And such is the uncertainty of military fe∣licity, that Odenatus by the treachery of Meonius his cousin german is slain with his sonne Herodes; and Maeonius shortly after by the souldiers. Zenobia the masculine wife of Odenatus undertook the Government in her childrens minority, so dexterously, that she kept all about her in subjection: So was Posthumius after all his good services slain in Gallia by Lollianus, and he by Victorinus, the son of Victorina, who like another Zenobia by the help of Tetricus and Marius, stopt  the incursions of the Barbarians. Victorinus a brave Emperor, but given to wo∣men, is murthered by the means of a woman the wife of Attitianus, whom he loved. Marius a Blacksmith is made Emperor, and the third day after was murthered by his servant. Then was Tetricus mad Emperor by Victorina. He was of a noble extraction, and Governour of Gasconie: his son Tetricus is made Caesar. Gallienus wholely addicted to his pleasures neglected
the Government:  among divers of his ridiculous Acts, this is one; he caused a certain fellow for sel∣ling glasse jewels in stead of true, to be brought to the place, where he was to be cast to the Lions; but instead of a Lion, he lets a Capon out of the coop upon him; whilest the people stood wondering at this toy, he caused this to be proclaimed: the cheater is cheated. His carelesnesse drew Aureolus with an Army of Rhe∣tians and Pannonians towards Rome, whom Gallienus met and drove him into Millain; having defeated his Army. But Gallienus was not long after by Martia∣nus and Heraclianus murthered in the dark, as he suddenly ran out of his tent, up∣on a noise that the enemy was breaking in upon him. Aureolus was guilty of this murther; for he deviced letters in which were written the names of the Tribunes and chief Captaines of Gallienus his Army whom he meant to slay; these Let∣ters were secretly flung over the wall, and taken up, as if they had been lost by chance. By this device Gallienus was suspected, and so murthered, having reigned 9 years alone, and 6 with his Father. He was deified by his successor Claudius; but vilified by the Senat, who decreed that his friends and courtiers should bee flung down the Gemonian ladders, and prayed the infernall Gods, that his place might be among the wicked. Gallienus was a wicked Prince yet mild towards the Christians, who put an end to the persecution by his Father Valerian, under whom Pope Xistus was mar∣tyred; Cyprian beheaded; and S. Laurence the Deacon, broyled. About this time was the great dispute concerning rebaptization. Cyprian made hereticall baptism void. The Bishops of Rome held it to be good; and so did Dionysius of Alexan∣dria; only he made void the Baptism of those hereticks which denyed the Tri∣nity. He also refuted the Millenaries opinion of Christs 1000 years reign. About this time sprung up the Angel-worshippers, called Angelici, who were quickly extinguished; and the Apostolici, who held it sin to possesse either goods or wives: then was Samosaenus who denyed Christs Divinity, condemned by the Synod at Antiochia: and deposed afterward by Aurelian. CHAP. VI. 1. The Roman affaires under Claudius, Aurelianus, Tacitus, Probus, Pro∣culus, Bonosus, Carus, Numerianus and Carinus. 2. of Zenobia, and of the Christian and forraign affaires. FLavius Claudius a Dalmatian, was by the Senat and souldiers named Em∣peror. He was stiled by the Senat, Father, Brother, Friend. He overthrew 4239. A. C. 269. Aureolus in a battell and slew him. He defeated the Alemans, neer the lake Benacus. The Goths, and Scythians, to the number of 300 and 20000. fall upon divers parts of the Empire, at such a time when the Romans had neither offen∣sive nor defensive Armes, when Tetricus had all Gallia and Spain, the chiefe strength of the Commonwealth, when Zenobia had al the Archers with her, yet the Barbatians were still put to the worst both at Maesia, Martianopolis, Byzantium and Thessalonica. Multitudes of them fled to the hill Hemus, where without pursu∣ing of Claudius, they dyed of the plague and famine. The Romans carelessely busied about their plunder, lost 2000 of their men by the Scythians in their flight, returning upon the Romans; but this loss was repayed with the slaughter of 50000 Scythians. About this time Zenobia Queen of Palmyrena a Town and Countrey of Sy∣ria,  raised an Army of 80000 against Egypt, and caused the Egyptians to receive a Garrison; but Probus Admirall of those Seas under Claudius drove out the Garrison againe, and with an Army of Egyptians and Africans, defeated the Palmyrenians; but shortly after being betrayed by Timogenes the Egyptian, he killed himself. The Scythians invaded Crete and Cyprus, but could doe no good by reason of the sicknesse that followed them; of which Claudius dyed at Sirmi∣um in Pannonia neer Danubius. He was not only deified, but had a golden statue
erected to him, neer Jupiter in the Capitol; and a golden Target with his Image on it in the Curia. He dyed of the plague with which also the Roman Army was infected. Qintillus his brother succeeded, a Prince of excellent parts had he lived; but he dyed the 17 day of his Empire, being slain by his souldiers for his severity; or as others say, at Aquileja he killed himselfe for anger, that Aurelianus was made Emperor by the souldiers. In Claudius his time the Christians began to be perse∣cuted afresh. An edict being published that all Christians should keep within their prisons, otherwayes they should bee punished if any of them were found a∣broad. Aurelianus was elected Emperor by the souldiers; he had given good proof of 4241. A. C. 271. his valour in the time of Claudius by expelling the Goths out of Thracia. In the Sarmatian war he slew in one day with his own hands 48 of his enemies, and in divers battels above 950. He was born in Syrmium of mean parentage, his mo∣ther was a priestesse of the Sun. He was a valiant but cruell Prince. He caused a souldier for committing adultery with his hostesse, to be torn asunder between the bowes of two trees. He kept the souldiers in such awe, that they durst not quar∣rell, nor be seen in Taverns, nor suffered to steal or rob the least thing without punishment. He recovered all the Roman bounds invaded by the Barbarians. He overcame the Marcomans, and in 3 great battels, to wit, at Placentia, at the river Metaurus and in the Fields of Ticinum now called Papia in Insubria. But not with∣out  great losse of the Romans, who presumed so much on his valour, that they thought it needlesse to implore the help of the Gods. He returnes to Rome and appeaseth the City seditions, having put to death the chief incendiaries, and some Senators too, for small offences, taking the witnesse of one mean man against them. He inlarged and strengthened the Roman wals, so that now they were 50 miles in compasse. He marcheth against Zenobia, now Queen of Egypt, and of the East; in the way he had many skirmishes with the Barbarians. Thyana shut the gates against him, whereat he vowed he would not leave one dog alive in the town; yet when it was betrayed, he spared it, killing onely the Dogs for his oaths sake, and the Traitour, saying: He that was not faithfull to his countrey, would be faith∣full to none: then he recovers Antiochia, and afterward defeates Zenobia, (after the Roman Horse had fled) by the Foot incouraged to fight, by a divine apparition. So at last Zenobia being discomfited, hee enters Emissa victo∣riously. Aurelian having quieted the Syrians, Persians, Saracens, Armenians, and Egypti∣ans, besiegeth Palmyra, and in it Zenobia, whom he had already overthrown in bat∣tels. She finding the town in danger, makes an escape, toward Persia upon Dromo∣daries, but is overtaken and brought back to Aurelian, who reserves her and her children for the triumph. He spared the town, but slew Longinus the Philoso∣pher, and the other Authors of this war. Having pacified the East, he returns to  Europe; where he subdues the Carpi; in the mean time the Palmyrians rebell, fills the Garrison, and delivers Achilleus to his enemy. Aurelian upon this re∣turns in fury, levels the town with the ground, and kils men, women, and chil∣dren. Then returning to the West, he makes Egypt quiet; thence he marcheth against Tetricus in Gallia, who delivers up his Army, which he could not rule to Aurelian; some of these Legions he subdued, the rest submitted to him. So having quieted East and West, he is carryed in triumph through Rome, and was the first that wore the Diadem with Robes all of gold and rich stones. After Zenobia had been led in triumph with her children, they were permitted to live privately at  Rome. In his time the coyners of false money, fearing to suffer, rebelled, and raised an army of 7000 in the city; whom Aurelian overthrew, and cruelly used. He con∣demned also many of the Nobility. He removed the Roman Garrisons out of Da∣cia which he could not keep, and placed them in Maesia. He increased the citie provisions, he made an amnesty or act of Oblivion, and put downe all informers. He punished exacting and
corrupt Officers most rigorously. He was rich in gold  and jewels, which he laid up in the Temple of the Sun. At last having denounced war against the Persians, in the way betweene Heraclea and Byzantium, hee was murthered by his Secretary Mnesteus, who fearing to be questioned for some 4246. A. C. 276. bribes he had taken, and for exaction, counterfeited the princes hand, and sent a∣broad among the souldiers the names of those whom Valerian meant to cut off; but falsely. The souldiers thinking this to be true, plotted his death. But when truth was discovered, Valerian was honoured with a Temple, and Mnesteus flung to the wild beasts. In his time Samosatenus Bishop of Antioch, was maintained in his heresie by Zenobia, then Queene of all that Countrey. Whilest Aurelian was putting pen to paper to subscribe an edict against the Christians, his armes were taken and shaken  with such a sudden palsie, that he could not write. Now dyed Plotinus the Phi∣losopher, and Porphyrie his scholar, first a Christian, afterwards becomes the bit∣ter enemy of Christ, against whom the eight▪ or (with others) the ninth persecu∣tion was raised, in which Pope Felix was martyred. Now the Manichees spread, and Manes their Patron is flead alive by the Persian King, for undertaking to cure his sick son with his prayers, which he could not doe, for the child dyed. In the Sea of Antioch Domnus succeeded to Samosatenus, and to him Timaeus. Aureli∣an reigned 6 years. To him succeeded Claudius Tacitus, chosen by the Senat, six moneths after Au∣relians death; for all that time the souldiers refused to choose any, leaving the e∣lection  to the Senat, at which all good men rejoyced. But he reigned not much above six months, for he dyed of a feaver, some say he was killed by the souldiers, being 66 years of age. He was an excellent Governour: he caused a golden sta∣tue to be erected to Aurelian, and put to death all that had a hand in his murther: his brother Florianus succeeded as heir, without consent of Senat or Army, 2747. A. C. 277. wherefore he continued not much above two moneths, for understanding that Pro∣bu was chosen Emperor by the Armies, and was marching against him, he fell into a deep melancholy, and killed himself; others say, he was killed by his Guard, being 23 years old. He affected the Empire, which his brother Tacitus refused; who made it death to adulterate money; who bestowed his Patrimony on publick uses. He highly honoured Tacitus the Historian, placing him in every Library: he was very spare in his dyet, and modest in his apparell, wearing no richer then private men use to wear; nor did he suffer his wife to wear jewels: he never suf∣fered a night to passe, in which he did not either read or write somewhat: He was too good for the Romans to enjoy long. Aurelius Probus succeeded, being a good man both in name and life. He was an 4247. A. C. 277. Hungarian born, and son of Maximus the Tribune. The souldiers made him Em∣peror against his will; and when it was propounded, that none should be chosen but he that was valiant, just, holy, modest, and milde, all cryed out with one voice, God save Augustus Probus. He was made a Tribune, before he had a beard: he executed justice on those that plotted the death of Aurelian and Tacitus: but spared them that followed Florian, because he was the Princes brother, and no tyrant: he drove the Germans out of Gaul, & recovered from them 60 Cities, & killed almost 400000 Barbarians. 9 German petty kings humbly submitted, and fell flat at his feet. He suppressed the Getes and Sarmatians: then marching into the East, he cleared those countries of oppression, robbers, and high way men: he made peace with the Persians. And translated 100000 Bastarni (a people of Sarmatia) into the Roman Territories: he suppressed the Vandals and others who rebelled: hee overthrew Saturninus Warden of the East Marches. Him the Egyptians against  his will saluted Emperor. Probus sent him mild Letters, and promises of pardon, but the souldiers would not trust him; wherefore he was fain to subdue him by force of armes; whom he overthrew in divers battels, at last besieged him, whom the souldiers took and slew, though against Probus his will. He overcame also Pro∣culus whom the Gaules had saluted Emperor. And Bonosus the great Drinker, called therefore the Hanging Tankart: this man was imployed by Aurelian, to entertain Embassadours purposely to fox them,
that thereby he might fish out of  them their secrets. He being overcome by Probus strangled himself. But his wife (being a noble Goth and a good woman) hee respected and bestowed on her whilest she lived a yearly Pension. But the wicked souldiers could not long brook so good a Prince; for they hated him because he would not suffer them to live idlely like drones, and to feed upon the sweat of other mens labours, therefore he imployed them in making vineyards throughout Gallia, Pannonia and Maesia: and as he was imploying them to drain the fens of Syrmium, where he was born, there he was murthered, having fled into a tower, but to no purpose. He reigned a∣bout 6. years, and lived 75. Thus ended that good Emperor, whose Epitaph was this: Here lieth Probus 4252. A. C. 282. the Emperor, truly Probus, or good. Conqueror of the Barbarians, Conqueror of the Tyrants. After his death the souldiers grew exorbitant, taking on them the full power to choose the Emperor, which the Senat out of covetousnesse, or cowardise, or factions, neglected. In his time Trophimus and others were martyred at Anti∣och. Pope Eutychianus who had buryed with his own hands 42 Martyrs, suffered martyrdom himself. Carus Captain of the Guard succeeded. Him Probus had recommended to the Se∣nat for a brave man. He suppressed the Sarmatians, making irruptions upon Panno∣nia and Thracia, and made them quiet after he had killed 16000 of them, and taken prisoners 20000. Hee had two sonnes, Carinus and Numerianus, these he named Caesars: he commits to Carinus (a wild young man) the charge of Gallia; and  takes Numerianus a solid and eloquent Prince alongst with him into the Persian War. He enters Mesopotamia with a great Army, and takes it. Then march∣eth along to Ctesiphon without resistance, and obtaines the title of Imperator Persicus. But having passed beyond the bounds of the Empire, he was struck with thunder, and dyed suddenly in his Pavilion. His best sonne Numeri∣anus was subject to soar Eyes, which now ware so weake with weeping, that hee was carryed in a Litter. Arius Aper his Father in law, aiming to be Em∣peror himselfe; murthers Numerianus, and conceals the fact, giving out that he could not come abroad because of his soare eyes; but the smell of the dead car∣kasse revealed the murther; whereupon Diocletian is chosen Emperor by the Army; and Aper slaine by the said Diocletian; so the Druide told him, that he should be Emperor when he killed the Boar; which now was fulfilled: for Aper is a Boar. Carinus the other sonne, and another Heliogabalus for wickednesse, hearing his Father and Brother to bee dead, grew worse then before. Hee over∣threw and killed Iulian and his Army, who aimed at the Empire. In divers battels he with stood Diocletian. At last hee was killed by his own souldiers. He did so degenerate from his Fathers vertues, that he denyed him to be his son. Numerian was a good Poet, and like to prove an excellent Prince. Thus Carus and his two sonnes reigned about two yeares. Carus lived 43 yeares.  Numerianus 20. and Carinus 18. to Numerianus was erected an Image of brasse. CHAP. VII. The Roman affaires under Diocletian, Maximianus, Galerius, Constantius, and Maxentius. 2. The horrible persecution of Christians nder them. 3. Of the Persian and forraign affaires of those times. VAlerius Diocletianus born in Dalmatia, his Father was Secretary to Ami∣linus the Senator: his mothers name was Dioclea. He fining the Em∣pire 4254. A. C. 284. subject to so many distractions, did choose a Co-Emperor, Maxi∣mianus of country parents, but a good souldier. He called him Herculeus, and himselfe Iovius, after hee had subdued the Persians and Egyptians. They also chose two Caesars to assist and succeed them. Diocletian
chose Galerius Maxi∣minus  a Thracian, Maximinus elected Flavius Constantius Chlorus, whom Carus meant to have made his successor, and to have killed his flagitious sonne Carinus. Maximianus marcheth into France, and suppresses the insurrections there of the countrey people, and robbers, called by them Bagaudae. These foure thus divided the Empire between them. Maximianus Herculeus obtained Italy and Afric. Con∣stantius all beyond the Alpes Northward. Galerius all the coast of Illyricum to 4261. A. C. 291. Pontus. Diocletian undertook the rest. By marriages these great Commanders u∣nited themselves, for Diocletian bestowed his daughter Valeria upon Maxi∣minus. Max. Herculeus gave his daughter in law Theodora to Constantius. Diocletian subdues Egypt, and in it Achilleus who called himselfe Emperor,  whom hee condemnes to the wilde Beasts. Unwalls Alexandria, over∣throwes Coptus and Ptolemais, and punisheth multitudes with persecution or death. Maximinus Caesar is sent against the Persians, by whom hee first was beaten. Wherefore was harshly used by Diocletian, when he came to meet him, for he suffered him in his purple robe to run before his chariot a mile or two. At last having recruited his army with old souldiers, marcheth through Armenia against the Parthians; falls suddenly upon Narsus the the Persian King, wounds him, and drives him to the mountaines, and takes his wifes, children▪ Nobility, prisoners; and plunders his Palace and treasure: and if Diocletian had not hindred him, he  had made Persia a province. Yet the Romans got five countreys beyond Tigris, so that the passing beyond the old bounds of Euphrates was not alwayes unfor∣tunate to the Romans: as the ancient Oracles fortold: because though M. Cras∣sus, Valerian, and some others miscarried; yet▪ Trajan, Odenatus, Carus, Pro∣bus, and this Maximinus Galerius, had good successe. Carausius invaded Britain, which he held 6 years, till he was traiterously killed by his Colleague Alectus, whom in 4 years space Constantius by Asclepedat us captain of his Guard, overthrew, and added Britain again to the Empire. About this time the Marcomans and Carpi were conquered again; in the mean while the city was well governed, for all oppressions and wickednesse were se∣verely  punished: the poore was provided for with corn, and stipends were duly paid. But Diocletian gave himself to excesse in wearing cloth of gold, in treading upon silk and purple carpets, beset with pretious stones. In causing himselfe to be called God, and to be adored after the manner of Caligula, and Domitian. So Her∣culeus gave himself over to all licentiousnesse, being a man of as stern a counte∣nance as conditions. These Emperors triumphed at Rome, where the wives, sisters, 4272. A. C. 382. and children of king Narsns were led before the chariot, Constantius in iGallia Bel∣gica did then wage war against the Alemans, who after he had by them been driven into the town, where he was taken up by ropes over the wall, (the gates of Lingon or Cangresse being shut) killed 5 houres after, when his army was come, about  40000 Alemans. The Empire flourished all this while, Rome, Carthage, Milan, and Nicome∣dia A. C. 306. were fenced with new wals; and the barbarous Nations feared the Romans. But Diocletian about the 19 year of his reign with Maximianus, began to rage a∣gainst the Christians, beginning first with the souldiers whom they casheered, and some they slew. Then publick edicts are made for pulling downe the Christian churches, for burning their Bibles; for degrading of such as were in honour, and inslaving such as were free. All Bishops and Pastors of Churches, who would not deny Christ, or offer incense to Idols, were commanded to be slain. Then pro∣miscuously the sword raged against all sorts of Christians. More cruell were these  men, then the wilde beasts, who oftentimes spared those, whom they murthered with all kind of tortures, which malice could device. Cosmus and Damianus af∣ter all sorts of torments, at last were beheaded with three more of their brethren. Sebastianus a Commander in the army, was first wounded with many arrowes, af∣terward recovering was whipt to death. None were suffered to draw water, nor grinde their corn, till they had offered incense to the Idol. Pope Cajus suffered Martyrdome, so did that Noble Roman Gabinius, with his
daughter Susanna. A  whole Legion of Christians after two decimations, were all at last cut off by the command of Maximianus. So were the two Captaines, Cerion and Victor with their Troopes. Marcellus the Centurion with his 12 sonnes were martyred; and so were Zenoche Tribune with all his souldiers: with many other brave men and women▪ In a church of Bithynia, on the day of Christs Nativity were burned mul∣titudes of people. In one month there dyed 17000 Martyrs. In Egypt there dyed by Martyrdome 144000 in ten years space, besides 70000 banished. No lesse cruelty was used in Africa, against those who would not be Traditores, that is would not deliver up their Bibles to be burned. In France among many other Martyrs, Victorinus Bishop of Poytiers suffered. In Spain Vincentius the Deacon. Osius Bishop of Corduba, and many more; Agnes, Eucratis, the two Eulalae, with divers other Virgins shewed more then humane courage in suffering un∣speakable tortures; whereas Pope Marcellinus fainted as Peter did before him. Diocletian and Maximianus being satiated with innocent bloud, tortured with diseases, and an evill conscience, fll madde, and so both in one day resigned up 4274. A. C. 304. their Empire, being content to live privately; Diocletian was then at Nicomedia, Herculeus at Millain. This betook himself into Lucania, the other to his native soil at Salonae. Both raging, that they could not with all their cruelty suppresse the re∣ligon and name of Christianity. Diocletian poysoned or stabbed himself, being 68  years old. Maximianus dyed of a loathsome and torturing disease in his bowels in the 68 year also of his age. Constantius Chlorus, and Galerius Maximinus, are declared Emperors. Con∣stantius was favourable to the Christians, a Prince of an excellent temper, who cared not for wealth, holding himselfe sufficiently rich, if his subjects were rich. When Diocletian upbraided him for his poverty, he presently gathered great store of wealth, which having shewed, he restored again to the right owners. He was the son of Eutropius, a noble Roman, and of Claudia daughter of Claudius Augustus. Though Italy, Africk, Gallia, Germany & Britain were allotted to him for his share of the Empire; yet he contented himself with Gallia alone; which hee ruled with  good laws and moderation▪ Galerius was a good souldier, and a handsome man, born in Dacia, of mean pa∣rentage, for his father was a husbandman, and he himselfe a Cow-heard, whence he was called Armentarius. Hee gave out that his mother had begot him of a Dragon, as Olympia did Alexander. He was indeed a Dragon to the Christians, for his persecution was the bloudiest of all, to prevent which, multitudes of peo∣ple fled to desart places and rocks. Urbanus president of Palestina put Appianus and Edaesius his brother with many others to cruell deaths. But he himself was by Maximinus, (whose cruell commands he so readily obeyed) sentenced to death. But Firmilianus worse then he, raged over dead carcasses, denying them buriall;  which inhumanity the very Gentiles abhorred, when they saw wilde beasts and birds carrying away mens limbes. When the friends of Pamphilus saw, that his body and 12 others lay four dayes in the streets untouched by any beast, took the bold∣nesse to bury them. And Firmilianus shortly after sheathed the same sword in his own bowels, which he unsheathed against Christians; so fierce was this Dragon against all that professed Christ, within his Dominions of Palestina, Egypt, Syria, Mesapotamia, Pontus, Cappadocia, and Bithyni, that he burned a whole towne of Christians at one time. The Governour of Provinces proffering rewards to those that should find out new tortures. About the 8. year of this bloudy Tragedy, both Judges and Torturers began to grow weary of acting, for they perceived that Christians ran as cheerfully to Mar∣tyrdome,  as the Romans did to a May-game. Therefore the tyrants fearing that their cities would be left desolate, were contented to put out onely one eye, and to break one of the confessors thighs, and to condemne them to work in mines. Many Bishops and Presbyters suffered martyrdome in these times. But Constan∣tius was a friend to the Christians, who did not suffer under him, but in the two years of Diocletian and Maximianus. One day Constantius would
try the since∣rity  of his Courtiers, commanding all that did worship Christ, either to renounce him, or forsake his Court; many went, many stayed: those he recalled, these he ex∣pelled, shewing that they who were not faithfull to their God, could not be faith∣full to him that was but a man. Maximinus having also obtained the Government of Italy, appoints two Caesars. Severus for Italy, and Maximinus his sisters son for the East, both being Iyrians. He kept Constantine by him as an hostage, under pretence of religion. For hee saw in him though a childe, more then a manly spirit. Therefore he indeavoured to ex∣pose him to danger, sometimes wishing him to sight with some barbarian, or with a Lion. But he perceiving his life aimed at, fled, and to reard the pursuers, killed all  the Post-horses that hee found in the way▪ and so came safe to Britain, where hee found his aged Father sickly, who dyed not long after at Yorke the 13 yeare of his reign, the 63 of his life. Hee was deified by the Ro∣mans. The Praetorian souldiers at Rome being bribed, declare Maxentius the son of Herculeus Emperor. Upon this Herculeus makes haste for Rome, hoping to bee re-invested in the Empire, which he unwillingly lost; to that purpose writes let∣ters to Diocletian, that he would reassume again his command and dignity, who returnes this answer, that he found more pleasure in planting his pot-hearbs, then ever he did in ruling over the Romans. But Severus Caesar is sent by Galerius to  Rome, to appease the Praetorians, and Maxentius, He sits downe with his army before the city: but his souldiers forsake him, and join with Maxentius. Severus betakes himself to Ravenna: but Maximianus cunningly inticed him to come forth, whom he carries to Rome, where he is put to death. After this Maximi∣anus in a full assembly went about to discover his sonnes nakednesse, and to shew how weake he was, and unfit for Government; but for his labour he was ailed at by the souldiers. Thence he went to Gallia to Constantine, to whom hee had given his daughter Fausta in marriage; pretending that hee was banished by his sonne; and that hee was desirous to live with Constantine; but in∣deed his intent was to kill him; which his daughter Fausta perceived, and  acquainted her husband with it. Whereupon hee flies to Massilia, intend∣ing to saile to his sonne, but by the command of his sonne in law, hee was there strangled, yet others thinke, hee dyed of a loathsome disease, as I shewed before. About this time Licinius the Dacian was made Emperor by Galerius, who dy∣ed 4280. A. C. 310. shortly after, having reigned Emperor 13 years. For having left Licinius to rule the Illyrians and Thracians, hee went to Rome to suppresse Maxentius; but finding him strongly maintained by the souldiers, whom he bribed, and fearing his own souldiers would be bribed to betray him, departed out of Italy, and shortly after died of an uncurable wound, his genitals being putrefied, and his whole body eat up with Vermine. Hee was told by his Physitians (many of whom he killed out of impatience of his paines) that his disease was incurable: he finding himselfe checkt in conscience for murthering so many Christians, re∣pealed his edicts against them, set them all at liberty, and recommended himself to their prayers, and so dyed. About these times Pope Marcellinus, Serena Dio∣clet ians wife, S. Catharine, Lucianus who was the seventh that turned the Bible into Greek, and many more suffered martyrdome. In the Councell of Rome con∣sisting of 300 Bishops. Marcellinus condemned himselfe for offering incense to Idols. Donatus the Numidian storming that Caecilianus was preferred to him in the Bishoprick of Carthage, broached his schism, which in a short time became an  heresie: he objected against Caecilianus, that he was one of them who delivered up the Bible to he burned, but he was absolved by Constantine. Theophilus was made the first bishop of the Goths.
CHAP. VIII. Of the Roman affaires under Constantine, Maxentius, Maximinus, and Licini∣us. 2. Of the Christian persecutions, and forraign affaires; during that time. COnstantine was the sonne of Constantius Chlorus, and Helena, not a Bithy∣nian as some think, but a Britain, he with Maxentius, Licinius, and Maxi∣minus ruled the Empire. Alexander who had then a command in Afric, would have been a fift Emperor, he was a Pannonian, and of mean parentage, but Rufus Volusianus being sent by Maxentius did quickly suppresse him. So Africa was now exposed to the fury of Maxentius who raged in Carthage, and all about with fire and sword. At first he shewed some favour to Christians, but being confirmed in his Empire, he persecuted them with as great fury, as ever did his predecessors. Neither Virgins nor Matrons could escape the fury of his lust, but such as fled, or dyed. He abused many noble women, and then sent them back to their husbands. He studyed magick, and to that purpose he cut up the bowels of di∣vers children, and ript up the bellies of many mothers. After the East had rested a while from persecution, upon the recantation of  Gallerius his successor, Maximinus fell with fresh fury on the Christians, imputing to them all the miseries that had fallen on the Empire; and recriminating them with pollutions and abominations whereof they were no way guilty; he com∣mands all the Idol Temples to be repaired, their sacrifices renewed, and the Christian religion to be quite banished. But by Divine Justice it came to passe, that plagues, famine, and unusuall diseases never raged in the world so much as now, that Christians are persecuted, who notwithstanding the miseries they indu∣red did shew the fruites of their Religion, by burying the dead bodies of their enemies, which lay scattered up and down the streets. But the Armenians by force of armes compelled Maxentius to permit them the free exercise of Christian re∣ligion.  After this Maxentius exercised his cruell and barbarous nature against the Nobility of Rome and Italy, which Constantine understanding, resolves to ease the Empire of such a tyrant. Wherefore having quieted Gallia, to make himself the stronger, he marryeth his sister to Licinius; Diocletian was invited by these two Emperors to the wedding; but he excused himself by reason of his age and weak∣nesse. Upon this denyall he receiveth menacing letters, shewing that he favoured Maximinus and Maxentius, whereupon he fearing some disgracefull death, poy∣soned himself, as was said. He was an ambitious and proud man, as may be seen by assuming to himself Divine honors, and by changing the ancient computation of years, causing the accompt begin from the first year of his reign, this was called Aera Diocletiani, and continued 248 yeares, Yet hee was a fearfull man, chiefly  of thunder and lightning, with which notwithstanding his Palace was set on fire. Constantine hastneth to Rome, the noise of whose approach affrighted Maxen∣tius. Yet an Army is sent to retard Constantines march, at Verona the two Armies meet: Maxentius lost the day; who was little troubled, either at the loss of his Army, or the disaster of his father; at last with much adoe, he ventures with a fresh Army against Constantine, 9 miles from the City, who obtaines a second victory; Maxentius flying back to Rome, and entring upon a bridge of boates, over the river, his horse stumbled, and he fell into the water, where he was drown∣ed  with the weight of his armour, and fearse could his body be found in the mud. The same fate befell his guard and Courtiers. Thus dyed he in the 6. year of his reign. His Armie consisted of 170000 Foot, and 18000 Horse, whereas Con∣stantines were not half so many. The report of this overthrow was not at first beleeved in the City, till Maxentius his head was brought in upon a pole; then there was great joy; for both Senators and people were delivered from the mas∣sacre intended by
the Praetorian Guard upon them; which murther was plotted by Maxentius, and should have been executed by his souldiers, whom Constantine for this put to the sword, and destroyed their fortifications. Whilest Constantine was in doubt whether he should go against Maxentius or not, there appeared to him about noon, the sign of the Crosse in the air, and on it these words ingraven, In this thou shal overcome: which sign the next night Christ himself confirmed by his own presence to Constantine, bidding him make use of this sign against his enemy. Upon this victory edicts are sent abroad for the free exercise of Christian religion. Maximinus in the east hearing of his fellow tyrants death, out of fear desisted from persecuting of the Christians, yet he did not permit their as∣semblies. But Licinius in a short time delivered the Church from this oppressor; for understanding that his souldiers had forsaken him; he pursues him from Illyricum  to Thracia, and from thence to Cilicia, where he shuts him up within Tharsus; there he dyed the third year of his reign, of a loathsome disease; in which hee lost his sight, and his body stunk like a dead carkasse, before hee was dead. Thus the Church is freed of seven tyrants, to wit, Diocletian, Maximianus, Galerius Max∣iminus, Maxentius, Valerius Maximinus, Severus, Galerius his Colleague, and Alexander tyrant of Africa, there remaines only Licinius with his Colleagues; but not long. Licinius giving too much heed to Magicians and Soothsayers, began first to in∣hibit the meeting of Bishops; then prohibited women to come to Church, commanding them to be instructed at home by those of their own sex, shortly af∣ter  he shuts up all the Churches, casheers all Christians in his Armies, and banish∣eth them from his Court. At last he embrewed his sword with the bloud of Bi∣shops. He overthrew the Church Amasena in Pontus, and cut some Confessors in peeces, then flung them into the Sea. He hated learning, and scholars, chiefly Law∣yers and Philosophers, calling letters the poyson and plague of the State. He was friendly to none, except to husbandmen, from whom he descended, and sooth∣sayers, who soothed him up with promises of great happinesse. Yet this was com∣mendable in him, that he kept the souldiers in good order; that he hated catamites and flatterers, calling them the rats and moths of the Palace. Many Christians fled to Constantine, who both maintained Christianity and learning, being a scholar  himselfe. He abolished the punishment of crucifixion, and breaking of legs. He suppressed all oppression and tyranny; he wrote kinde letters to Licinius, desiring him to bee favourable to Christians, according to the league made be∣tween them: he was proudly answered, that he had no reason to meddle with his part of the Empire. Whereupon Constantine with his son Crispus, marched a∣gainst Licinius in Thracia, where neer Odrissa, since called Adrianopolis, he de∣feated him; from thence Licinius flyes to Bythinia in Asia, and raiseth a new ar∣my, which Constantine overthrew by the power of Christ, the representation of whose Crosse he carryed still in his Banners, and on his Coin. Licinius sends his wife Constantines sister to procure his pardon, which was granted, conditionally, that he should live privately with his wife at Thessalo∣nica. But Valens whom Licinius had chosen for his Colleague, was put to death by Constantine. Zosimus writes, that Constantine not only pardoned, but also received him again as Co-Emperor, and named his sonne Licinianus fel∣low Caesar, and successour with his owne sonnes Crispus and Constantine. But six yeares after, this peace was broken, and Licinius driven out of Thracia into Chalcedon, where he chose Martinianus for his Caesar. And as Eusebius writes, they were both overthrown by Constantine, who having received his imperi∣all robe sent by his wife, pardoned him again, and sent him to Thessalonica,  whereupon new commotions raised by him and his Colleague Martinianus, they were both put to death. Licinius reigned about 15 years, and lived almost 60. About these times the Christian Religion was much propagated through Scotland, by meanes of the Britaines who fled thither to avoid the fury of Dio∣cletian. But Christianity was imbraced in Scotland above 100 yeares afore this, by Donaldus their first Christian King, in the year of Christ 199. about the time that Severus came over to Britaine, to
suppresse the Scots and Picts, which had  made divers incursions upon the Roman Territories there, and had committed great slaughter upon them. For which cause he was forced to build a wall and forti∣fications to keep out these Northern Britaines, a people free, and no ways disposed to receive the Roman yoak. The third Book  OF THE SECOND PART, INTREATING Of the times from CONSTANTINE the Great, till CHARLES the Great, containing 476 Yeares. CHAP. I. The life, actions and death of Constantine the Great. 2. The history of his four sonnes. 3. The affaires of the Church under these Emperors. THE Church hitherto Militant, begins now to be Triumphant, which being delivered from a longer captivity, then that of 4294. A. C. 324. Babel, is setled by a greater Captain then Zorobabel; Con∣stantine the great Eagle carries this woman upon his two  wings into the wildernesse, or state of rest and security. Now Religion lifteth up her head, the Temples are opened for the true God, at whose presence Idolatry like Dagon falls to the ground; Bishops and Doctors, chiefly those that suffered are highly rewarded; controversies are silenced; therefore Constantine gives, order for calling of Councels, and will himselfe hear the difference between Caecilian and Donatus, by his Deputies who absolve Caecilian and condemne the turbulent spirit of Do∣natus, and his sect. Constantine compelled no man to embrace Christianity; yet suffered none to commit Idolatry: he would have Christ to be professed freely; not by constraint. He will not use that bloudy course against Pagans which they used against Christians. Furious reformers of Religion, are the successors of Di∣ocletian, not of Constantine. But this fair day of the Churches peace was quickly overcast by the black cloud of Arianisme, which like a sparkle being kindled at Alexandria by Arius Presbyter, there did spread it selfe soon after into a flame through Egypt, Lybia, and the rest of the world. The Emperour willing to quench this fire betimes, sends Osius Bishop of Corduba, with letters, desiring them to study mo piety, and lesse controversie, lest they become a mocking stock to 4295. A. C. 325. the Infidels. But seeing he could not thus prevail, he cals a Councell at Nicea in Bi∣thynia of 318 Bishops, besides innumerable Presbyters and Deacons. Sylvester the Pope by reason of his age could not be there, but sent his Deputies. Constan∣tine sitting down in his gilded Throne, exhorted them, to decide the controver∣sie by Scripture, and to lay aside all emulation and strife. In the end Arius is con∣demned and banished; and the eternall consubstantiality of the Son of God with his Father is confirmed. The controversie also about Easter is abolished, and it is commanded to be kept, the first sunday still, after the Equinoctiall full Moon, and not with the Jewes, the 14 day of the Moon. All other controversies between
the Bishops he ended by flinging the papers in the fire. He commanded the Lords day to be observed, he put downe the Gladiators, and would not suffer any Chri∣stian to be slave to a Jew. He did not permit the Governours of Provinces to in∣fringe the Bishops Decrees and Canons. He caused the Church goods to be re∣stored, which were held by the city, and many other excellent laws he made in sa∣vour of Testators, Orphans, and Virgins. He alwayes heard Sermons standing, acknowledging thereby what reverence was due to Gods Word. After the overthrow of Arius, Constantine celebrates the 20 yeare of his reigne, and entertaines the Bishops with a great Feast, on whom he bestowed gifts. Hee kissed the scars of Paphnutius Bishop of Thebais, and of Spiridion bishop of Cy∣prus, calling them blessed that were wounded for Christ. It was this Paphnutius that stood up in the Councell in defence of the marryed Clergy. Constantine re∣proved Acesius bishop of the Novatians, for denying the Communion to those that had fallen, and wished him to set up a ladder, and climbe up himselfe alone to heaven. But the Arians did not cease to spew out their malice against the Or∣thodox, by false accusations, whereas other wayes they could not hurt them. In the mean time Constantine gives order to pull down the chappell of Venus, built over the Holy Sepulchre, and in lieu thereof to erect a Temple to our Saviour; and a town, which he called new Jerusalem. His mother Helena built churches in the places of Christs Nativity and Ascension. Shee searched and found the Holy  Crosse, by which miracles were wrought. At last having done much good, she dyed being 80 years old. Crispus was Constantines eldest son, who being falsely accused by his stepmo∣ther Fausta, that he would have ravished her, is by his Fathers command put to death, and she afterward being found guilty of this murther, is killed in a scalding bath. Hee caused also Licinianus his sisters son to be slain. Then he repaires and beautifies Byzantium, and cals it from his own name Constantinople, and having translated thither many Noble Families, and wealth from Rome, and erected mag∣nificent buildings and Temples there, it was called new Rome: he buildes again the wals which by Severus 130 yeares before were thrown down; and gives the  same priviledges to new Rome, which old Rome had. This he did in hatred to Romes greatnesse and Idolatry; and because this city lay fit for the suppressing the Goths, and Sarmatians: but it was impolitickly done to weaken the old seat of the Empire, and Italy which lay so fit for Dominion. He adorned also Ni∣comedia, Hebron, and Antiochia and other places. He caused Idolatry to be sup∣pressed, and Idols to be thrown downe, and hereticall conventicles to be abolished: hee subdued the Scythians and made them tributaries, and likewise the Sauro∣matae or Sarmatians, Indians, Ethiopians, and Persians honour him with pre∣sents. Hormisdas the Persian king fled to him for aid. He upon spleen of his No∣bility was put by his right, being the eldest son, and cast in chains; the younger bro∣ther was made king: but Hormisdas wife delivered him, by sending him a fish, and in it a file, wherewith he filed off his fetters, and in the clothes of an Eunuch passed unknown through the drunken guard; and so got to Armenia, and from thence had a convoy to Constantine: who had sent to Sapores the old Persian King to surcease persecuting the christians, as he did; upon the instigation of Jews and Magitians, he killed above 16000 Christians. Constantine in his latter dayes began to waver, for the Arian faction wrought upon his sister Constantia, the wife of Licinius, and she upon him, to recall Arius from banishment. Eusebius also bishop of Nicomedia, with other Arians falsly accused Athanasius successour to Alexander in Alexandria, and in a councell held  at Tyrus condemned him, with Eustachius bishop of Antioch, whom they falsly accused of adultery. Athanasius is banished to Treviri, but by a Synod of 80 bi∣shops in Egypt, he is absolved from the Arians unjust sentence, who condemned him for a magitian: but Arius having fraudulently subscribed and sworne to the Nicean creed, having another under his arm, was received by the Emperor, and order given to Alexander bishop of Constantinople to receive him publickly in∣to 4306. A. C. 336. the church there,
seeing the Alexandrians refused to communicate with him: but the next day as Arius was going in pomp towards the church, he stept aside to ease himself, and in the privy, his guts and soul went together. He dyed belike of a rupture; this was it that Alexander in his prayers did so earnestly desire the night before. Constantine had three sonnes besides Crispus whom the stepmother Fausta the daughter of Maxentius murthered, that her own sonnes might succeed; the el∣dest Constantinus was made Caesar the 10 year of his Fathers reigne; Constans the second son in the 20 year, and Constantius the youngest in the 30. In lieu of Crispus unjustly slain, and much lamented by Helena his Grandmother, and the whole city. The good old Emperor having celebrated the marriage of his sonne Constantius, and answered the Embassadours of India and Iberia, as he was going 4307. A. C. 337. against the Persians, and was baptized in the Suburbs of Nicomedia, departed this life the 63 of his age, and the 32 years of his Empire. His death was foretold by a comet▪ his body was interred with great solemnity in the Apostles Church which he built at Constantinople. He was much lamented by the Romans, such was his piety that he taught his armies to pray, and gave them a set forme of his own making. He caused his Image to be stampt on his coin, in the gesture of one kneeling and praying to Christ: In his time Meletius bishop, for his misdemean∣ours was degraded, and then out of spleen became Arian. Clodomerus King of the Francs invaded Gallia, the two Feasts of cxaltation and invention of the Crosse were  instituted. The Irish are converted by the preaching of St. Patrick. Christianity in∣creaseth in India, Iberia and Armenia. Constantine a little before his death, upon the importunity of the souldiers made Dalmatius his brothers sonne Caesar also; but by the same souldiers he was oppres∣sed, and so the Empire was divided betweene the three brothers. Constantine the eldest had for his share Spain, Gallia the Alpes and Britain, Constans (whom others call Constantius confounding the names) had Italy, Afric, Graecia, and Illyri∣cum. Constantius or Constans obtained the East. Constantine having restored A∣thanasius, as his father had ordered, quarrelled with his brother about Italy and Afric, and was overthrown by Constans his army; having received many wounds 4310. A. C. 340. as hee fell from his horse neer Aquileja, and is flung into the river Alfa, the 3 year of his reign, the 25 of his age. Coustans was at first a valiant and just Emperor, but afrer growing gowty, he began lascvious and cruell. Hee subdued the Francs oppressing Gallia: he maintained Athanasius and the Nicean creed: but one day as he was hunting, Chrestius, Marcellinus and Magnentius, conspire against him, and murther him. Ungratefull Magnentius forgot that one time Constans saved his life, by casting his robe over him, when the souldiers would have killed him. Constans dyed the 13 year of his reign, he had been Caesar 3 years before his fathers 4320. A. C. 350. death, he was 27 years old, some say. 30. Magnentius made himselfe Emperor of the East. Vetranius Generall of the Illyrian and Pannonian Forces, invaded the Emprire on that side, but Constantius by an eloquent speech hee made to both the armies ready to fight, made Vetranius lay down his command, the 10 month after he had taken it up, and content himselfe with a private life. At Rome Nepo∣tianus sisters sonne of Constantine the Great, having slaine the Governour of the city is made Emperor in such a tumult, that the streets ranne with bloud, and all places were filled with dead bodies. The Persians also invaded the Empire. Constantius finding how unable he was alone to manage the Empire, makes Gallus his cousen German Caesar, and marryeth to him Constantina his sister, who had been marryed to Annibalianus Governour of Armenia. Magnentius also makes his kinsman Decentius Caesar, beyond the Alpes. These having many times skir∣mished, at last encountred with all their strength neer Mursia, where Magnentius the Gaul is defeated, having lost 36000 men, and Constantius 30000. This victory was deer bought, for by the losse of so many men, the Empire was much weak∣ned, so that the barbarous Nations could not be kept out. Magnentius fled to Lions, where he killed himselfe with his own sword, the 4 yeare of his Empire; 4323. A. C. 353. and about the 50 of his age. Decentius hearing of his overthrow and death, strang∣led
himself. Gallus Caesar quieted the Jewes who would have made them a new King; he killed many thousand of them, and burned Cesarea, and Tiberias. This Gallus was of a fierce and bloudy disposition; so was his wife. They caused many innocent men to be murthered, upon false accusations of informers, she thought she might doe any thing, being the Emperors sister. But they both were invited by flattering letters to come to Constantius. She feared her brothers cruelty, yet ad∣ventured to see him; but having come to Bithynia, she fell sick of a Feaver and dyed, Gallus was apprehended at Pola a town of Istria, where he was accused of all 4324. A. C. 354. his cruelties; he laid the blame of al upon his wife; but there he was beheaded, the 4. year of his tyranny. Silvanus was chosen in his room by Constantius; he was a Gaul by birth, but of an aspiring nature, who aiming too high was killed by the souldiers, within a month of his advancement. Constantius having now no Competitor, begins to exercise his cruelty, accusing many, as if guilty of plotting with Magnentius Gallus, and Sylvanus against him. He banisheth also many Orthodox Bishops. And because the Francs, Alemans, Saxons, and Quadi made irruptions upon Gallia, he chose Claudius Iulianus the brother of Gallus, and having sent for him from A∣thens, makes him Caesar: and gave him command over the Transalpin coun∣tries, he subdued the barbarous Nations thereabout; and took king Chonodoma∣rius prisoner: and regained the ancient bounds of the Empire. He took also pri∣soner Badomarius chief King of the Alemans. He defeated the Saxons and Qua∣di;  upon this he is proclaimed Augustus by the Army. Constantius by Embas∣sadours counsells him to content himselfe with the title of Caesar; who replyes that he will be no lesse officious and obedient, under the high title of Augustus then before. Constantius overcame the Sarmatians, who had over run Illyricum, but having no successe against the Persians, and understanding that Iulian was marching against him with an Army, out of impatience and long watchings, fell into a vio∣lent feaver and dyed, at Mesocrene neer the foot of mount Taurus, having reigned 24 years, 8 alone, 16 with his brother & Magnentius. He had fought 9 battels with the Persians, but with little successe: the last was lost by the wilfulnesse of his soul∣diers. He was a good archer, temperatin dyet and sleep, a good scholar; and one that could indure hard labour. Not much given to venery, contenting himself with his wives, chiefly Eusebia. Hee favoured the Arians, being induced thereto by the same Presbyter that wrought upon Great Constantines sister. He was 41 years old when he dyed; his genius that was wont to be cheerfull with him, a little before his sicknesse looked sad upon him. In his time Athanasius was much vexed by the Arian Bishops, for returning to his charge without Episcopall approbation; for bringing into the Church the word Consubstantiall not found in Scripture. He to avoid Constantius his fury,  flies to Pope Iulius at Rome; in his absence one George sits down in his chair at Alexandria: and Eusebius at Antioch in a conventicle of 80 bishops, expels the word consubstantiall; and possesseth the chair of Constantinople, which belonged to Paulus the true bishop. But after his death Paul is received again by the Catho∣licks; but Macedonius is ordained by the Arians, and ratified by the Emperor, who sent Hermogenes with some Forces to thrust out Paul. But the people killed the captain, and burned downe his house. For this sedition the city is fined, Paul banished, and Macedonius with the losse of 3000 citizens gets up into the chair. By the favour of Constans and Pope Iulius, Athanasius returnes to Alexandria, and is banished the third time, being accused for converting the Poors corn to his own use. He flies to Constance, and desires a free Synod. His fellow-sufferer Paul, by the Arians malice perished in his exile: and Macedonius himselfe, who held the Holy Ghost to be the servant only of the Father, and the Sonne, was shortly expelled by the Arians, because he would not call the Son of God a creature. Constans calls a Synod of 300 Westerns, and 800 Eastern Bishops at Sardica in Thracia, in which Athanasius is absolved by the
Western bishops, and is a∣gain  restored to his charge, to the grief of the Eastern Cleargy: but Constans be∣ing dead, Constantius was much abused by the Arian bishops, chiefly by Va∣lens who prayed with Constantius, whilest his Army was fighting with Mag∣nentius, and got him the first news of the victory; he with divers others, still waited on the Emperor, soliciting him against the Catholicks; whom George at Alexandria did eagerly persecute. Photinus bishop of Syrmium is condemned by a Councell held there, for giving Christ no other beginning but from Mary. Aetius and his scholar Eunomius, dissent in this from the Arians in denying Christ to be like his Father. A Synod is called by Constantius at Millan in which Pope Liberius, Hilarius bishop of Poytures with divers others are banished for not subscribing to the unjust sentence against Athanasius. But the Arians dis∣senting among themselves, & with the Orthodox gave occasion of calling another Synod at Ariminum in Italy of 400 bishops. But there could be no reconciliati∣on. Whereupon a Synod is called at Seleucia, in which much digladiation there was about the word or like; whether was meant the similitude of essence or of will. But nothing could be agreed upon, wherefore the Arians fly to Con∣stantinople, and forced many Orthodox bishops to receive that fallacious Symbol, which was compiled in the Synod of Seleucia, in which the word usia, or sub∣stance was put out, and concluded that the Son was like the Father, and that he was not a creature like other creatures: but some who refused to subscribe were banish∣ed. Hilarius is sent back to France, as being found too hard a disputant for the ea∣stern bishops. About this time Apollinaris starts up, affirming that the Word assumed the flesh, but not the soul, or minde, and that God was the mind or soul of the flesh as∣sumed. Constantius was a great enemy to superstition; he punished all that con∣sulted with cunning men or witches. He removed out of the Forum, the image of Cybele. Many Jews were converted to Christ upon the sight of a fiery crosse in the air, reaching from Golgotha to Mount Olivet. CHAP. II. Of Julian, Jovinian, Valentinian, and Valens. 2. Of the Church, and forraign affaires. FLavius Claudius, Iulianus the sonne of Censtantius Constantine the Greats brother, whose mother was Basilina a Noble Lady. In his youth he was bred 4331. A. C. 361. a Christian under the bishop of Nicomedia, and for his pregnant wit and e∣loquence was made reader in the church. He was studious and expert in the Greek tongue. But being too familiar with Libanius the Sophister, with Iam∣blicus, Maximus, and other Philosophers, hee became a heathen, a magician, a persecutor of Christians, and a right Apostate. He used to diffame great Con∣stantine, calling him an innovator and disturber of the ancient lawes. He put none to death for religion, but pretended other causes: hee shut up all schools of learn∣ing among Christians, knowing that learning was an enemy to Gentilism. He opened the Idolatrous Temples, and commanded sacrifices there to be offered. He stampt upon his coin Iupiter, setting the crown on his head; Pallas putting on his cloak, and Mercury giving him the scepter. He robbed the church of her revenues, telling the Clergy that they should be the fitter for heaven, because it is written, Blessed be the poore. He suffered no military honours to be conferred  on Christians. He writ invectives against Christian Religion, which Nazianzen and Cyrill refuted. He would not permit Christian children to learn Rhetorick, fearing lest they might wound the Gentiles with their own quils. He incouraged the Jewes in hatred of Christianity, to set up again their owne State and religion, promising them great immunities and priviledges. Upon this the Jews began to rebuild the Temple, but they were faine to give off by reason of thunder, hail, fire, and
earthquakes which destroyed many thousands of them. Where ever they cast their eyes they saw crosses on their garments and tables; the Delphic Temple also, was much about this time overthrown with thunder and earthquakes, as Iulian was sending thitherto know by the Oracle what successe he should have against the Persians. It had been overthrown before and spoiled 4 times, namely by the Phlegians. 2. by Xerxes his souldiers. 3. by the Phocenses 4. by Brennus; but still it was rebuilt again; by the overthrow of these two Tem∣ples, Judaism, and Gentilism were deadly wounded. It's recorded of Iulian (whom Athanasius called a cloud soon vanishing) that in private he put divers Christians to death for their religion: among the rest Artemius Governour of Egypt, which made the Alexandrians fall furiously up∣on George their Arian Bishop, and murther him. This George had used to in∣veigh  bitterly against them, to make sport with the skuls of the murthered Ca∣tholicks; tricks fitter for a Turkish turbant, then a Bishops miter. Iulian threat∣ned to revenge this murther of George, but was taken off with fair words, and the Persian war: which he was preparing for. Understanding that Apollo could utter no Oracle, because the christians had buryed some of their Martyrs neere to him, he caused their bodies and reliques to be removed, the people in the interim singing that of the Psalmist: Confounded bee all they that worship graven Images. At which Iulian was vexed inwardly, but could not helpe it, but vowed to sacrifice the bloud of christians to his Gods, if he prevailed against the Persians. About this time also Apollo's Temple at Rome was burned down. Sapores who was made King before he was born, 24 years of age, made irrupti∣ons upon the Empire. Iulian with 65000 souldiers tooke divers Forts and Towns from the Persian, and wasted all Assyria. Having crossed the river Ti∣gris, he burnt his boats, as if he had conquered all: but being brought into an ambush by a fugitive, where he was beset with famine and Persian armies, was shot in the liver, by an unknown hand; he in a rage flinging the bloud of his wound in the air, cries out, Thou hast overcome mee O Galilean, and so dyed the 31 year of age, having reigned alone 1 year, 8 months, and 10 yeares with  Constantius. His wife was Helena great Constantins daughter, of whom hee had no children, her Matrix being poysoned by Eusebia the Empresse, so hee dyed childlesse. Maris bishop of Chalcedon was blind, whom Iulian mockingly told him, that he could not have so much as eyes from his Christ. I thank Christ for it (saith he) for so I shall not see thee, who art the great plague of the world. Atha∣nasius after the death of George was restored againe to Alexandria; but pre∣sently was forced to hide himself a while from Iulian's fury; in which time he compiled his excellent Symbol. Nazianzen writes of Iulian, that he was unstable in his head, eyes, and feet; at first he exhorted them to agree a∣mong themselves, and not to trouble themselves with points of Religion, but to let every one enjoy his owne opinion. He restored to the Donatists their churches again. Iovinian or Iovian succeeded, he was chosen for his fathers sake Varonianus a Noble Pannonian, and who had done good service. Iovinian was a good chri∣stian, 4333. A. C. 363. a bountifull Prince, and a handsome man. He was forced upon the ill suc∣cesse of Iulian to make a dishonourable peace with the Persian, upon these arti∣cles. 1. That five regions beyond Tigris with some castles should be surrender∣ed to the Persian. 2. That Nisibis and Singara, which the Romans held ever since Mithridates till now, should be delivered to the Persian, but not the inhabi∣tants. 3. That the Romans should not aid Arsaces King of Armenia the greater  against the Persians; this Article was hard, being this King was alwayes faith∣full to the Romans; but they were forced to yeeld, because the Army was much weakened with famine and war in that hostile and barren countrey. Hee would not take upon him the Empire, till the whole Army had declared them∣selves Christians, for many of them in Iulians time had apostatised. He shut up al the Idol Temples again, and restored the true worship of God, with the churches revenues, and Valentinian (who had been banished) to his former charge of the
Army. He recalled the banished Bishops, chiefly Athanasius, to whom he wrote for a copy of that truth in Religion which he was to follow. Upon this Athanasius cals a Synod at Alexandria, where the sum of the Catholick Faith was compiled, and sent to the Emperour. As the Emperor was returning from Persia, the Semi-Arian Macedonian he∣retickes met him, crying out against the Arians, and striving to insinuate them∣selves into his favour, but he rejected them, professing that hee would give no ear to contentions. Acacius the great Arian, Bishop of Caesarea, who had been a great stickler for Arianism, is now (but hypocritically) content to subscribe to the Nicaean Creed in the Councell of Antioch held by Meletins Bishop there, who was lately returned from exile: his example was followed by divers other Ari∣an bishops, more out of fear to the Emperour, then love to the truth. Iovi∣nian could abide no disputes in Religion, but advanced those who were mode∣rate and peaceable men. He dyed in Illyricum suddenly of a surfeit the 8 month of his Empire, and of his age the 33 year. In his time Vlphilas the Arian Bishop of the Goths found out the Gothic letters, and was the first who turned the Bi∣ble into the Gothic tongue. He was interred neer to the Capitol, and his ob∣sequies kept in Pannonia; before his death a comet appeared, and the Library at 4334. A. C. 364. Antioch was burned. Valentinian the first succeeded, he had been Tribune of the souldiers under  Iulian, who casheered him for striking a heathen Priest, that besprinkled him with Holy water in the Church porch, as Iulian was sacrificing to his Idol. But Iovinian restored him. He was a Pannonian born, his fathers name was Gratian, who was so strong that five souldiers could not with all their strength wring a rope out of his hand, which he had then to sell. The Army urged Valentinian to choose a consort; one told him, that if he loved his kindred, he had a brother; if the State, he should seek out some other. This speech angered him; but hee said nothing till he came to Constantinople, and then pronounced Valens Co-Em∣peror: no man daring to oppose him, they two deposed most of Iulians officers. About this time the barbarous Nations on all sides invaded the Empire, the Picts Saxones, Scots, and Attacots, (a Nation in the South of Scotland, or North of England) fell upon the Britaines, the Persians on Armenia, the Alemans on Gallia, the Sarmatians on Pannonia, the Goths on Thracia, and the Maurisci on Africa. Upon this Valentinian sets up his seat at Millan, Valens at Constantino∣ple, where he was infected by Eudoxus the Arian bishop, from thence he remo∣ved to Antioch, where he cast the Catholicks out of their churches. Petronius his Father in law did so pole the people with extortions that they set up one Pro∣copius to be Emperor of Constantinople, Armies are raised, and Bithynia is taken. The Thracians and Goths are invited to side with them. The posthume daughter of Constantius, the Emperor is carryed about the Army, as if this new Emperor intended her good: Cizycus is taken; but when Procopius should have fought  with Valens, his souldiers forsook him, and he was brought to Valens, who gave order hee should lose his head, and be quratered; many also of his side suffered with him: thus ended that civill broil. At this time a great schism was in Rome, about the election of the Pope Dama∣sus and Vrsicianus striving for it; the faction was so great, that many were killed; at last Damasus carryed it. He was the first that authorised the Latin Version before the Greek: but the Clergy retained their old Psalmes; he caused the Creed of Constantinople to be sung in stead of the Nicen. Lucifer bishop of Sar∣dinia brought a schism into the church, for refusing to admit those Arians into the Priesthood, who had renounced their errours. Ambrose then translated from the Greek into the Latin church the singing of hymnes and Anti-hymnes; he was made bishop, being Governour of Millan, for he being commanded by Valentinian to suppresse the sedition that was risen about the election, he himselfe was elected by the approbation of all. After Valentinian had suppressed the Alemans, and was recovered from a de∣sperate sicknesse, he named his young sonne Gratianus Emperor: so now are
4337. A. C. 307. three Emperours. Hee began to be a rigorous punnisher of every small offence in the Army. He suppressed the Scots and Picts incursions upon the Britains: whom still they vexed in the Romans absence. He subdued the Randon the Ale∣man, and fortified the Rhene. Valens also suppressed the Persians, and killed their King Arsaces. At Rome Maximinus rageth upon all sorts of people. One Theo∣dorus at Antioch foretold that the foure first letters of his name did belong to Gratians successour, meaning Theodosius, but this Theodorus with some other Ma∣thematicians were burned, and divers Philosophers beheaded, Iamblicus poyson∣ed himselfe. For Valens rashly condemned all such learning, not discrimina∣ting between good and bad, nocent and innocent. In the West Valentinian did  so oppresse the people with taxes and tributes, that the Mauritanians rebelled and made one Firmus their Emperour, whom in divers battels Theodosius defea∣ted. This Firmus flying to the neighbor king Igmazanes for help, but finding none, killed himself. The Quadi also rebelled because Garrisons were placed beyond Ist∣her, and Gabinius the king was slain by Caedestius Perca at a feast treacherously; therefore they fell upon Pannonia, and had almost taken the daughter of Constan∣tius, who was going to be marryed to Gratian, if Messala Governour of Panno∣nia had not by post brought her back to Syrmium. The Sarmatians also breake out, but they were so beaten by Theodosius then a young man; that they were for∣ced to beg for pardon and peace from Valentinian, excusing themselves, that this  insurrection was not caused by the Nobility, but by the countrey people, who were angry at the new erected Garrisons. Valentinian in a violent passion reproved them for this frivolous excuse, and their ingratitude, and upon the vehement stirring of his spirit fell into a Feaver, and within few dayes dyed, having reigned about 15 years, and lived 55. Valentinian had two wives, Severa the mother of Gratian, and Iustina mother of Valentinian the second. This being as yet but 4 yeares old is made Emperor, of that part, by the Army which might be indangered without a head, seeing Valens and Gratian were far off, and could not help them. So he is Emperor of Italy, and Afric, and Illyricum. In the mean while the Hunns an unknown peo∣ple beyond Maeotis towards the frozen Sea, having no setled aboad, nor houses, nor lands, but lived in waines, made a sudden incursion upon the confines of Isther: so that the Goths and Scythians implore Valens for aid. He unwisely re∣ceives these barbarians within the Roman territories, who being pinched with famine, in great multitudes passe over the Danow, and enters Thracia with their Armes, which they were commanded to deliver up, when they petitioned for help: but Maximus and the other Roman Governours were carelesse. Valens was forced to leave the Persian war, and to aid Thracia, which was oppressed by the Goths, to whose assistance there did flock all sorts of discontented persons: be∣sides as Gratian was coming with an Army to aid his Uncle Valens, he was set up∣on by the Aleman forces, but Gratian defeated and killed 40000 of them. Valens unwilling that Gratian should have any share of his victory, would not stay for his assistance, but ventured with his Army upon the Goths, Alans, and Hunns, who defeated him, and at last burned him in a cottage whither he had retired, to dresse his wound he received by an arrow. He lived almost 50 yeares, and reigned a∣bout 14. This, next to that of Cannae, was the greatest blow that ever the Romans had; the Goths also lost aboundance of men, both in this battell, and in their siege of Adrianapolis; hee was a cruell and an illiterate prince, who could indure any religion except the Orthodox. Which against his brothers will he persecuted. As he was subscribing an edict for banishing of Basil out of Caesarea, his arm was taken with such a shaking, that he was forced to desist. He cruelly caused to be burned in a ship 80 Orthodox men, that were sent to petition for the free exercise of their faith. About this time dyed Athanasius, having beene bishop of Alexan∣dria 46 years. In the time of Constantius he hid himselfe 6 years in a dark cave, where he saw not the Sun all the time of Iulian, he hid himself in Alexandria, un∣der Valens he lay hid 4 months in his fathers tomb. To him succeeded Peter, but because he was Orthodox, Valens thrust him out, and set up Lucius the Arian.
CHAP. III. Of Gratianus, Theodosius, Arcadius, Honorius, and Theodosius the younger. 2. Of the Goths, Vandales, and other barbarous Nations. 3. The Church affairs of those times GRatianus was born at Syrmium; this was a learned and good Prince; who 4349. A. C. 379. after the death of Valens called home the banished Catholicks. He would neither take the title nor habit of the High Priest, as others used to doe. He was moderate in his sleep, diet, and delights. He permitted liberty of conscience, except to the Manichees, Eunomians and Photinians: he sent for Theodosius out of Spain, and made him Co-Emperor, by whom he subdued the Alans, Hunns, and Goths, Nations not touched by Alexander; and he overthrew them at such a time, when the Roman army was almost lost, and when the enemy had furnished them∣selves with the Roman horse and arms. Gratian reigned with his Father Valentini∣an 8 years, with his Uncle and brother three, with the same brother and Theodosius 4350. A. C. 380. four, with these and Arcadius 6 moneths. Theodosius was baptized at Thessalonica, and after his great victory in Thracia which he set free, entred Constantinople, and was made Emperor. Valens had placed in divers towns of Asia, the sons of the chief Barbarians to be civilized and educated. These understanding of the great overthrow of their countrymen, resolved to sacrifice to their Ghosts, these towns they dwelt in; but were prevented by Iulius who had the charge of them: for one day he assembled them all together, as if hee meant to reward them, and suddenly by the souldiers laid in ambush, slew them. Theodosius made much of the Fugitives, and mixed them with his own souldiers. He was a Prince endowed with as many vertues as ever any, and nothing inferiour to Trajan his countryman, from whom he derived his pedegree; but hee exceeded Trajan in being more temperate, and lesse ambitious. His diet was simple, his apparell was plaine like others; his modesty was such, that hee forbid the marriage of cousin germans. He was an enemy to all lasciviousnesse, not suffering women to play or sing at Feasts. He was learned, wise, diligent, sober; a hater of Cinna, Marius, Sylla, and such like tyrants. He overthrew Idolatry, and established the true religion. Gratian began to grow carelesse, and to prefer the Alans before the Roman souldiers, so that hee became hatefull to them. Maximus Theodosius his fellow soul∣dier, angry that no honour was conferred on him, in Britain made himself Em∣perour, then passing over into France, Gratians souldiers being angry with him, 4353. A. C. 383. entertained Maximus for their Generall, who driving him to Lions, killed him, having lived 28 years. He was a good Oratour, whose Epistle to S. Ambrose, wherein hee professeth the Nicen Faith is yet extant. In his time Audaeus in Sy∣ria,  taught that God had a humane shape; his scholars were called Audeani and Anthropomorphites. To these were coetaneall the Messalians, called Euchites and Enthusiasts, who bragged much of prayer, and of the Spirit, in the i nterim li∣ving an idle life. Priscillianus then lived in Spain, who renewed the heresie of the Gnostics, he with his followers were banished out of Spain, and in Gallia be∣ing brought before Maximus Emperour, there were punished with death. The Mes∣salians or Euchites were called Valentiniani, because in his time they first appeared. Vigilantius and Iovinianus hereticks affirmed, that all sins were equall. The Sa∣racens and Gothes turn Christians, but withall, Arians. Theodosius cals a Sy∣nod at Constantinople, where Macedonius is condemned, and the Divinity of the  Holy Ghost asserted, then was the title of Patriarch first mentioned, and given to the four chief Bishops. Gratian being dead, Theodosius chose his brother Valentinian the second, yet a child for his colleague. Iustina his mother supplyed his room, in his minority; she had a fair face, but a foul soul, infected with Arianism. Shee would have ex∣pelled Ambrose out of Millan, but he resisted the souldiers that were sent
into the  Church to apprehend him, saying the Church was Gods House, not the Empe∣rors. Maximus who had the charge of Britain, Gallia, and Germany, not con∣tent with this share aimed at Valentinians also, wherefore having past the Alpes, he drove Valentinian out of Italy, who fled to Theodosius for help, the rather be∣cause he had new marryed with Galla, the daughter of old Valentinian and Iusti∣na; for he had buryed his former wife Placilla mother to Arcadius already created Augustus, and his brother Honorius. He resolves therefore by reason of this affinity with Valentinian, and the justnesse of this cause, to assist him. Andragathius Generall of Maximus his Forces, had fortified the passages of the Alpes, but hearing of Theodosius his preparation, forsakes the Alpes, and by a naval expedition, in∣tends  to prevent the enemy; Theodosius unexpectedly passeth the Alpes now o∣pen, falleth upon Aquileja, where Maximus thought himselfe secure, takes him, and kills him. Andragathius hearing that Maximus was slain, flings himself over∣board into the Sea. So Valentinian recovered Italy and his Empire, and by the perswasion of Theodosius embraceth the Catholick Faith. Theodosius in his victo∣ry shewed great elemency in sparing Symmachus and others of Maximus his faction. Victor Maximus his sonne Generall of the French Forces was now dead, whereupon Valentinian repaires thither, and governed Gallia about 5 yeares. Theodosius goeth to Rome, and there shuts up the Idol Temples, and reformes many abuses. Valentinian at last by Eugenius his Secretary, and Arbogastus the  Goth, Generall of his French Armies, was strangled at Vienna; because hee had casheered Arbogastus upon suspicion of treason. He told Valextinian to his face, that hee received no preferment from him, nor had hee power to casheer him; and so put himself out, and killed his Lord. Arbogastus presuming on the souldiers favour raised a great Army, and de∣clares Engenins Emperour, who unwillingly accepted it; knowing hee should bee Emperour but in Title. These two intended to re-establish Idolatry: but Theodosius hearing of these great preparations, betakes himselfe to his prayers, then marcheth with his small army against the enemy, carrying the Crosse for his standard. Arbetion with a part of the enemies Forces went over to him. In  the heat of the battell, a sudden whirlewinde fell upon the enemy, and beat the darts against themselves. Upon this the whole Army submitted to Theodo∣sius, for whom the Heavens did fight. Eugenius fell flat at the Emperors feet, but was killed by the souldiers. Arbogastus killed himselfe. Theodosius returning victorious to Rome, declares his son Honorius Emperor, and appoints Stilico for his Tutor. He perceiving how unwilling the Romans were to leave their old I∣dolatry, under which they had flourished 1200 yeares, seiseth upon all the re∣venues that belonged to the Priests and to the Idols, and so Idolatry began to decay: and the poor in stead of Idols were relieved: yet Gentilism could not be as yet quite extirpated. Whilest Theodosius was at Millan in a popular tumult, at Thessalonica, Vlde∣ricus the Governour there was killed. Upon this the Emperor in anger sent thi∣ther some Troopes to revenge his death, these killed about 7000 men. Ambrose Bishop of Millan, hearing of this, debarred Theodosius from the Communion, who publikely acknowledging his errour, shewed serious repentance, and made a a law that 30 dayes should intercede between the sentence and execution. For Theodosius though an excellent Prince, yet was oftentimes rash and rigid in pu∣nishing, as may bee seene in the Antiochians whom he caused to bee plundered and inslaved, for breaking downe the statue of Placilla the Empresse. Yet was afterward pacified by Flavianus the Bishop, and so hee was recon∣ciled to the Byzantines for pulling downe the Jewes Synagogues, and by S. Ambrose perswaded to thrust them out of all Cities into the Suburbs. After this good Prince had reigned 16 years, he dyed at Millan, the 50, others say the 65 year of his age, and left the Empire to his two sons, his body was buryed at Constantinople. The Goths not long before Theodosius chose them a King, Alaricus by 4365. A. C. 395 name, who persecuted
the Christians. Afterward he embraced Arianism, in which the Goths continued 213 yeares. Theodosius subdued them; to whom they sub∣mitted, but afterward chose Alaricus for their king. The Helvidians or Anti∣dicomarianits lived about these times; then also ceased the Olympiads, and the Indictions were instituted. Isdigerdes persecutes the Christians in Persia. Gregory Nazianzen surrendred for peace sake his Bishoprick of Constantinople, to whom succeeded Nectarius who abolished private confession, upon an abuse offered by a Deacon to a Noble woman: a Synod was held at Constantinople, and another by Damasus at Rome. After Theodosius, Arcadius succeeded in the East, Honorius in the West. These two were bred under Arsenius a Roman Deacon, whom Theodosius one day com∣ing  into the schoole reproved, for suffering his sonnes to sit, whilest hee stood teaching them; therefore he made them stand up, and him set down, charging him to whip them when they deserved. This Arsenius might have had any preferment from his scholars, but hee refused all, and lived an Eremit. They had two Govern∣ours in their minority; Arcadius had Ruffinus a Gaul and a wicked man; Honorius had Stilico: to Gildo was committed Africa. Ruffinus drew Alaricus the Goth in∣to Greece, where he committed many outrages. Stilico marryed with Serena, the daughter of Theodosius his brother, of her he had a daughter Mary by name, whom he marryed with Honorius. Then sends Captain Gaina with an army to Arcadius, in whose presence they kill Ruffinus. So Stilico was rid of a corrivall. Gildo by defrau∣ding the souldiers of their pay, caused them to rebell, hoping thereby to be Emper∣our. 4368. A. C. 398. But him also Stilico destroyed by the help of his brother Mascelzel, who hated Gildo his brother, for some wrongs received from him, therefore he overthrows him in a battell, and drives him to self-murther. Afterward Mascelzel by Stilico's trea∣chery was drowned in the river. The two Emperors having now got some breath after these tumults, in imi∣tation of their Father, command all Idolatrous temples to be overthrown, and the gladiators to be abolished. Chrysostom was then sent for to be Bishop of Constan∣tinople; who reproved Gaina to his face for aiming at the Empire; and en∣deavouring to overthrow Eutropius who succeeded to Ruffinus in the Emperours  favour: Gainas conspiring with his countryman Tribigildus, began to make shew of a civill war. Tribigildus wastes many places in the provinces, against him Gai∣nas is sent, who of purpose increaseth the feare, and labours with Arcadius to banish or put to death Eutropius for his own security. So Gainas a Goth and Arian is received within the City, desires to exercise publikely the Arian heresie, telling the Emperor that it did not stand with his honour, that he who was the Roman Generall should exercise his Religion without the wals. But Chry∣sostome resisted him, telling him of his ingratefulnesse, and turbulent nature. But the Traitor intends to invade the city and Empire, wherefore under pretence of re∣creating himself, removes into the countrey, carrying some Forces with him, and leaving some in the city to act for him. But whilest they thought to surprise the  city in the night, there appeared a guard about the Tower, as if they had been angels. For Arcadius not doubting of treachery, placed no guards in the city. But some ar∣mour which he was conveying away being found, Gainas is proclaimed traitor, and all the Goths in the city, were by the inraged multitude murthered; even those 7000 that had taken sanctuary in the Temple. Then Travittas being made Generall, overthrew Gainas in a Sea fight, and drove him home into his owne country, whom at last the king of the Hunns overthrew in a battell, and then put him to death. The Alani about this time made inroades upon the Empire. Stilico the Van∣dall  got the good will both of the Roman and Barbarian souldiers. He kept se∣cret correspondency with the enemies of the Empire, and endeavoured to set the two brothers Emperors at variance. He imployed Alaricus to seise upon Illyricum, and all this was to make his own son Eucherius Emperour. Hee imployed also his countreymen the Vandals, with the Alans, Sueves, Goths, and Huns against Gallia and Germany. The Vandals under Croscus their Generall did much havock in Gallia. Alaricus king of the Visi goths, or Western Goths, drove the Alans
and Sueves with the Vandals thence into Spaine. Stilico's ambition was raised by the great victory he got over the Scythians, of which 200000 under their king Rhadagaisus break in upon Italy, having laid wast many townes by the way. Hee vowed the bloud of Christians for a sacrifice to his gods. But Stilico so shut him up within the barren hils of Fesulae, that they consumed away with the plague and famine, their king was laid in irons, and strangled, and they were sold by flocks like sheep, a crown then could buy a whole flock; but they dyed shortly after. In the mean while Arcadius dyeth, being 31 years old, having reigned 14 years alone, and 4378. A. C. 480. 13 with his Father. His Empresse Eudoxa dyed a little before, having a dead child in her womb. In his time the Monkes who in Diocletian's persecution began, were increased to great numbers: they persecuted Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, for deny∣ing to God a humane shape, this Theophilus was an enemy to Chrysostome, because hee befriended the Monkes which he had excommunicated, for commending Ori∣gens bookes. Chrysostome stood for Origen, whom Epiphanius Bishop of Salamis in Cyprus resisted condemning these bookes, which Methodius Bishop of Lycia, then of Tyrus, compared to the Syrenes for their many allegories. Epiphanius was reproved by the Monkes for condemning these bookes before a Councell was called, and so as he was returning home dyed by the way. Chrysostome for being too free in his speech, chiefly against Eudoxa the Emperesse, whom he calls Hero∣dias,  inveighing bitterly against her and her statue which was erected neere the Church upon a marble pillar, at which the Stage players used to act. Hee thrust out also 13 Bishops; and reproved the Monkes for comming into cities; re∣fusing to converse or eat with any of them. Hereupon hee is banished, but by the importunity of the people recalled again; yet could hee not refrain from inveighing against Eudoxa, which made Arcadius being uxorious banish him the second time, then he dyed on the borders of Armenia, a year before the death of Arcadius, two years before Rome was taken by Alaricus. But Pope Innocenti∣us excommunicated the Emperour and the Eastern Churches for condemning of Chrysostome. Arcadius left one sonne Theodosius behinde him, a child of 8 years, to the tuiti∣on of Isdigerdes king of Persia, hopeing by this meanes that the Persians would forbeare to molest the kings pupill by incursions on his territories. He was a milde and religious Prince, well educated by his sister Pulcheria, who in his mino∣rity ruled the Empire with great commendation. About this time a certain pa∣ralytick Jew by baptism was recovered, and Marutha Bishop in Mesopotamia by his prayers freed Isdigerdes from his continuall head-ach, and his sonne from the evill spirit with which he was possessed, so that the king was like to turn Chri∣stian had not his Magi hindred him. The same year that young Theodosius began his reign, Honorius understanding  of Stilico's treasons caused him to be put to death at Ravenna with his confederats. Stilico's daughter that was marryed to Honorius, is restored to her mother Sere∣na. His sonne Eucherius is executed at Rome, and the wives and children of the Goths are by the inraged souldiers through all the townes of Italy murthered. The Goths to be revenged, assembled themselves in a body of 30000 under Ala∣ricus, 4379. A. C. 409. who finding no justice from Honorius, by a secret command as hee said, marcheth toward Rome, without medling with any towns by the way; to hinder him: hee seised upon the harbour and stopt all provision. He laughed when hee heard the citizens would fight; saying: that thick hay is easyer cut then thin. In∣nocentius caused all the Images to be stript of their ornaments and jewels, to make up the summe of 5000 l. weight of gold, and 30000 of silver, to pay Ala∣ricus, who upon receipt thereof, removed the siege. But Honorius refused to give hostages, and to ratifie the peace which the city had made with Alaricus, wherefore hee intercepted the souldiers which Honorius sent to guard the City. Honorius continuing in his obstinacy sent for the Huns to assist him, and remitted to Constantine the Tyrant, all the
Territories beyond the Alpes, then  did the Britaines, Celtae, and Amorici recover their liberty, by expelling all the Roman Officers. Alaricus besiegeth Rome againe, and forceth the citizens to make Attalus their Governour Caesar, and to join their Forces with him against Honorius. But the Army of Attalus which hee sent to subdue Africa, was cut off by Heraclianus Governour there under Honorius. Alaricus would willingly have made peace with Honorius, and to that purpose sent divers Embassies, but Honorius had vowed the contrary. Attalus with a great Army drew neer Ra∣venna where Honorius was, which so affrighted him, that hee profferred to make Attalus his colleague, which he refused, in a proud and scornfull way; whereupon Alaricus devested Attalus of all his honour, and princely ornaments, which hee  sent to Honorius, hoping thereby that hee would hearken to peace. But Sarus and Iovius the two great Commanders of Honorius his Armies, would not give way to any peace. Wherefore Alaricus by treason takes Rome, and sackes it; when the 4380. A. C. 310. newes thereof came to Honorius, that Rome was taken, he thought the messenger had spoke of his great Cock, which hee named Rome. Alaricus gave order that none should be slain who took Sanctuary: but he could not keep the souldiers from pillaging and burning. So great was the famine in Rome before it was betrayed, that the people desired a price might bee set upon mens flesh. Alaricus stayed not in the city above three days, for he feared lest Theodosius Honorius his brothers sonne, might be coming with his Eastern army, wherefore having wasted Italy, as  he was passing over into Sicily, dyed suddenly, to whom succeeded his kinsman A∣taulphus. This Ataulphus marryed with Placidia Honorius his sister, who by her allure∣ments was perswaded to make peace, and goe into Spaine, that Honorius might suppresse the new upstart tyrants, which invaded the Empire, to wit, Constantine, Constans, Gerontius, Iovinus, Sebastian, Sarus, and others. Which was effected by the meanes of Constantius and Vulphilas his Generall. Constantine at Arela∣tum is besieged, taken, and slain by Constantius: his sonne Constans is killed by Gerontius, and hee by his own souldiers: Iovinus also is slain. Attalus is carryed away with the Goths into Spaine, and being taken at Sea, had his head cut off. He∣raclianus  with a great fleet entred upon Italy, but being beaten back as hee was landing, returnes to Carthage, where hee is slain by the souldier. About this time Constantius recovered Gallia from the Goths. Athaulphus for desiring to make peace with Honorius is killed in Spaine by his souldiers: and so was his successor Sugericus, for the same cause. After whom Mallia was elected by the Goths, to break the peace, which the two former kept; but he remembring the miseries, which the Goths formerly suffered for violating the peace, made a firm league with Hono∣rius, gave him choise hostages, and sent him back his sister Placidia, who afterward marryed with Constantius that brave commander, and of him had Valentinian, af∣terward Emperor. In the interim the Vandals and Suevi did continually war with the Goths, to the great advantage of the Romans. But the Burgundians being grie∣vously  oppressed by Uptarus king of the Huns, resolve to serve Christ, and so having received baptism, they fall suddenly upon the Huns, and in one battell kill 30000 of them. Since which time they constantly maintained the Christian re∣ligion. In the East Baraanes the Persian, upon the instigation of his Magi persecuted the Christians, which Isdigerdas tolerated, and because Theodosius would not re∣store those that fled to him, hee is threatned with war: but Ardaburius the Em∣perors Generall defeated the Persian Armies, and slew 10000 of their prime soul∣diers, which they called immortall, 100000 Saracens being suddenly taken with a panic fear, as they were flying from the Romans over Euphrates were drowned.  The news of this defeat was by Palladius in three dayes space brought from Meso∣potamia to Constantinople. About this time Honorius dyed of an Hydropsie at Rome the 30 year of his Empire, and the 40 of his age. He had made Constantius 4393. A. C. 423. his sisters husband Co-Emperor, but he dyed 5 moneths after his inauguration. About these times lived Pelagius the great patron of free-will, Helvidius also, Audaeus and Benosus hereticks. From Atulphus the
Spaniards reckon their kings,  for before him Spain was possessed by Vandals, Alans, and Sueves. The French begin their Chronicles from Faramund their first king, and General of the Francks. Vasconia is so called from the Visigoths which drove out thence the Vandals, A∣lans and Suoves into Spain, and 19 years after they drove the Vandals, thence in∣to Africa, they also overthrew the Alans and Sueves, and reigned there about 386 yeares, untill they were destroyed by the Mores. Innocentius the first drove the Novatians out of Rome. The Britains being forsaken by the Romans, became a prey to the Scots and Picts; from whose oppressions that they might be delivered, they invited to their own destruction the Saxons or Angles out of Germany. The Gaules also shook off the Roman yoak, and called in the Francks, whilest Alari∣cus  was raging in Italy. Palladius by Pope Celestine is sent into Scotland, to convert them from the Pelagian heresie. He was the first Bishop there, before him that Church was governed by Monks. About these times dyed S. Hierome in Bethlem 91 yeares old, and about 11 or 12 years after, S. Augustine in Hippo in the 76 year of his age, the 40 of his Bishoprick. The University of Bononia is insti∣tuted by Theodosius. CHAP. IV. Divers alterations in the Empire under Theodosius, Martianus, Leo and Ze∣no.  2. The Westerne Empire ruined by the Goths, Vandals, Huns, and Heruli. 3. Divers forraigne passages of those times; and of the Church affaires. VPon the death of Honorius, Castinus Generall of the Army, advanceth Iohn the Secretary to the Empire; who sent Embassadours to Theodosius for his favour and approbation. But hee imprisons the Embassadours, and 4395. A. C. 425. sends Ardaburius the Praetor against him, whom Iohn neer Ravenna beset round. Which being known, Theodosius sends Valentinian the sonne of Placidia his Aunt, whom hee had made Caesar to recover the Western Empire. Asper the  sonne of Ardaburius was sent before, whom a shepheard in an unknown habit, con∣ducted through a Lake into Ravenna. Ardaburius is set free, Iohn is subdued, and Castinus banished. So Valentinian by the consent of all Italy is made Emperor. Bonifacius and Aetius by Theodosius are allowed for his Generalls. But these two by their emulations, and Valentinian his negligence ruined all. Spain, Gallia, Bri∣taine, and west Lybia are lost. Aetius instigated the Emperour against Boniface Go∣vernour of Africa, who understanding of the danger he was in, and what was in∣tended against him by Valentinian and Placidia, called in Guntharius and Genseri∣cus kings of the Vandals then in Spain. These with fire and sword wast Africa, and  poyson it with Arlanism. But at last Boniface understanding that Aetius his letters, which he sent him were false concerning the Emperors intentions against him, would fain have thrust the Vandals out of Africa again, but could not, wherefore he comes to Rome, and in a set battell defeats Aetius, but shortly after hee dyed, and left 4402. A. C. 432. Afric to the Vandals, who besieged Hippo, in the 3 month of this siege S. Au∣stin dyed. After this Aetius is reconciled to the Emperours. Numidia is given to the Vandals and a peace concluded with them. Aetius forceth the Burgundians, and Litorius, the Goths then besieging Narbon, to hearken to peace. Theodosius his wife Athenais daughter of Leontius the Athenian Philosopher, was baptised, and  new named Eudoxia. Shee expressed some places of Scripture in Homer's verses, as Proba Falconia did before her in Virgil's. This Eudoxia had a daughter by Theodosius of her own name, who was marryed to Valentinian in Constan∣tinople. Eudoxia the mother went the next yeare to Jerusalem, whence shee brought Peters chaines, in memory of which shee caused the first of August to be kept holy, which before was observed in honour of Augustus his victory over Antonius and Cleopatra. In
the 30 yeare of Theodosius there were earthquakes which lasted many moneths together, overthrowing houses and townes, which pre∣saged great commotions and changes in the State. In these earthquakes a certaine young man was suddenly taken up in the air, and let down again, who told the peo∣ple, that they must all sing: Holy God, Holy and strong, Holy and Immortall, have mercy upon us. Hereupon they all sung Kyrie eleison, and the earthquake ceased. But the Empire began more and more to decline. For Theodosius let loose the rains to his covetous Funuchs. The Goths first defeated Valentinians Army, took Litorius his Generall pri∣soner, and forced the Emperour to sue for peace, and to surrender a part of Gallia. In the interim Gensericus possesseth himselfe of Carthage, the next year he cros∣seth over to Sicily, which he wasteth. Theodosius sent Forces thither, but to little purpose. Shortly after, that scourge of God Attila king of the Huns, wastes Thra∣cia and Illyricum: takes in all Castles, and Cities, except Adrianopolis and He∣raclea. So that Theodosius was fain to hire him to be gone, for 6000 lib. weight of gold, and a yearly tribute. But pretending not long after, that his tribute was not duly paid, he renews the war; and being confederate with Gensericus, he arms the Scythians, Ostrogoths, Sarmatians, Marcomans, Saxons, and divers other na∣tions, making shew that he would drive the Goths out of Gallia, and makes the Goths beleeve, that he was the greatest enemy the Romans had. But Valentinian having discovered his cunning plot, unites himself to all the kings of Gallia, to Theo∣doricus of the Goths, Gundericus of the Burgundions, Merovenus of the Francs, and  Sangibanus king of the Alans; all these under Aetius his Generall, he employeth a∣gainst Atila. In the large fields of Catalaunum or Chaalons the battel was fought, on both sides were slaine 162000, besides 90000 of the Gepidae and Francs, whch before the great battell had killed each other in the night time. The Francs held with the Romans, the Gepidae with the Huns. Theodoricus king of the Goths, or of Spaine was killed by a fall from his horse, as hee was riding about his souldiers, animating them to fight. Attila after the battell durst not ven∣ture out of his Camp. It's thonght hee had in his Army 500 thousand men. Theodosius the second being 50 yeares old, dyed of a bruise which hee had by a 4420. A. C. 450. fall from his horse, he reigned 42 yeares after his father. In his time lived Pope Leo a great Champion against Eutyches Archimandrita or Abbot of Constanti∣nople, who held but one nature in Christ. Him Flavianus the Bishop excommu∣nicated, Eutyches appeares to Leo, who condemned his Colleague of temerity: and the heretick by the meanes of Chrysaphius the Eunuch got a Councell to be held at Ephesus, in which Dioscorus of Alexandria guarded by souldiers was presi∣dent. Here Flavianus was condemned, and Eutyches absolved. The Bishops then present out of fear were fain to subscribe to Dioscorus. Flavianus was kickt out of the Councell by Dioscorus, and dyed three days after. It's said that Dioscorus troad on him after he was dead. This second Councell of Ephesus was called , or the  theevish Synod. After this Domnus of Antioch repenting that hee had voted with that impious Synod, incensed the Emperour against Dioscorus, to appease whose an∣ger Chrysaphius made Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople, and removed Pulcheria from the Court, upon false surmises. But Theodosius upon better information ba∣nisheth the Eunuch, recals his sister to the Court againe, and reproves his wife, who pretending a vow went to Jerusalem. But the death of Theodosius, and wars of Attalus hindred the full decision of this heresie till the third yeare of Martian. Before this, in the 24 yeare of Theodosius the second, the first Councell of Ephe∣sus  was held against Nestorius the Syrian Bishop of Constantinople, who held there were two persons in Christ. Against him Cyrill of Alexandria wrote, whose doctrine was received by the Church of Constantinople. Nestorius is banished be∣yound Thebes in Egypt, where he dyed, his tongue being eat out with worms: this Ecclesiasticall broil raised by Nestorius was presaged by the murther done in the Church of Constantinople. Not long before; some slaves being threatned by their Masters, took sanctuary in the Church, from whence
they were commanded to  depart, but they having killed a Priest, and one more that resisted them, at last mur∣thered one another. And not only was the Church infested with Nestorians and Eutychians, but with Pelagians also and Novatians, against whom divers Councels were assembled; and the Novatians by force of armes were forbid the exercise of Religion. The Jewes about this time were driven out of Alexandria, and those of Crete being deluded by a false Moss, who perswaded many of them to leape into the Sea, promising he would divide it for them, as the true Moses once did, were drowned, and the rest being wiser were converted. The Goths being gone, Attila layeth siege to Aquileja, which hee took and o∣verthrew, with Millan, Ticinum, and Vincentia: the Veneti or Heneti, a people  of Paphlagonia, seated neer the Hadriatic, for fear of Attila fled into those lit∣tle Islands of the Sea, and laid the foundation of Venice. Pope Leo so pacified 4424. A. C. 454. Attila, that he went not further, but returned with his army into Gallia, where hee was defeated by Thursimundus, and so retreated into Scythia, where he dyed in his marriage bed: for though he had many wives, yet he would marry with Hil∣dico a young maid and daughter of the King of Bactria, that night being infla∣med with wine and Venus, he surrendred his bloudy soul, being choaked with bloud in his sleep which gushed out of his mouth in great aboundance. Not long after Valentinian was murthered by Maximus who was then a great man at Rome, and whose wife Valentinian had abused by sending her husbands ring to her which he in sport pulled off from his finger, she thinking it had been her husbands pleasure to repair to the Court, went, where she was ravished by the Prince. To be revenged of this wrong, Maximus aleniates Valentinians affection from Aetius, as if hee aimed at the Empire. Whereupon Aetius who had done him so much good service, is by his command put to death; Valentinian (as one told him) had done better to have cut off his own right hand. Maximus causeth two of Aetius his 4425. A. C. 455. souldiers to kill him, which they did, and thus was his magick, lusts, and murther punished in Campus Martius the 30 year of his Empire. About this time the Sax∣ons being called by the Britaines against the Scots, drove those they should have aided into Wales. The Acephali were the Eutychian spaune, who held that Christ was to be worshipped but in one nature, which was made up of the divinity and hu∣manity. Martianus succeeded to Theedosius, he was a Thracian by birth, and the Gene∣rall of Theodosius his Army in Africa against Gensericus, and in Syria against the Persians. Pulcheria being now a Virgin of 50 years, advanced him to the Em∣pire, and marryed with him conditionally, that he should make no use of her bed, for she meant to dye a Virgin. He had been taken heretofore a prisoner in Africa by Gensericus, to whom hee swore that if ever he were Emperor, he would hold perpetuall peace with the Vandals. For when he was sleeping among the rest of the captives in the field, Gensericus observed how an Eagle spread her wings o∣ver  his face to keep him from the Sun, which he tooke as a presage of his fu∣ture Empire. Therefore dismissed him, on the condition above said; which he observed, holding it unlawfull for a publick person to breake the Oath he made when he was a private man. That he might put an end to the quarrels of the Ma∣cedonians, Arians, Nestorians, and Eutychians, which had now troubled the world 150 years, he cals a generall Councell at Chalcedon, in which he was present with 600 and 30 Bishops. Here Dioscorus of Alexandria was condemned; and it was de∣termined, that in Christ remained the two natures without confusion, mutation, division or separation, united in one person. The quarrell was no sooner ended, but upstarts another between the two Patri∣archs of Rome and Constantinople about the primacy; Leo challenging the head∣ship  over all Churches. The Councell gave to Constantinople an equall share with Rome. In the mean while Attila was wasting all the Westerne Empire. Earthquakes every where, and flashes of lightning in the air. Leo disliked the definition of the Councell, and impugned it with publick and private Epistles written to the Churches. Valentinian and Aetius being killed, the Barbarians without feare broke in on all sides upon the Empire. The Francs were now
sub∣ject  to Merovius, after Feramundus and Clagio; they took possession of Paris, and the Isle of France. The Visigoths under Theodoricus were seated in Spain, whence they expulsed the Suevi. At Rome Maximus marryed with Eudoxia the daughter of Theodosius, and wife of Valentinian. Possessing both wife and Empire together by force of armes. But when foolishly hee had discovered to the Emperesse, that hee was the cause of Valentinians death; shee desiring to bee revenged, invited Gensericus out of Africa by private letters. Gensericus glad of this occasion, hastens to Rome with a great Fleet. Maximus being unprovided, thought to escape by flight, but his own souldiers stoned him to death. The Prin∣ces flye away, the City is delivered to Gensericus, which the souldiers for 14 dayes together spoil and plunder, carrying away the rich statues and ornaments thereof, with the plate which Titus brought from Jerusalem; this plate Bellisarius after∣ward, having recovered Africa, sent to Constantinople, and by Iustinian it was remitted to Jerusalem: the City also in many places was fired; but consecrated places upon the intreaty of Leo were spared, much of the spoil was cast away by shipwrack, as they returned home. The tyrant carryed with him to Africa Eudoxia with her two daughters, which shee bare to Valentinian, Placidia, and Galla, Eudocia, with many more Captives. Hee marryed Eudocia to his sonne Hunnericus; Placidia to Olybrius a Roman Senator. Others write that Gensericus to appease Martianus who was  moved for the losse Rome had suffered sent, to him Placidia with her mother; but before they came Martian was dead, and so Leo had them. Gallia now is di∣vided among the Burgundians, Goths, and Francks. But on a sudden Avitus whom Maximus had made his Generall invaded the Empire of France, which he was forced to lay down again, and to accept of the Bishopwrick of Placentia. But thinking himself not safe there, returned into Gallia where he dyed of griefe. Him shortly after followed Martianus who dyed the 7 year of his Empire. He was a 4426. A. C. 456 peaceable and religious Prince. Leo succeeded to Martianus, hee was a Thracian, and had beene a Tribune of the souldiers, he was the first Emperor that was crowned by a Patriarch. Anato∣lius  was the Bishops name that crowned him. Hee maintained the Chalcedon Faith; and punished the Alexandrians for murthering Proterius their Bishop. He made Majorinus Generall of his Forces, and sent him to govern the West, which he did for 4 years, at last was killed by Ricimerus, whom hee had invited with his Army to expell the Alans out of Gallia. Leo made a league with the O∣strogoths, who drove Hernacus the sonne of Attila into Scythia, and the Sueves out of Spaine. Ardaricus King of the Gepidae, a people among the Getae, the first who freed himselfe from the slavery of Attalus his sonnes, received Dacia from Leo. The Goths had Pannonia, a part of the Alans had the lower Maesia. After Majoranus, Severus reigned 3 yeares, under him Ricimer defeated the A∣lans, 4431. A. C. 461. breaking in upon Italy, and killed Beurgus their King. By a Candle left burning in the Forum carelessely, Constantinople took fire, which could not be quenched in 4 dayes. Antioch, Gallia, and others parts were shaken with Earth∣quakes, which occasioned Mamertus Bishop of Vienna to institute larger Litanies, which afterward were wont to be sung still the sixt week after Easter. Severus being killed by Ricimer the Goth Anthemius is sent to Italy by Leo, upon the intreaty of the Romans, his daughter Ricemer marryed, and so was quiet a while. 4445. A. C. 465. In the mean time Gensericus is defeated in a Sea fight. Leo's Fleet was 1000 and 100 ships; but shortly after, Basiliscus the brother of Verina Augusta, (whom Leo upon the recommendation of his two great Generalls Aspar and Ardabutius  both Arians, had made Admirall) treacherously lost this Fleet to the Vandals, Basiliscus being an Eutychian, and willing to please his two Patrons, that the Arian heresie might flourish. Ricemer also the Arian besiegeth his Father in law Anthemius in Rome, which hee took, and then murthered him, having reigned 5 yeares; but hee shortly after dyed, to whom succeeded Anicius Olybrius, who 4452. A. C. 472. dyed 4 months after. Then did Leo upon the importunity of Aspar, create his sonne Caesar, at which the peope repined, that an Arian should reign over
them.  but not long after Leo finding Aspars treachery, commanded both him and his two sons to be slain and bequeathed by will, the Empire to his Grandchilde by Ariadna his daughter. To Olybrius succeeded Glycerius at Ravenna; he bribed the Goths to keep out of Italy, and so did Leo to keep them off from Greece. Who shortly after dyed of a loosenesse, having reigned 17 yeares. Hee named Iulius Nepos for the western Empire, who comming to Italy by Sea, removed Glycerius after he had reigned 5 yeares, and made him a Bishop in Dalmatia. In Leo's time Childericus King of the Francs, was banished by the people (for his insolency) into Thuringia, and by them Aegidius a Roman Commander is chosen: but 8 years after Childe∣ricus  returnes, and is received again, whose reign afterward was more moderate. The name of France was given to all that part which Merovnus held. About this time dyed Pope Leo, to whom succeeded Hilaricus. And at Constantinople to Genandius succeeded Acacius. Studius a Consular man set up an order of watch∣ing Monkes who were to sing divine Service, and to watch by turnes night and day: in Constantinople. There a certain painter represented Christ in the form of Iupiter, whereupon his hand withered. Vesuvius brake out into great flames, with the ashes whereof many countreys were covered: in memory of which, an annuall solemnity was ordained to bee kept at Constantinople. Euty∣ches and Dioscorus refusing to stand to the decrees of the Councell of Chalcedon,  divided themselves into divers sects; the two chiefe were the Iacobites, so called from Iacob the Syrian, and the Haesitantes or Diacrinomeni, which doubted whether or not they should receive the said Synod. The Rogation solemnity was then instituted by Mamercus Bishop of Vienna: In which the time was spent in fasting, praying, singing, and weeping, it was occasioned by the Earthquakes of Vienna, and the irruption of Wolves and other wild Beasts into the City, which destoyed many people: then did Rabbi Ionathan perfect the Thalmud of Jerusalem. Leo's Nephew being dead in his infancy, deformed Zeno Leo's son in law, a Cilician of obscure parentage, and father to the foresaid Infant, succeeds in the  Eastern Empire, and Nepos in the Western, whom Orestes drove into Dalma∣tia, as Nepos had done Glycerius before. Nepos his sonne called Momyllus, is made Augustus, and for his small stature is named Augustulus. But hee shortly after is banished by Odoacer King of the Heruli, who being called in by the friends of Nepos, overrun all Italy, slew Orestes at Placentia, and took Rome; which is now the 4 time it is taken. 1. By the Gaules. 2. By the Goths in the time of Hono∣rius. 3. By the Vandals in Martians time. 4. Now by the Heruli. And 5. it was afterward taken by Attila. In the reigne of Iustinian, as wee shall see, Odoacer named himselfe King of Italy, abolished the Consular dignity, transferred the seat of his Kingdome to Ravenna, and so that glorious Em∣pire  which began in Augustus ended in Augustulus, 522 years since Augustus Caesar. In the East Basiliscus brother to Verina the Emperesse, made war against Zeno, A. C. 476▪ shee animating her brother against her son in law, Zeno being a coward, fled with his wife Ariadne to Isauri neer mount Taurus in Cilicia, where hee was born; there he lived one year and 8 moneths. In the meane time Basiliscus as bad as Zeno, advanced the Eutychian heresie, and forced Acacius to side with him a∣gainst the Councell of Chalcedon. But within two yeares his Army under Har∣matus fell off to Zeno, against whom they were sent, and brought him back to Constantinople, who sent away Basiliscus with his wife and children to a Castle  in Cappadocia, where they perished with famine. In Basiliscus his time, the Li∣brary of Byzantium took fire, in which 120000 bookes were burned. Zeno be∣ing nothing bettered by these troubles, names for Caesar Basiliscus sonne to Har∣matus the traitor; hee first kills Hermatus the father, not daring to trust him who betrayed his Master, then after hee had named his sonne Caesar, according to his promise, hee makes him a Clergy man. Zeno's sonne dyed, before hee attained the Empire. And he himself being one day dead drunk
fell down speechlesse, his  wife Ariadne buryeth him before he was quite dead, no man offering to help him, though he groned lamentably, and so dyed having reigned 17 years. 532 yeares after Iul. Caesars death. Two years before Zeno dyed, Theodoricus the sonne of Amalus King of the Ostrogoths, having overrun Thracia and Maesia, threatens Constantinople. Zeno a better flatterer then a souldier, invites his enemy into the City, made him Consul, and bestowed divers honours on him; and at last perswaded him to goe against Odoacer in Italy. Theodoricus an active Prince was easily perswa∣ded to this, being troubled that Italy the mistresse of the World should bee subject to the obscure Nation of the Heruli, and finding that Odoacer having subdued Phaebas Prince of the Rugi upon the Baltick sea (whose seats were now possessed by the Longobarbs) was secure at this time; hastens into Italy, and defeates him at the bridge Sotius, then gives him a second overthrow neer Verona, whence he was called Veronensis. In the third encounter hee drives 4460. A. C. 490. him within Ravenna, who having made a sally upon Theodoricus in the night, was beat back again; a part of the Army was left to besiege the towne, with the rest Theodoricus marcheth about Italy, makes peace with Hunericus King of the Vandals in Africa, and frees Sicily from their oppression. This Hu∣nericus worse then Gensericus his father, upon the instigation of the Arians, banished and slew 400000 Catholicks. Hee cut out some of the Preachers  tongues: and at last hee fell so madde that hee tore and bit his owne flesh, so that hee dyed miserably, his body being putrefied, and eat up with ver∣mine the 8 yeare of his reigne. Odoacer after hee had beene besieged three yeares in Ravenna, was slaine by Theodoricus, who having recovered Italy, recommended the care of Rome to the Senat, and made Ravenna the seat of his Kingdome. But being an Arian hee imprisoned Pope Iohn, till hee dyed there, for not permitting the Arians to have Churches. Hee imprisoned at Ticinum two Senators, Symmachus and his sonne in law Boetius; then seised upon their estates, and slew them. Not long after, at supper, as hee was looking on the head of a fish; hee thought hee saw Symmachus with fiery eyes gaping on him, which put him into such a shaking, that he was car∣ryed away to his bed and dyed. This Symmachus was not hee that in the time of Theodosius wrote against the Christians. About Zeno's time the South-Saxons erected their Kingdome in England 32 yeares after their arrivall. The Jewes at Tiberias by the help of Rabbi Ben Aser, and R. Ben. Nepthali found out those Hebrew pricks which we use at this day in stead of vowels and accents, which are read in some words otherwayes by the Eastern Jewes about Babylon, then by the Western. Enricus King of Spain was the first there, that gave lawes to the Goths in writing. Pope Gelasius compiled the Canon of the Masse, and the Collects or short Church-prayers. Clodovens the first Christian King of France is baptized by Remigius Archbishop of Rhemes, who gave him the name of Ludovicus. The holy Oil was then (if we may be∣leeve it) brought by a Dove from Heaven, with which he was, and his successours are at this day anointed. CHAP. V. The Roman affaires under Anastasius, Justinus and Justinian. 2. Of the Persians, Goths, and other barbarous Nations of those times. 3. The affaires  of the Church. ZEno being starved in his tombe, for want of food eat up his own flesh, A∣riadna his wife not suffering any to help him; advanceth to the Empire Anastasius, with whom 'tis thought shee was too familiar in her former 4461. A. C. 491. husbands time; therefore now makes hast to marry him. Hee was before but a Court Scribe or Secretary, called Silentiarius, for Secretaries should be
silent, he  was nick named Dicorus because the apple of his eyes were of two colours. Euphe∣mius Patriarch of Constantinople, refused to crown him, till he had subscribed to the councell of Chalcedon: which in policy he did, shewing great justice in the beginning of his reign; in abrogating those acts by which taxes were raised by un∣lawfull wayes, as of publick stewes, and such like; he banished all informers from the city; and would suffer no offices to bee bought and sold. He banished Longinus, Zeno's brother, for aspiring to the Empire, at last slew him for arm∣ing the Isauri against him. Hee forced the Arabians who had overrun Meso∣potamia and Palestina, to make peace with him. He took Amida from Cabades the Persian King. Whom his subjects imprisoned for making it lawfull that  wives should be common. But his wife got him to be dismissed by prostituting her body to the Goal Keeper. He shortly after recovered his power, and became a good friend to the Christians. But killed his brother who had reigned 2 years. Anastasius being setled in the Empire, began to shew himselfe in his true colours being disguised before. He demands back his hand-writing, by which hee had promised never to molest the Orthodox professours. He banisheth Euphemius, and sets up Macedonius in his place, from whom violently hee extorted his hand∣writing, and then banished him, advancing Timotheus his flatterer, and Pander. Hee banished also the chief of the Orthodox Clergy. He built a wall 280 fur∣longs distant from Constantinople, to keep off the barbarous incursions of the In∣habitants  about Pontus, Colchis and Maeotis. But he could not keep out Vitalianus the Thracian with his Mysians and Scythians from plundering the countrey all a∣bout Byzantium; who also beset the City with a Fleet of Ships. But Anastasius sent Martinus captain of his guard with an army against him, and by burning glasses, which Proclus the Mathematician had made, set all the enemies ships on fire: yet he was fain to begge for peace, which was granted conditionally, that the Orthodox Bishops which Anastasius banished, be recalled home; and that a Synod bee cal∣led. Which was assented to, and Vitalianus is made muster master of Thracia, and rewarded with a great summe of gold. Pope Hormisdas sent to Anastasius about this Synod, but upon some discontents, or miscarriage of the Legats, they  were sent privately away, with command not to return any more into Greece. So little hope there was of a Synod. Flavianus Bishop of Antioch was assaulted by the Eutychian Monks, because he would not abjure the Councell of Chalcedon, but the townsmen fell upon the Monks, killed many of them, and drove many into the ri∣ver Orontes, where they were drowned. Hereupon Flavianus is banished againe, and the Eutychian Severus set in his chair, who being incensed against the Monks of Syria for aiding Flavianus, he slew 300 of them, and would not suffer them to be buryed. Anastasius adding to the hymne of the Trinity these words, who was cru∣cified for us; as if he meant, that the deity was crucified, occasioned such a tumult in the people, that he could scarse appease them, though he layed down his crown be∣fore them. In the second year of Anastasius, Odoacer was killed by Theodoricus, who was 4463. A. C. 493. King of Italy 33 yeares; he repaired the decayes of Rome, and was bountifull to the people. Clodoveus then King of France, partly by the instigation of his wife, a Burgundian, and partly because of his vow which he made, became a Chri∣stian, for he vowed so to be, if he obtained the victory over the Alemans, which hee had. He overcame also Gundebaldus of Burgundy, and Theodoricus the Goth King of Aquitania, so having inlarged the bounds of France, he set up his Court at Paris, he was angry with Anastasius for diverting the Bulgarians, (a people unheard of till now) from Illyricum, and Thracia, where they were seating them∣selves,  and sent them into the Western Provinces. These Theodoricus overthrew, and added Syrmium with Pannonia to his Dominion. Anastasius made Clodo∣veus a Patrician, and named him Augustus, whence great jealousies arose between Clodoveus and Theodoricus, and then wars in which 30000 Francks were killed by the Goths. Pope Anastasius being dead, a bloudy quarrell arose at Rome, about the election of a new Pope; some stood for Symmachus; some for Lau∣rentius. The quarrell lasted 3 yeares, till Thedoricus ended it, who assigned the
honour to Symmachus that was first nominated. About this time the Catholicks in Africa were set at liberty by Gundamundus the Vandall, but they were banished afterward by Thrasamundus. One Olympius as he was blaspheming the Trinity, was visibly burned by a fire dart from heaven. Theodoricus the Arian killed one Diaco∣nus whom hee loved well, because he became an Arian for the Kings sake, saying: He that will not be faithfull to God, will never be faithfull to the King: for he hated those that changed their religion. Severus the Eutychian Bishop of Antioch would have converted Alamundarus the Saracen king to Eutychianism. The King fained himself to be sad for the death of Michael the Archangel: the Bishops told him an Angel could not dye, to whom he replyed: How then could Christ dye, if 4488. A. C. 518. he was only God? and so stopped the Eutychians mouths. Anastasius having lived 88 yeares, and reigned 27. was struck dead with thunder. In his time the Acephali or headlesse hereticks, having no Bishops to patronise them, divided themselves into many sects: to wit, Trithaits, Agonets, Theopa∣schites, Jacobites, Armenians, &c. A people of Persia called Immeres, who had been Jews, after Salomon had visited their Queen, but turned again to Gentilism, sent to Anastasius for a Bishop, and so embraced Christianity. Alamundarus also the Saracen Prince was baptized. The Babylonian Thalmud was now finished by the Rabbies, about 100 yeares after the Thalmud of Jerusalem, and 29. years af∣ter, the invention of the Hebrew pricks. The feast of Michael the Archangel is instituted. Anastasius dreamed before he dyed that 14 years of his life should be cut off, for his heresie; he was forewarned also that he should dye by thunder. His statues and his wifes are dragged through the streets of Byzantium by the inraged people. Iustinus a Thracian born, of a Sow-herd became Emperor, by bribing the soul∣diers. For Amantius the Eunuch and great Chamberlain to Anastasius, had given to Iustinus a large donative to be distributed among these souldiers, who did vote for his friend Theocritus whom he meant to make Emperour, Iustinus preferred himselfe, and so got the souldiers to vote for him. Amantius being thus delu∣ded conspired with Andrew the Chamberlain, and Theocritus against Iustinus, but the plot being discovered, they were all three slain. Amantius had dreamed a little before this, that he was devoured by a great hogge. Iustin to shew his zeale 4889. A. C. 519. to the Councell of Chalcedon, called his wife Dupicina by the name of Euphe∣mia the martyr, in whose church that Councell was held. He recall'd the Catho∣licks from banishment, exiled the Arians and Eutychians, thrust Severus from his Bishoprick of Antioch, and condemned him to lose his blasphemous tongue. Vita∣lianus muster-master under Anastasius, and very intimate with Iustin was (as its thought) by his command murthered in the palace. In whose place Iustinian his si∣sters son was chosen. Cabades the Persian king having wars with Iustin, he hired for gold Zeliobes King of the Huns, to assist him. Who being invited by the Persian for a greater summe forsook Iustin, and assisted the Persian. Iustin by his letters acquainted Ca∣bades how this dishonest King had served him, who could not deny, but hee had received the money, whereat Cabades being incensed slew him, and many more of the Huns with him, which had not escaped by flight; (there were 20000 of them) and peace was made with Iustin for his sincerity, which lasted not long: for Tsathius King of the Lazors or Colchi revolting from the Persian, came to Iu∣stin, receives the Christian religion and is baptized, therefore hee is called King by Iustin, and is sent back to Colchis, which then was subject to the Persian. This caused a quarrell; the Colchi and Huns join with Iustin against the Persians. But Cabades being aged and sickly, desired his sonne Cosroes might bee adopted by Iu∣stin;  which had beene done, but that he was by Proclus his Treasurer disswaded, as being dangerous both to himselfe, and to Iustinian. Upon this the quarrell grew greater; and now not only is Cabades Iustins enemy, for advancing Tsathius, but Theodoricus Veronensis also, for persecuting the Arians. Pope Iohn the first successour to Hormisdas with Boetius and Symmachus, came to intreat Iustin, that hee would not bee too rigid against the Arians, lest Theodoricus should use the same rigour in his Dominions against the Catholicks. These Embassadours were honourably entertained, and great joy there was to see a Pope in
Constantinople,  who because he was above the Patriarch, Iustin would bee crowned by him; hee was the first Emperour that was crowned by the Pope; Theodoricus hearing of this was inraged, thinking these Embassadours had plotted with Iustin, against him, and his Western Dominion, therefore he starved Iohn in pri∣son, and slew the other two (as was said) with their followers; he dyed shortly after 4496. A. C. 520. himself. His daughter Amalasunta succeeded with her young sonne Athalaricus, they reign∣ed together 8 yeares, and restored to the Francs those parts of Gallia, which the Grand father had taken. After the death of Alaricus, Amalasunta made Theo∣datus her cousin german Colleague with her in the kingdome, whom shee used to reprove freely for his loose manners. Shee also put to death three prime men of the Goths, for telling young Alaricus, that it stood not with the greatnesse of a Prince to bee under the mothers ferula. But shee for her good will towards her sonne and cousin, lost her life; for by command of Theodatus shee was strangled in a bath. But Eudoxia daughter to Valentinian the third so instructed her sonne Childericus, that hee having obtained the kingdom of the Vandals in Africa, by the death of Tharsimund, broke the Oath which his Father made him sweare, to persecute the catholicks, and hearkening to his mother, called home all the ba∣nished Bishops. Iustin in the mean time having reigned 9 yeares, and lived 77 dy∣ed of grief, for the overthrow of Antiochia by Earthquake, in which Euphrasius  the Bishop, with millions of people perished, foure moneths before his death hee nominated his sisters sonne, Iustinian Emperour. In his time the Manichees were utterly destroyed by King Cabades in Persia, because they poysoned his son Pha∣tuarsas with their heresies, and were tampering with him, to bring innovations in∣to the kingdom. Clodovejus four sonnes divided the kingdom amongst them, and to entertain peace with Alamaricus the son of Alarinus they marry their sister Clotilda to him. Alaricus 2 King of Spain, and Aquitain marryed with Amalasintha daughter to Theodoricus King of Italy. Shee was learned in the Greeke and Latin tongues, besides divers vulgar languages; whereas Iustin the Emperour could neither write nor read. Alamaricus marryed with Tottilla the daughter of king Clodovejus, whom hee used roughly for holding firm to the Catholick Religion, which caused a warre between Childebertus (who succeeded Clodoveus) and Al∣maricus, who here lost his life. S. Benedict instituted the order of the Benedictin monkes. Slavi a people of Scythia invaded Istria and the borders of Venetia; these in the time of Mauritius transplanted themselves into Bohemia and Polonia. The Histrians upon the comming of these Slavónians removed to the Isle Ca∣praria or Aegilon in the Tuscan Sea, abounding in Goates; here they built Justi∣nopolis. The Longobards invade Pannonia, whence they drive out the Huns and Ostrogoths. Theodoricus restores Spain and Aquitania to his Nephew Amalari∣cus. About this time lived S. Brigid that famous Scots Lady, who was very intimate  with S. Patric. Iustinian succeeded, a Catholick Prince, learned and fortunate, by reason of his 4497. A. C. 527. good Commanders, but covetous and wretched, extorting great summes from the people, which he spent on his buildings and souldiers. He so broke the Persian with that war which Iustin began that he forced Cosroes the son of Cabades to sue for peace. He slew also the rebellious Jews, hee caused Tribonianus and other Law∣yers to abbreviate and reduce into method, the old lawes confused and dispersed in many volumes. Whence we have the Codex, the Digests and Institutions. The rest of Antioch is overthrown with a new earthquake, and in a dangerous sedition at Constantinople above 30000 were slaine. For Hypatius Pompejus and Probus  cousin germans, and the Nephews of Anasiasius, being armed by the people who were weary of Iustinian's taxes, invaded the Empire, first pillaging for five dayes together, all that were loyall to Iustinian. But Hippatius and Pompejus were both slain, as they were offering to seise upon the Palace, by Belisarius who being be∣fore in some disgrace, did now by this fact reingratiate himselfe with the Em∣perour. In Afric Gilimer having killed Hildericus the
sonne of Hunericus, and Eudoxa Valentinians daughter, took the kingdome of the Vandals by force. Iustinian who interceded for the life of Hildericus, finding his request slighted, and Hil∣dericus murthered in the prison, sent Belisarius with an Army, who drove Gilimer into Numidia, took Carthage, which had been 95 yeares out of the Romans possession, since Gensericus tooke it. Gilimer being besieged and forced with fa∣mine, was taken and carryed in silver fetters by Belisarius to Iustinian, who as he was led in triumph cryed out Vanity of vanities, and all is vanity. Thus was the king∣dome of the Vandals extinguished in Africa, which had continued since their first comming thither 108 yeares. Iustinian divided Afric into seven Provinces, three Consular, and four Praetorian: that is, three were appointed by the Consuls and peo∣ple,  and foure by the Emperour, then Belisarius being made Consul is sent into Sicily to revenge the murther of the Queen Amalasventa, who in prison implored the Emperours help. Belisarius having seised upon Sicily, Theodatus sends Pope Agape∣tus to Constantinople to make his peace with the Emperour. Agapetus condem∣ned Anthimus the Patriarch of heresie, and having got Menna to succeed him, dy∣ed shortly after at Byzantium, to whom by the appointment of Theodatus Silve∣rius succeeds. Belisarius takes Naples, upon which Theodatus is slain at Ravenna by his souldiers for his carelesnesse, and so hee was punished for the murther of Amalasventa his cousin german. Vitiges is made King by the Goths. Belisa∣rius was invited to Rome by the citizens, who takes it and repaires the walls;  the Italians fall off every day to Belisarius; Vitiges joining with the Francs, raiseth an Army of 150000 men, layeth siege to Rome, Belisarius stoutly defends it, so that 30000 Goths were at this siege destroyed in one day. The siege lasted a∣bove a year, in which time there were 69 skirmishes, and the Goths at last driven from the siege. Pope Silverius being accused of treachery is by Iustinian's com∣mand banished into Pontia an Island in the Tyrrhen Sea, called Porce. In whose place Belisarius sets up Vigilius, and then raiseth the siege before Ariminum. But the Goths assisted by the Burgundians, take Millan upon surrender, and put all to the sword; it's thought at least 300000. of all sorts, the women were bestowed on the Burgundians. 50000 dyed of the plague at Picenum, and so great was the famine, that mothers eat their children. This famine drove the Francs back again into Gallia; wherefore Vitiges being in great straights, solicited Cosroes the Per∣sian to make warre upon the Emperour, who otherwayes was like to bring all his Forces into Italy. But in the meane while Belisarius tooke Ravenna, Vitiges submits to him; the Goths proffered to Belisarius the Empire of Italy, which he refused, and retorning home upon Iustinians command, carryed with him Vitiges. In whose stead the Goths beyond Padua set up Theudibaldus, who having scarse reigned a year, was killed. Araricus succeeded, who was slain shortly after; then To∣tilas was made King. He thrusts the Romans out of Ravenna, and overthrowes them in a pitcht battell. Belisarius upon his returne is imployed in Syria and Persia against Cosroes, at 4511. A. C. 541. which time the plague so rageth at Constantinople, that there dyed 10000 a day. Cosroes burnes Seleucia and divers other cities. In Italy Neapolis is reco∣covered by the diligence of the Goths. The Garrison is friendly dismissed, and the Inhabitants almost starved, are kindly used. So strict was the Discipline of the Army, that Totilas executed a kinsman of his for lying with a maid, whose whole estate he bestowed on her. Italy being in danger to be lost again. Belisarius is cal∣led back from Persia, and sent to Italy, where hee could doe but little good, be∣cause the old souldiers were either al gone, or else they were grown stubborn. There∣fore Totilas takes Rome again, being betrayed, and almost all starved, and over∣throwes some parts of the walls, but abstained from slaughter. In England Occa King of Cantium having invited the Saxons against Arthur King of the Britaines, was disappointed; for they were not permitted to land, wherefore they take pay under the French King. Serditius King of the South. Saxons, seiseth on the Isle of Wight, which he bestowed upon Stuffa and Whitgar, who destroyed the old Britains. Whitgar called the Castle there Whitgarsburg, now briefly Garesburg. Belisarius returnes again into Italy, takes Tarentum,
Spoletum, and Rome,  which hee fortysieth; but the Persian warre being renewed by Cosroes, hee was a∣gaine commanded thither. Whose departure gave occasion to Totilas to over∣runne againe all Italy: hee obtaines also Rome by the treason of the Isauri; which now hee fenceth for himselfe. Not long before this, the Danes being driven out of France, fell upon Frisia. The Lombarbs came out of their countreys be∣fore this, Sujon being then king of the Danes, they under their Captain Alboi∣nus, on the borders of Pannonia overcame Cunimundus King of the Gepidae, to whom Syrmium and much of Dalmatia was subject. Shortly after Narses whom Iustinian sent to Italy in stead of Belisarius sends for these who did him good service in subduing the Goths: in a short while after Totilas in Tuscia was over∣thrown 4522. A. C. 552. and killed. So Rome and Italy became subject again to Iustinian, from whence the remainder of the Goths were quite expulsed, who chose Tejas for their King. He having raigned one year, was in a battell overthrown at Cumae, and slaine. The 22 year of the Gothic war. Aligernus Captain of the Cumaean Garri∣son, yeelded himselfe to Narses. Shortly after the Francs and Alemans, as they entered into Italy, and fell to plundering, were set upon, stript of all their booty, and of 30000 Scairs 5000 returned home, the rest being consumed by the sword and the plague. So Italy being quieted, and Cosroes forced by many losses to sue for peace, both Rome and Constantinople were shaken with earthquakes, upon which follows the plague, which swept away multitudes of people: Iustinian  laying aside his Crown, bestowed the money on the poore, which was wont to be imployed on sports and playes. He made a law against Sodomites, punishing them with the losse of their genitals, and sacriligious persons with the losse of their hands. Belisarius though now aged, yet was imployed against the Huns, who had broke in upon Chersonesus and Greece, these also he overthrew, and cleared the Em∣pire of them. But after all his good services, upon suspicion of treason hee was imprisoned, some say hee was forced to begge for almes; but hee being found in∣nocent, was restored to his wealth and honours, and two yeares after dyed in peace. Iustinian also dyed the same yeare, having reigned 38 yeares and 7 months. In his time the fifth generall Councell was called at Constantinople; in which Theodo∣rus. 4535. A. C. 565. Bishop of Mapsvesta in Cilicia, Theodoritus Bishop of Cyprus, and Ibas Bi∣shop of Edessa were condemned, which had moved many dangerous disputations savoring of Nestorianism; Origen was also condemned, though Vigilius the Pope would not be present or give his assent, for which cause hee was banished, but re∣called by Narses the Evnuch, and in his return dyed of the stone in Sicily. In this Councell also were condemned the two Originists, Didymus and Euagrius, for teaching that the soules were extant before the bodies, that the Divels should bee saved, and that the paines of hell were not eternall. Iustinian occasioned much barbarousnesse and ignorance in his time, by converting the salaries allowed  for maintenance of schooles and learning, to his owne use; he spent vast summes in building: the chiefest whereof was the Temple of S. Sophia, dedicated to the eternall wisdome of the Father. Hee held before hee dyed, that Christs body was immortall and incapable of suffering from the time of his birth: which opinion he forced upon all men, and because Eutychius the Patriarch of Constantinople would not give his assent to it, hee was banished, and Iohannes Scholasticus substi∣tuted in his place. In his time David an Indian king, upon a victory hee had over the Homerits a people of Ethiopia, became a Christian, and had a Bishop with some Monkes sent into his country, two of these Monkes brought home with them Silk-wormes, which were before unknown to the Romans, and so they learn∣ed to make silk stuffes, which they were wont to buy ready made, hitherto. As Iustinus had commanded Christs Nativity to bee kept, so did Iustinian festum oc∣cursus Simeonis , the purification of Mary, and afterward Mauritius her sleep or death. Then did the Avares a people of the Huns obtain from Iustinian a place in Pannonia to inhabit, upon the removing of the Longobards from thence into Ita∣ly. Gethes King of the Heruli, Gorda King of the Huns, Abasgi and divers other people upon Tanais become Christians. The Sarmatians and their new King Iulian
were destroyed. Toletum is taken by the Francs, who plunder the Churches thereof. The hereticks called Agnoetae, held that Christ knew not the day of judgement. Pope Agapetus for calling Iustinian Diocletian, in that hee became an Eutychian, was smitten on the face by a courtier; some thinke Iustinian dyed madde. Narses of the booties which hee tooke from the Goths, built a Temple at Venice to Theodoricus the Martyr, where now is the Church of S. Mark. Ruper∣tus Bishop of the Francs converted the Boii or Bavarians to Christ. The last of the Consuls was Basilius, in whom ended that honorable Office. Childebertus & his bro∣ther Clotharius, takes divers towns in Spain, and bring away with them the coat of Vincentius, the martyr, to whom they build a church in the Suburbs, now called S.  Germans. CHAP. VI. 1. Of Justin, Tiberius, and Mauritius. 2. Of the Persians, Goths, Longobards, Suevi, Avares, and others of these times. 3. The affaires of the Church then. IUstinus the second a Thracian born, and Nephew to Iustinian by his daughter,  succeeded; in the beginning of his reign he took off many taxes, built fair houses, and adorned the Churches. But shortly after, being of an infirm body, hee gave himselfe to women and idlenesse. Hee sold the Church livings, and by con∣nivence, permitted many injuries, till one demanding of him the Government of the City, and wishing him to give way for execution of justice, caused a Senator that was found guilty to be whipt, and so the others by this punishment were af∣frighted. Iustin deposed Narses being accused by the Romans for his oppression, and Longinus is sent in his place. In whom began the Exarchat of Ravenna; the Em∣perors Deputies being called Exarchi. Sophia the Empresse, scoffingly sent word to the Ennuch, that hee should returne to spin among the women. Hee returned her this answer, that He would spin her such a thred, as neither shee nor her husband should bee able to untwist. Whereupon hee cals the Longobards into Italy, who under their King Alboinus, made no scruple to exchange poore Pannonia for rich Italy, 4538. A. C. 568. thither they came accompanyed with the Saxons and other Nations, leaving Pan∣nonia to the Huns, but conditionally, that if things fell not out to their mindes in Italy, they might injoy againe their old habitations. This migration of the Lom∣bards into Italy was presaged by the rushing of armed men in the air. Narses having raised the storm, forsooke Rome, and sheltred himself in Naples, Pope Iohn the third (who succeeded Pelagius) followed after, desiring his return to Rome; but not long after they both dyed, and left Italy as a prey to the Barbarians. In the inter∣im  the Huns and Avares did utterly extirpate the Gepidae, and the Saxons coun∣try being forsaken, is re-peopled by the French King with plantations of Sue∣vians. Albonius having possessed himself of Gallia Cisalpina, called it Longobardia, now Lombardie. He spent 3 yeares and 6 months in the siege of Ticinum, which hee took, and made the seat of his kingdome, and called it by the name of Papia. Three dukedomes were erected: one called Forojulium now called Friuli, the se∣cond at Spoletum, and the third at Beneventum. But Alboinus in the 4. yeare of his reign ended his life by drunkennesse. He had killed some yeares before Cuni∣mundus king of the Gepidae, whose wife being dead (shee was the daughter of Clo∣tharius the French King) He marryed with Rosimunda the daughter of Cunimund. One day at Verona in a feast, hee drunk to her in a cup made of her Fathers skull, de∣siring her to be merry with her Father. Shee in a rage prostitutes her body to Hel∣miches the kings page, and to one Perido a resolute souldier, desiring no other re∣ward but the murther of her husband. Upon this Alboinus is murthered in his chamber, as he was sleeping after dinner. Helmiches flyes with adulterous Rosimund to Longinus the Exarch. Shee falling in
love with an other poysoned Helmiches, as  he was coming out of the bath; he perceiving that hee was poysoned, drew his sword, and forced her to drink up the rest of the potion: thus three murtherers are justly punished. To Alboinus succeeded Clephus, who having reigned tyrannically 1 yeare and 6 months, was murthered by one of his servans. After him the Longobards chose them Dukes, as they were wont. These subdued a great part of Italy, and made warres upon Gallia, these lasted 10 yeares, till one of them fell off to Lon∣ginus the Exarch. About this time the peace was broken by Iustin with the Persian for he with held the payment of 500 l. weight of gold which hee used to pay to Cosroes. He armed Arethas the Ethiopian King against the Parthians, and under∣took also the protection of Armenia the greater. Martianus Iustins Generall, de∣feated the Persian, and besieged Nisibis; but Iustin most foolishly took away Mar∣tianus commission, and substituted Acacius as great a coward as himselfe. This made the Army in a rage give off the siege, which the Persian perceiving; pre∣sently Hormisdas the sonne of Cosroes▪ sends Ardamanes with new Forces, which far and neer wasted the Eastern Empire; so that Sophia the wife of Iustin (who was now become phrenetick upon his bad successe) was forced to sue for peace. Iustin being recovered, by the advice of his wife made Tiberius a Thracian, but a good souldier, his successour, to whom hee gave many wholesome admonitions, in which hee shewed himselfe a better Counsellour, then an Emperor. And so grieving at his own follies and miscarriages dyed the 13 yeare of his reigne. In his time Cantabria was subdued by the Visigoths, who having overthrown the Sue∣vi, made Toletum their Regall Seat. In France there were civill warres between the four sonnes of Clotharius. Two French Bishops Sagitarius and Salonius were degraded in the councell of Lyons, for arming themselves like souldiers, and going to the wars; but upon their appeal to Pope Iohn they were restored, yet after∣ward continuing in their lewd courses they were degraded again in the Councel of Cabilon. Herebertus or Charibertus, the son of Lotharius or Clotharius King of Paris, for putting his wife away unjustly, & committing incest with his two sisters, was excommunicated by Germanus Bishop of Paris, and suddenly after dyed. Tiberius Constantinus was made Co-emperor with Iustin before his death, and was crowned with his wife Anastasia by Eutychius the Patriarch. He was a just, milde and bountifull Emperor, chiefly to the poore, wltom Sophia the Empresse reproved, as being too prodigall; he answers, that hee should never want wealth on earth, as long as hee laid up treasures in heaven by relieving the poore. For as hee caused a marble stone to be taken up, on which was ingraven the crosse, count∣ing it unchristian like to tread upon it, hee found many talents of gold buryed there. Hee was also informed of the great treasure which Narses had hid; with this wealth he relieved the poore, and made war against the Persians which had broke in upon Armenia, and recovered all that had been lost under Iustinian and  Iustin. Cosroes being aged and grieving for his losses dyed; and made a Law that no Persian King hereafter should make war against the Romans. Tiberius having found such good service from Mauritius in this last Persian warre, bestowed his daughter Constantina on him, and having crowned them both, made him his suc∣cessour in the Empire. He shewed himselfe so gratious to the captives, that hee sent them home without any ransome. He releived the Romans with corn from Egypt, when they were almost famished, and ready to surrender to the Longo∣bards, or long bearded Barbarians, who were grown very insolent, because Tibe∣rius was wholely employed about the Persian war. Tiberius before he was made Emperour by Iustin, was sent against the Avares,  who being vexed by the Turkes their neighbours, removed from the higher Scy∣thia, 4436. A. C. 576. and passing over Caucasus, sat down upon the banks of Ister, and threat∣ned to take Syrmium. In this expedition Tiberius escaped narrowly from being ta∣ken. But at last he made peace with them. Coganus their King desired Tiberius to send him some Carpenters to make baths for him after the Roman fashion; but when the Carpenters came, hee forced them to build him a bridge over Danubi∣us, that he might on all occasions plunder the
Roman Provinces. Tiberius having  reigned with Iustinus 3 yeares and 11 moneths, and by himselfe 4 yeares, dyed of a surfeit, eating too many mulberries. In his time Pelagius the second being consecrated Pope without the Emperors knowledge, sent Gregory then a Dea∣con, to excuse him to Tiberius, whom he could not acquaint with his consecration, because the city was besieged: then did Gregory begin his Commentaries on Iob; and caused Eutychius the Patriarch to renounce his Origenicall opinions. Such violent Arians were in the Goths in Spain, that King Lemugildus slew his own sonne Elmingildus, because hee forsooke the Arian heresie. Many Jewes in his time became Christians. It's thought that Cosroes dyed a christian, and that he sent two golden crosses, with other rich presents to the Church of S. Sergius in  Antioch. The remainders of the Suevi are driven out of Spain, having reigned there 177 years. The Gothish Kings who hitherto wore the same clothes and used the same seats, that the Nobility used; begin now to sit in a throne and to wear the re∣gall purple. One Donatus then, was the first that brought into Spain the monasti∣call profession. Mauritius a Cappadocian born, succeeds: an excellent Prince had he not been 4553. A. C. 583. covetous. Having taken Alamundarus the Saracen in the Persian war, and sent him prisoner to Sicily, he had wars next with Caganus King of the Avares, who bad taken Syrmium the chief city of Pannonia, and exacted a yearly stipend from the Romans. And not content with this, he sends the Sclavi to plunder and waste the Roman territories, whom Mauritius by his General Commentiolus suppressed; and recovered all the Roman prisoners, and the booty. Hormisdas the Persian King slighting his fathers command, makes wars upon the Romans. Against him Mauritius sends Philippicus, on whom he bestowed his sister in marriage. The Roman Army had rejected their Generall Priscus for his insolency, and chosen Germanus, but by the intreaty and eloquence of Gregory; they received Philippi∣cus for their Generall, who had good successe against the Medes and Persians, but Martyropolis was betrayed to the Persian by Sitta the Decurion, whereupon Com∣mentiolus is sent in Philippicus his place. He overthrowes the Persian neer Marty∣ropolis. Hormisdas being angry with Baras his Generall, (who had subdued the  Turks, and made them tributaries to Persia) banisheth him to Colchis, where Ba∣ras was again overthrown by Romanus Mauritius his Praetor. Upon this Hormisdas takes away the Generals place from him, and in a scoffe sends him a womans gar∣ment. Baras to be revenged of this disgrace, faines letters as from the King written to the armies, in which he upbraided them for their cowardise & effeminatenesse, and withdrawes also a good part of their pay. The souldiers thinking these let∣ters to be reall, swear fealty to Baras. Bynodoes a great man whom Hormisda had put in irons was set at liberty by his brother Basta; who seise on the King, and imprison him. These having called a Parliament; condemne the King as unworthy of Government, because of his cruelty, and needlesse wars, besides his other crimes. Hereupon he is deposed, imprisoned, and exoculated, his wife, and son whom he appointed his successour, both put to death, and his son Cos∣roes whom he hated is made King. This new King used his Father at first very kindely, but being exasperated by his railing language continually against him, at last commanded him to be cudgelled to death. This fact made him odious to his people, who fel from him to Baras. Hereupon Cosroes flyes away on post Horses to the Roman camp: He was received by Probus the Patrician, and recommended to Mauritius, whom he animates against Baras. Narses is sent with the Army, who overthrowes Baras: besides many thousand Persians that were slaine, 6000 were taken prisoners. Cosroes is restored to his kingdome; who puts all the captives to  the sword, except the Turkes who are sent to the Emperour at Byzantium, and so in the 8 year of Mauritius a generall peace is concluded in the East. But the wars with Caganus King of the Avares is not yet at an end. Many doubtfull bat∣tels are fought betwixt them. And many inrodes are made by the Sclavi. But Mau∣ritius in the 10 year of his reign removed Caganus out of Thracia by this trick. He faigned some letters and sent them to Priscus the Praetor, who was then be∣sieged in acastle by Caganus; he wisheth him to hold out the siege, for the Barbarian
should be forced to remove suddenly; because the Fleet which hee had sent to waste his coast, had already made great havock in his countrey; Chaganus ha∣ving intercepted these letters, and supposing them to be true, raised the siege and marched homeward. But for 6 yeares after there were continuall wars; so that Chaganus sackt 40 cities of Dalmatia. Mauritius out of covetousnesse, and the bad counsell of Commentiolus, gave way that Caganus should take many of his soul∣diers prisoners, because they refused to contribute towards the charges of their armes and clothes, yet tooke 12000 captives, whom hee offered to release for a small sum, which Mauritius out of hatred and avarice refused to pay. Where∣fore Chaganus in a rage put them all to the sword, and would not depart thence, till  he had received a great sum of gold. Mauritius was so little sensible of what he had done, that he absolved Commen∣tiolus, when hee was accused as the chief actor in this treachery, and his ac∣cusors were punished; which so incensed the people, that they slung stones at the Emperor as he was going to the Church. He had after this some victories over the Avares. But shortly after a Monke running with a naked sword through the streets cryeth out, Mauritius shall shortly be killed with the sword. A comet burned for whole 6 moneths. At last his heart smote him, for the murther of the souldi∣ers, and desired that he might be prayed for; In his sleep hee thought that hee stood before Christs Tribunall, where he was asked, whether he would be punished here or hereafter: he answered here Lord, and so he was by Phocas; of whom he understood by Philippicus, that he was a rash young fellow, but unconsiderable, and a coward; then said Mauritius: if a coward, then a murtherer. This Phocas was a Centurion, he had been Yeoman of the stirrop to Priscus the Patrician; but now a great stickler against Mauritius his government. Who used his army un∣discreetly and rigidly, abridging them of their pay; and refusing to let them have any provision but what they should take from the enemy, and therefore wilied them to take up their Winter quarters among the Slavonians. Upon this the Army did mutiny, and lifting up Phocas on a Target, as the custome was, they salute him Emperour; Peter Mauritius his brother who had charge of the Army is forced to flye. In Constantinople they would have made Theodosius the son of  Mauritius, or else Theodosius his father in law Germanicus Emperor; but Mauri∣tius had already imprisoned Philippicus who marryed his own sister, upon suspi∣cion. He cudgelled his sonne. Germanicus took sanctuary in a Church, whence Mauritius would have pulled him out, but the uprore so increased, that hee is driven our of the City; Phocas is received, who having sworne to maintaine the Orthodox Religion, is crowned by Ciriacus the patriarch. 5 dayes after Mau∣ritius is pursued by Phocas and taken at Chalcedon, where hee fell sick. In the presence of Phocas, Mauritius his two younger sonnes are slain, then his 3 daugh∣ters, at last Constantina their mother and daughter of Tiberius, though some write  that the mother and 3 daughters having taken sanctuary, were not beheaded till 5 yeares after. Brt Mauritius having seen the execution of his sons, and his owne at hand, cries out: Iust art thou O Lord, and righteous are thy judgements: and so submitted his neck to the sword. After their heads were cut off, their bodies were left on the shore for the gazing objects of the people; but at last they were bury∣ed in the Church by a certain Eunuch. The eldest sonne Theodosius was fled to the Persians by his Fathers advice: but he was so eagerly pursued, that he was overtaken, and by a command from Phocas, slain also. Shortly after Germanus is killed, and his daughter the wife of Theodosius; and at last all that had any re∣lation to Mauritius even his youngest child of all, which was but an Infant, 4572. A. C. 602.  and whom the Nurse would have saved, by offering her owne to death, which Mauritius refused. He reigned 20 yeares, three moneths, and some odde dayes. In his time the Saxons being weary of the Longobards Government, returned to their own countrey, which was now possessed by the Suevi, between whom there arose such a quarrell about the removing of the Sueves; that 20000 were killed. The Lombards after they had bin ruled 10 years by Dukes, they
chose them a King
whom they named Flavius, because this was an honourable name among the Romans; on him they conferred the halfe of their goods, that hee might main∣taine the greater state. Mauritius hired Childebertus the French King, to op∣pose him, which caused great troubles in Lombardy. Such inundations of waters there were in Italy, that Tibris overflowed the wals, a great Dragon swimmed through the city downe towards the Sea, upon which followed the plague, whereof Pope Pelagius dyed: this sicknesse lasted many yeares. Grego∣rius is made Pope; who by letters desired Mauritius not to confirm this election, but this honour was forced on him; and not without cause was he called great, if we consider either his doctrine, or life. Hee appointed Litanies against that  plague, which swept away in an houres space 80 people. Gregory sent Austin with some other Monks to instruct the Saxons in the Christian Faith, who had now been setled 150 yeares in England. Antioch 61 yeares after the former earthquake was shaken again, in which there dyed 60000 people. Gregory Bishop of that City was strangely preserved, for no sooner was he gone out of the house, but it immediately fell down: Iohn Patriarch of Byzantium assumed the title of Oecumenicall Bishop; which Antichristian pride in him Gregory sharpely reproved. In Spain Ricaredus the sonne of King Lebuigildus who killed his son for being a Catholick, drove the Arian heresie out of Spain, and obtained the title of Catho∣lick King. He overthrew 60000 French, who had broke in upon Spain. Hee was both a good and fortunate Prince, who having reigned 15 years dyed at To∣letum.  Such was the ignorance of that age, that neither the Latin tongue at Con∣stantinople, nor the Greek at Rome was understood. Chilpericus King of France was slaine by his subjects, at the perswasion of his wife Fredegunda, for his cruelties, and heresies; a Synod of 62 Bishops in Toledo is held against Arianism. With Religion, learning flourished in these South parts of England, till Charles the great, who sent for Beda's scholars hence to teach in France and Italy. The Slavi set themselves in Istria and Dalmatia, which from them is called Slavonia: Gregory calls himselfe the servant of servants. He introduceth many ceremonies, sets up divers Monasteries, one in his own house, and six in Sicily, and sends abroad  many Apostles to preach the Gospell. Columbanus out of Ireland preacheth to the Picts. CHAP. VII. The affairs of the Empire under Phocas and Heraclius. 2. Of Mahomet and the Saracens. 3. Of the Church and divers Forraign passages of these times. PHocas who murthered his Master, and by sedition; got the Empire, by ty∣ranny  maintaines it. But not long; for hee tyrannised not much above 7 4581. A. C. 611. yeares. That Army of his which murthered Mauritius is overthrowne by Cosroes. And hee who cut off the head of his Master, had his own head at last cut off with his armes and genitals. Not onely he, but the whole Empire suffers, for his cruell paricide. The Persians subdue Phenicia, Syria, and Palestina, they wast Galatia, Paphlagonia, and Cappadocia. In Europe the Avares overrunne Thracia, and kill every where the Roman Legions. In Antioch the Jews murther the Christians, and among the rest Anastasius their Patriarch, whose body they burned. The Jewes for these outrages are condemned to lose first their geni∣tals, then their heads. Phocas was a notorious drunkard, who being taxed by some  for that vice, rageth on the people murthering multitudes of them: but tyranny is short-lived: therefore Heraclius Governour of Afric, enters into a league with Priscus and Gregoras Patricians, that hee who first did dispatch Phocas, should be Emperour. Heraclius the sonne of this Heraclius, by a Fleet of Ships obtaines Constantinople. Photius a Noble man, whose wife Phocas had abused, breakes into the Palace, flings down Phocas from his thrown, lays him in Irons, and brings him to Heraclius, who kicking him with his heels,
caused his genitalls with which he  abused so many women to be cut off, and at last his head; some say he was burned in a brasse furnace. It's remarkable that of all Phocas his Army, which consented to the death of Mauritius, there are but two left alive, in lesse then 8 yeares space. Caganus King of the Avares enters Lombardy, kills Gisulphus, king Agilulphus his Generall, and besiegeth Forojulium, and takes it by the treachery of Romilda the wife of Gisulphus, to whom hee promised marriage. Caganus hating the trea∣chery and leachery of Romilda, performed his promise for one night, and lay with her, then he delivered her to the lust of his souldiers, who having abused her, thrust a long pole through her. But her daughters more modest then the mother, preserved their chastity, by keeping in their brests the flesh of chickens,  which putrefying with heat, so stunk that no souldier could come neer them, who thought that all the women of Lombardy had smelled thus ranck. About this time the Sclavi shake off the tyrannicall yoke which the Huns and Avares (now called by one name Hungarians) had laid on them; and made one Samon a French Merchant their King, under whom they defeated the Huns in a battell. Agilulphus Duke of Taurinum in Lombardy is chosen King by Theudolinda (the widow of the former King Autharus) whom she marryed, and made a good Christian; her Gregory had by his letters seasoned with the Catholick Religion. This King made peace with France, and with the Exarch, & caused al Church Lands to be restored,  which had been taken away. In Spain Vittericus obtained the kingdome by mur∣thering the sonne of Recaredus the former king, and he himselfe in the 7 year of his reign was murthered by his own subjects at a feast. Gindemarus that followed reigned 2 yeares, and Sesibutus his successour 8 yeares. Pope Gregory dyed the 2 yeare of Phocas, to whom succeeded Sabinianus, and after him, Boniface the third, who obtained of Phocas, that Rome should be the head of all other Churches. He was willing to comply with the Pope, knowing how conducible this was to his af∣faires; Boniface the third, 8 months after this dyed, to whom succeeded Boniface the fourth, who turned the Pantheum dedicated of old to all the Gods, to a Church dedicated to Mary and all the Saints. Cosroes took Jerusalem from the Romans, and  carryed away the Crosse to Persis with many thousand Christians. About these times the use of clocks and bels was found out. The Roman government was quite extinguished in Spain by Sesibutus King there. Heraclius a Patrician, and sonne of Heraclian or Heraclius Governour of Africa, 4589. A. C. 619. is made Emperour by the Senat and Army. He with his wife Fabia Eudoxia were crowned by Sergius the Patriarch. He indeavoured first to make peace with the Persian, but could not, except he would reject Christ and worship the Sun. In the interim the Jewes insult over the Christians, having bought from Cosroes their conqueror 90000 of them, which they barbarously murthered. Jerusalem be∣ing taken; the Persians seise next upon Alexandria, Egypt, and Libya, subduing  all to Ethiopia, about the 6 yeare of Heraclius, and in the 7 they tooke Carthage: and at the same time Caganus was pillaging Thracia. At the same time also Io∣hannes Limigius successour to Smaragdus in the Exarchat, and after him Eleuthe∣rius for their tyranny in Italy are slaine by the souldiers. Heraclius who could not make peace with Cosroes, makes it with Caganus; and so removes his European Armies to the east: Exhorting them to remember the wrongs done to Christi∣anity by Cosroes. They first enter Armenia, and defeat Sabarus the enemies Ge∣nerall there. In the 13 year of his reign he marcheth through the heart of Persia, killing many thousand of Persians, and overthrowing their groves, and fire which they worshipped. He had so many captives, that in Albania where he wintered, he  suffered 50000 to escape. About this time appeared Mahomet the Saracen, being left a poor orphan, he A. C. 623. marryed his rich mistresse Chadiga, whom hee made beleeve that his falling sick∣nesse was but a consternation of his mind, proceeding from the sight of the An∣gel Gabriel, who used to appear to him: which lye was confirmed by Sergius the Monk, who was banished out of Byzantium for his Nestorianism, by whose help and of an impostor Jew, hee compiled a gallimafry
of errours out of Christian  Jewish and Heathenish writers, which he called Alcoran, wherein hee denyes Christs Divinity, and the Trinity; approving Circumcision and Polygamie. Of this absurd and impious book I have spoke, in my caveat against the Alcoran. He was forced to flye from Mecha; being in danger to lose his life for his errours. This flight the Arabians call Hegira, that is, the persecution, from whence they compute their yeares. Cosroes mad at the successe of Heraclius, plunders all the Christian churches of his Dominions, and forces them to embrace Nestori∣anism, already professed by the Armenians and Georgians. Hee invites the Bul∣garians, Avares, Gepidae, and Sclavi to invade Constantinople. Herarclius hear∣ing of this, calls in the Chazari or Turkes to the number of 40000. Byzantium A. C. 626. is besieged by the Barbarians, who ten dayes after were forced to flye. Heraclius marcheth as farre as Ninive, where he defeates the enemie, kills Razates their Generall, and many of their prime men. Cosroes shuts himself up in Seleucia, and fends Spartarius to kill Chardarigas, who with Sarbarus besiegeth Chalcedon, because hee suspected that hee entertained correspondence with Heraclius. This businesse of killing Chardarigas was discovered, at which the Persians were dis∣contented, and the rather because Cosroes refused to hearken to any peace with Caesar. Gundabundas a Colonell to Sabaros revolts to the Romans; many of the Commanders fals off to Siroes the Kings eldest sonne, whom he meant to dis-in∣herit, and to crown Merdaces his son, by another venter. Upon this Heraclius and Siroes conclude a peace; wherein it was agreed that all places and captives should be restored. Siroes the new chosen king pursues his father, overtakes 4598. A. C. 628. him in his flight, and layes him in irons, then shewing him his gold and jewels; which he had bought at so deare a rate from the Romans, by the losse of so much blood, he left them with him to feed upon, for he was was kept 5 days without food; then having seen Merdaces whom he designed for his successor, with his other sonnes murthered before his face, by Syroes command he was shot to death with arrowes, and so he lost both his crown and life by the Romans; of whom he had received both. Thus the captives & plunderings being restored on both sides, the Crosse and Zacharias Bishop of Jerusalem, then a captive, were restored. Hera∣clius  in the 7 year of this war, returned in a triumphant chariot to Jerusalem bear∣ing the Crosse in his hand; upon this was instituted the feast of the exaltation of the Crosse. Heraclius understanding by the Astronomers that his Empire should bee laid wast, by those of the circumcision; he thought the Jews had been meant, and not the Saracens: wherefore hee forces them to embrace the Christian professi∣on; and those that refused he banished out of his Dominions, commanding them not to come within 3 miles of Jerusalem. The same was done by Sisebutus in Spaine, and by Dagobertus the French King in France, against the Jews, of whom divers joined themselves with Mahomet, supposing him to be their Messias, till they saw him feed upon Camels flesh, and then they fell from him again. Ma∣homet 4602. A. C. 632. having in 9 yeares space inlarged his Dominion by force and craft, his wives made him away: hee dyed being 40 yeares old, the 22 year of Heraclius. His stinking carcasse which had lain 3 dayes on the ground unburyed, was put in an iron chest, and sent to Mecha. Hee promised his Disciples he would rise again the third day, but forgot it. The Saracens souldiers who had served un∣der Heraclius, were slighted by one of Heraclius his Eunuchs, who had charge to pay them their arreares, but hee paid them with ill language, calling them dogs, so being incensed for want of their pay, and with ill words, they stirre up the whole Nation of the Saracens, being accustomed to robbing, against Heraclius.  These under Abubecher their leader, Mahomet's kinsman, take Gaza, and the pas∣sages of Mount Sinai, being a while resisted by the Governour of Caesarea Pale∣stina, two yeares after Abubecher dyed; Homar succeeds. Who fell upon Arabia, and tooke the city Bozra, then drove Theodorus Heraclius his brother to Edessa. Heraclius sends an Army of 40000 under Theodorus Sacellarius and Bahanes, against the Saracens, Sacellarius was first defeated, then Bahanes having the
dis∣advantage  of ground, and the winde which drove the dust in his face. Homar sei∣seth upon Damascus, then upon Phenicia. Thence he falls upon Egypt and makes it tributary: In the 26 year of Heraclius hee sits down before Jerusalem, and in two years space takes it. To Sophronius the Bishop, and to all the Christians of Pale∣stina he promised security. In the 28 year of Heraclius Antioch is taken, Muha∣vias is made Amaras or Praetor of Egypt, as far as Euphrates. Then Hyaidus another of their Generalls takes Edessa, Darae, and Mesopotamia. The next yeare they enter Persia where king Syroes was dead, having reigned one year. Hormisdas succeeded, whom they defeated and put to flight, and took the three daughters of Cosroes prisoners, with all the kings wealth and furniture, and so in a short time subdued the East, and conquered the Persians, calling them Saracens now from Sara Abraham's wife. Heraclius being grieved at this great successe of the Saracens 4611. A. C. 641. or Hagarens rather, dyed of an hydropsie, having reigned 31 yeares. His incestu∣ous marriage with Martino his brothers daughter, and his hereticall prefession, in holding there was but one will and operation in Christ, as Sergius Bishop of Con∣stantinople, and Cyrus of Alexandria had taught him, were the causes of these miseries which fell on the Empire. Martina his incestuous widow having poysoned her son in law Constantine the third, after he had reigned 4 months, not without the knowledge of Bishop Sergius undertakes the Government. But having ruled halfe a yeare, shee was condemned by the Senat to have her tongue cut out, and her son Heraclionas to loose his nose, and both to be banished. Constans the son of Constan∣tine and nephew of Heraclius obtained the Empire. Pyrrhus the Patriarch who suc∣ceeded Sergius, upon a sedition raised against him, fled to Africa, to whom succee∣ded Paul. About these times Edwin king of Northumberland was christned by Paulinus, whose successour Oswaldus propagated the Gospell farther in those parts. Isaacius Paulinus a Bishop. Exarchat of Ravenna robs Pope Horonius of his treasures. One Mauritius keeper of Records, aiming to be king of Italy, is by this Isaacius apprehended and slain. In Lombardy Rotharis succeeded Ariobaldus, who set down in writing the Laws of the Lombards 77 yeares after their comming into Italy. Muchavius the Sara∣cen after 7 yeares siege took Caesarea Palestina. In France Brunchilide the Queen mother of Childericus who had caused much effusion of bloud, by set∣ting the French kings at variance among themselves, and had been the death of ten kings, was by king Lotharius of France condemned to lose one foot and one arm, then to be tyed to the tail of an unruly horse, and torn in sunder. To Lotharius suc∣ceeded Dagobertus in Austrasia, Neustria and Burgundy. His other sonne Ari∣bertus succeeded in Aquatania. Rupertus or Robertus Bishop of Woorms first, then of Ratisbone converted Theodon Duke of Bavaria to the Christian faith; Lupus Lupus Bi∣shop. being banished by Lotharius baptizeth Duke Boson in Austria. The Nestorian he∣resie by means of Cosroes spreads far in the East, and continues to this day, whose  Patriarch resides in Mozall or Seleucia of the Parthians. Pope Boniface the fifth made Sanctuaries of Churches and Altars; so did Ho∣norius and Theodosius long before. The Jacobites so called from Iacob the Syri∣an increase much. Pope Honorius the first in the 4 Councell of Toledo is excom∣municate and degraded by the Bishops. The West Saxons are converted by the preaching of Berinus; sent thither by Pope Honorius. Severus a Bishop in Spain is martyred. Chilenus a Scotch man converted to the Faith the Atrebates or people of Arois, about Arras. The University of Cambridge was erected by King Sigebert, or as some will have it repaired or inlarged by him, but founded by Cantaber King of Spain many yeares before, when hee lived here in exile. Cyrus  the last Bishop of Alexandria save one, a Monotholit, paid to the Saracens for 3 years an annuall pension, and so long Egypt injoyed freedome of religion; but when Heraclius refused to allow it the Saracens subded it. Heraclius was the last elective Emperour; after him it became hereditary. The Saracens seise on Persia, which had continued in the race of Artaxerxes 413 years; that is from Artabanus the last Par∣thian king till Hormisdas 2 the last Persian king. Dagobertus king of France erects many Monasteries and Churches; hee
covered S. Dennis with silver, and made the  Duke of Britany doe him homage. Rotharis king of Lombardy placed in every Church two Bishops, an Orthodox and an Arian, which occasioned much mischief and factions. In Italy Sosphronius was the last Bishop of Jerusalem. From hence till the year 1100 that it was recovered by the Christians, if there were any be∣tween they were only titular. Pope Severinus sate in the chaire a year two months: his successour Iohn the fourth 1 yeare 9 months, to him succeeded Theodorus or Theodosius 6 yeares 5 months. Pope Iohn by his letters reproves the Scots for their Pelagianism, & undue observation of Easter. Peter was the last real Bishop of Alexandria; for now after the Saracens had got it, the Bishops were but titular; the Saracens make Babylon the seat of their kingdom, which before was in Damascus:  they call their chief Prince, Amiras or Caliphas, that is a successour; because Ebube∣zar was the first Caliphas or successour of Mahomet, the Governours of their Pro∣vinces, they name Sultans. CHAP. VIII. The affaire of the Empire under Constans the second, Constantine the fourth, Ju∣stinian the second, Philippicus Bardanes, Anastasius the second, and Theodo∣sius the third. 2. The affaires of the Saracens, Longobards, Spaniards, French, and others. 3. The affaires of the Church in that time. COnstans the second son of Constantine the second succeeded. He was a Mo∣nothelite, 4612. A. C. 642. and a persecutor of Orthodox men. By Theodorus Calliopas the Exarch, Pope Martin was seised upon, and sent to this Constans who banish∣ed him into Chersona where hee was starved to death, because he condemned the Monothelites in a Synod held by him; in whose chair he set up Eugenius. He mur∣thered his brother Theodostus, though a Clergy man, with the horrour of which murther he was so affrighted in his sleep (for he dreamed that his brother presented him with a cup full of bloud) that he resolved to transfer his seat from thence to  Rome, saying, the Mother deserves more honour then the daughter, but he was disswa∣ded by his wife, children, & friends. Yet he went over into Italy, and made war upon Romoaldus king of the Longobards: from whom hee tooke some towns in Apulia, and was set down before Beneventum; but hearing that Grimoaldus Prince there∣of was comming to raise the siege, Caesar removed to Naples, and there being beaten by Romoaldus he marcheth to Rome. Pope Vitalianus with all the Clergy and people met him. A cloak interwoven with gold was by Constans presented to S. Peter which hee had better been without. For Caesar robbed the Churches and City too of all their brasse ornaments, for 12 dayes together, and stript the Pan∣theon that was covered with brasse, then he laid heavy taxes upon Sicily, Calabria,  Sardinia, and Afric, and who did not pay, had either their wives or children taken from them. So that he was laden with the curses of the Sicilian women, and un∣der this burthen hee dyed, being stifled in a scalding bath the 27 yeare of his reign. In the 11 year of Constans his Empire there rained ashes, upon which followed a cruel plague; a Ghost was seen to knock at mens doors, and as often as he knocked 4639. A. C. 669. so often there dyed some out of that house; a year before his death, Sapor Govern∣our of Armenia who revolted to Muhavias had his brains dashed out against a wall by his horse. In his time Homar having built a Moscu at Jerusalem was stabbed by a Persian, to whom succeeded Hormanus, who defeated Gregory the Patrician in A∣frica,  having rebelled against Constans, and so imposed a tribute on that part of Africa. The next year which was the seventh of Constans Muhavias in a Fleet of 1700 ships invaded Cyprus and took Constantia the Metropolis of that Island. He conquered also the Island Aradus after much opposition. Constantinople was delivered from a siege by two sonnes of a certain Trumpeter, who broke their prison doores, slew Amiras and set the Fleet on fire, but Muhavias prepared a new Fleet with which hee beat Constantines neer Phenice a harbour of Lycia, the Sea was
died with the Roman bloud, the Emperor was fain to disguise himself in a poor ha∣bit, and so escaped. Then also did the Saracens subdue the Isle of Rhodes, and in it break down the Colossus of the Sun, which a certain Jew bought. The brasse of that statue loaded 900 Camels. Shortly after this the Saracens fell out among themselves. Some of them fol∣lowed Muhavias, some Aly Mahomets son in law, who called himselfe the true Prophet, saying, that the Angell Gabriel was sent to him, and not to Mahomet, but by a mistake. Muhavias during this division was humbled, and content to pay a yeerly pension to the Emperour, which afterward when things were setled he re∣fused to pay. He subdued Haly and his faction, by intercepting the waters, so that being tormented with thirst they submitted in the 15 yeare of Constance. Pope Vi∣talianus brought the use of Organs into the Church, Eligius Bishop of Novio ma∣gum converted Flanders to Christ, Zechius a Croatian, by birth a Sclavonian, ha∣ving committed murther at home, fled into Bohemia, and there planted. His bro∣ther Lechus planted in Polonia, so called from pole which in Sclavonic signifies a plain or champion countrey. The posterity of Zechius planted Moravia and Lu∣satia. But Russia and Pomerania were peopled by the children of Lechus. Sigeber∣tus in France, fearing hee should be childlesse made Hildebert son of Grimoaldus his successour. But beyond hope having got a sonne, whom he called Dagobert, hee commits the care of him to Grimoaldus, and then dyed. Grimoaldus having  shaved Dagobert sent him into Scotland, and made his own sonne Hildebert king. The French hating this treachery, sues him before Clodoveius, who imprisoned him, thrusts out Hildebert, and sets up his own sonne Hildericus King of the Au∣strasii. Clodoveius spoiled all the Sepulchers of the Martyrs, of their wealth, which his Father Dagobert had bestowed on them; and distributes all to the poore. But to make amends hee exempts the Monastery of St. Dennis neer Paris, which his Father had built, from the Iurisdiction of the Bishops. To him succeeded Ebrunus; about this time the French Kings growing dissolute and carelesse, left the mana∣ging of the kingdome to the Governours of the Palace. Homar ordained that e∣very month the Alcoran should be read. Azomon the fourth from Mahomet much  weakened the Empire. Theodiscus a Greek Bishop of Hispalis or Sivill, was un∣bishopped for corrupting Isiodores workes, wherefore he becomes an Arabian he∣retick, in detestation of this wickednesse, the primacy of the Church of Spaine is translated from Hispalis to Toledo. Eugenius the first, ordained that Bishops should have peculiar prisons for Delinquent Clergy men. Cindasuindus king of Spain, repaires the Churches which were demolished by the hereticks, Peter suc∣ceedeth to Paul in the seat of Constantinople. To Pope Eugenius who sate almost 3 yeares succeeded Vitalius who was Pope 14 years: from the first year of Clota∣rius, which was the 662 yeare of Christ, till the 750 which is about 90 yeares, to wit, till Pipin the Father of Charles the Great, the Major Domus or Steward of the  Kings house managed the kingdome, the kings themselves taking their pleasures, and presenting themselves to the people but once a year. The Saracens under Mu∣havias Gizad expelled the Romans and Vandals out of Africa; Pope Adeodatus suc∣ceeded to Vitalius, and sate 4 yeares. Constantinus the 4th called Pogonatus from his great beard which he wore when he 4639. A. C. 669. returned from Sicily, whither he went to revenge his Fathers death, was made Em∣peror in his Fathers time. He overcame & slew Mezentius the Armenian whom the Sicilian Legions had saluted Emperor. Constantine the Patrician, and al that assisted Mezentius were taken by the help of Theodorus Calliopa the Exarch, and punished: the Eastern Princes, would have had Tiberius and Heraclius Constantines two bro∣thers to be crowned, desiring a Trinity of Governours on earth, as there was in heaven. Constantine making shew as if he assented, sent for these Princes, and slew them as seditious persons, and made his brothers uncapable of the Empire, by cut∣ting off their Noses. The Saracens in the mean time waste Africa, and took 80000 prisoners. They take also Syracuse, they besieged Byzantium 7 yeares, in which time they lost many ships and men, and were at last forced to return home, in which return they lost by a sudden storm
all their ships, but this losse they repaired, and shortly after they lost their ships again, by the invention of Callinicus the Mathe∣matician, who by a new invented fire called Marinus or Graecus, which burned in the water, consumed them all, with the losse of 30000 men. This fire from Calli∣nicus the Graecian is called Graecus; but indeed before this the Romans made bals of fire which would burn in the water. The Saracens had also another losse by the Mardaits in Mount Libanus: they made them sue for peace, which was granted for 30 yeares, paying yearly during this time 3000 l. weight of gold, 50 men, and so many of their best horses to Caesar. Upon the report of this peace, Caesars European enemies, fearing lest their countreys might be made the seat of warre, by presents and intreaties, obtained also peace of the Emperour: the yeare fol∣lowing  there was a great Earthquake, a forerunner of the Bulgarian eruption A. C. 679. out of Scythia upon the lower Mysia not farre from Byzantium, called from them Bulgaria, and this from the river Bolga, whose springs are from the lakes of Mo∣scovia: against these Constantine marcheth with an Army, which made the Bulga∣rians keep themselves within their trenches. This war was like to hold; Caesar be∣ing troubled with the Gout, went to the baths of Mesembria, a city in Thracia. His souldiers thinking that hee had fled for fear, began all to fly, which the enemy per∣ceiving, pursued and killed multitudes of them: and subdued the Sclavonians; Con∣stantine was forced to pay them a tribute, that they might not annoy the Roman territories. About this time dyed Muchavias Prince of the Saracens, to whom suc∣ceeded  his son Gizildus. Constantins care now was, having peace abroad, to quiet all controversies in the Church also: therefore cals a Synod at Constantinople of 280 Bishops. This 4653. A. C. 680. was the sixt Oecumenicall Councell, in which the five former were confirmed, and the Monothelites condemned for hereticks: among which were Sergius, Pyrrhus, Cyrus, Paulus, Petrus and Pope Honorius, who lived in the time of Heraclius. But some excuse him in that he held there were not in Christ two contrary wills. Theo∣phanes the Abbot was made Bishop of Antioch. Alexandria and Jerusalem, sent no Bishops, being now in the possession of the Saracens. Pope Agatho his Le∣gats had the chief place in the Councell next the Emperour. Who ased Rome of the money which was wont to be paid to the Emperour, for the Popes ordination, but conditionally, that the Pope should not be consecrate without the Emperors de∣cree. The Bishop of Ravenna is commanded to receive his ordination from Rome, which hitherto he neglected, presuming on the greatnesse of the Exarchs. In Constantins time Partharis king of the Longobards, after the death of Gri∣moaldus is called home from his banishment, and is made King. Bamba King of Spain, having reigned 10 years with great commendation, and after hee had sub∣dued the Saracen Pyrats on the Coast, became a Monk. Hildericus or Childeri∣cus the French King, for causing Bodilo a noble man to be whipped, was with his wife great (with child) killed by this Bodilo, as hee was hunting; and so Theo∣doricus,  who had been thrust into a Monastery, was called to the Scepter. To Adeodatus succeeded Donnus who was Pope five years, his successour was Agatho who sate two yeares. Under him began the sixt generall Councell held in Constan∣tinople, but it ended under Pope Leo the second, who sate not above 10 moneths. At this Synod the Popes Legat celebrated the Masse in the Latin tongue be∣fore the Emperour and people in the great Church of S. Sophia in Constantino∣ple. In this Synod the Monothelits were confuted out of the writings of the Greek and Latin Fathers. Caesarea Queen of Persia with her husband and 40000 Persians are baptized at Constantinople. This Pope Leo brought into the masse the holy kisse or os∣culum pacis. In Spain to Bamba succeeded Eringius; in that time Maildulphus a a Scotchman, was a famous professour of Greek and Latin tongues in England. To Leo succeeded Benedict the second, who was Pope 10 moneths, who sent Chilianus to preach the Gospell in Germany, chiefly in Franconia. His succes∣sour Iohan the fifth, was Pope 1 year. He ordained that the Pope should bee con∣secrated in the Church of Lateran by the Bishops of Ostia, Portunus, and Veliter∣num, which custome yet continues, whereas before, he was only carried to St.
Peters chaire where hee sate while Abdimelech King of the Saracens, recovers Persia, Mesopotamia, Armenia, and Hircania, having overcome his two enemies, Mu∣star in Persis; and Said in Mesopotamia. Conon in the Popedome succeeded to Iohn, and sate 11 months. Constantine reigned 17 yeares. Iustinian the second succeeded Constantine, son of Anastasia the Empresse. He 4666. A. C. 696. by Leontius his Generall subdued divers Nations in the East, whilest the Saracens were at difference among themselves: for Abdimelech had great warres with the Kings of Persia and Arabia, whom he subdued, and so he put an end to the Ma∣humetan civill warre, In the 5 year of Iustinian, with whom the Saracens made peace, by restoring to him Africa, and paying dayly 1000 peeces of silver, with one  servant and one horse, conditionally that Iustinian would cleer Libanus and the adjacent Mountaines of all the Mardaites, which much infested the Arabian ci∣ties. But in so doing Caesar weakened the Empire, for so long as these Mardaites held the Mahumetans play, they troubled not the Empire, but when they were removed, the Saracens power increased. Hee also weakned himselfe by breaking the second yeare of his reign the league, which his Father made with the Bulgari∣ans. At first he had the better, but afterward, he lost his Army, and was forced to flye almost alone to Byzantium. In the 7 year of his reign, having entertained 30000 Selavi, and trusting to his power, broke the peace with the Saracens, pre∣tending that the money which was paid him for a tribute, was not stampt with his  Image. The Saracens calling upon God the revenger of perjuries, and carrying on the top of a speare in stead of a Banner the Articles of peace, fell upon the Ro∣man Army and routed them. The Sclavonian Generall having first revolted with 20000 to the enemy, who corrupted him with money. Iustinian hard∣ly escaped, who comming to Leucate, commanded the remainders of the Sclavi to be killed and flung into the Sea. After this the Agarens made havock of the Roman Provinces, and Sabbatius the Armenian Praetor, delivered up Armenia to them. The Arabians overrun Africa, to whom Sergius the Patrician betrayed the city Lazica. But Iohn brother to the Emperour Leontius recovered Africa again, and  drove out the Saracens. This Leontius had been imprisoned 2 yeares by Theo∣dosius and Stephanus the Emperours favorites, but having escaped out of prison, was by the Patriarchs help made Emperour. He cut off Iustinian's nose, and banished him to Chersonesus, having reigned 10 yeares. The two sycophants Theodosius and Stephanus, were by his command dragged through the streets, by ropes fastned to their feet, and afterward were burnt. Leontius after three yeares reign was by Tiberius Apsimarus (whom his Army had made Emperour, upon his return from Africa) served, as he served Iustinian; for he cut off his Nose, and then thrust him into a monastery: then he sent his brother Heraclius into Syria against the Saracens, who tooke and slew of the enemies about 200000. The Ar∣menian  Princes killed their Agaren Governours, and returned to the Roman o∣bedience. But Mahumet Prince of the Arabians, subdued the Armenians again, and burned their princes alive. Yet in Cilicia he was defeated by Heraclius who took multitudes of the Saracens prisoners, and sent them to his brother Abismarus for slaves, who about this time sent Theophylact into Italy as successour to Iohn in the Exarchat. After this Iustinian escaped out of prison, and marryed with Theo∣dora the sister of Chaganus, with whom hee lived a whole yeare in Phanogoria a town of Sarmatia. But the Barbarian king being corrupted with gold from Abis∣marus, promised to betray him, which hee understanding by his wife, fled to Tre∣bellis the Bulgarian king, by whose Armes hee was restored, the 10 yeare of his A. C. 703. banishment. The third day after he laid siege to Byzantium, by some sluces of water which he opened, he got within the town. Abismarus fled, but was overtaken and brought back, multitudes of the people who had abused Caesar with ill lan∣guage as hee lay before the City, were slaine. Leontius and Abismarus being in irons fell flat at the Emperours feet, who troad on their necks, the people crying out: Thou shalt walk upon the Aspe, and the Basilisk, and then they were both be∣headed. Callinicus the Bishop had both his eyes thrust out, and was banished
to  Rome, and Cyrus set up in his place, who had incouraged the Emperour in his banishment to recover his right. Abismarus had reigned 7 yeares. It's said of Iustinian that still when hee wept or blew his cut nose, he caused one of Leonti∣us his faction to be slain. For he had vowed before when he was like to be drown∣ed in a storm, that if God would preserve him then, he would shew no mercy to his enemies. Things thus setled, King Trebellis being honourably rewarded was dismissed; but afterward Iustinian quarrelled with him about the extent of their borders: the Bulgarians being suddenly set upon by the Imperialists, fled to the mountains, whence afterward perceiving the Greeks to be secure, came down and made such  slaughter among them, that Iustinian in hast got on shipboard, and returned with dishonour to Constantinople. Afterward hee sent an Army against the Chersonaeans, among whom he had been exiled. They in the beginning of his designes would have destroyed him; therefore he causeth them to be cruelly mur∣thered, and their Grandees to be burned: and delighted himselfe to see 73000 of their youths drowned in a storm. The Chersonaei being thus barbarously used, and their childrens heads by Iustinian's command dashed against the wals, im∣plore aid from the Chazari, and perswade Philip Bardanes, lately returned from banishment, and made Admirall of the Seas, to invade the Empire, with him joines Elias the Praetor, whose children Iustinian murthered in their mothers breasts, and marryed her to an Indian cook. Bardanes with Elias rise against  the tyrant, who was now in Amastris a town of Paphlagonia, which Elias took, and in it Iustinian, whose head he cut off with his own hands; and slew his sonne Tiberius whom he begot of Theodora, and had made his colleague in the Empire. 4682. A. C. 712. This was the last of Heraclius his race, who of all the Emperours had the hap∣pinesse alone, to have a sixt successour of his own bloud. Iustinian reigned 7 years after his banishment. He was nicknamed Rhinotmetus from his cut nose; his tongue also was cut out by Leontius after he had been animated by the Astro∣logians, and Calinicus the Bishop (whom Iustinian had first designed for the slaughter) to invade the Empire. In his time a Synod was held in the palace cal∣led  Trullus of Constantinople, wherein Clergy men are ordained to retaine their wives. Pope Sergius who succeeded Conon opposed this Synod, wherefore Iustinian commands him to be brought to Constantinople; but in vain, for the Ar∣my at Ravenna resisted, and did not suffer the Pope to be touched. Besides Kilianus that was sent to convert the Franconians in Germany, who was murthered there. Wigbertus with divers other preachers from England, were sent to convert the Fri∣sians, Danes, Saxons and others. At this time Cunibertus the sonne of Bertarius was King of Lombardy. Him Alchisus Duke of Trent, whom Cuniberius saved when his Father Bartarius would have killed him, drove him out of his kingdome. But Alchisus tyrannising over the Clergy, was hated, and Cunibert is restored; who defeated Alchisus in a battell,  and then cut off his head and feet. To Cunibert succeeded his young son Ludbert; whom he recommended to the care of Duke Asprandus. But Regnibert Duke of Taurinum made war and overthrew the young King with his Governor Aspran∣dus; and so made himselfe King. He dyeth within one yeare of his reign, to whom succeeded his sonne Aripertus the second, who reigned 12 yeares. He kil∣led the lawfull heirs. Ludbert, whose Governour Asprandus fled into Bavaria, where he lived in exile 9 yeares: then being assisted by Dithbertus Duke of Ba∣varia, hee returnes to Lombardy, where he overthrowes in a great battell Ari∣pertus the usurper, and in his flight at Ticinum kills him. This Aripertus bestowed  on the Popedome that part of Piemont, which of old was called Alpes, Cottiae, or Cottiae, or Gothitae, Cerduella king of the West-Saxons was baptized at Rome, and there dyed, to whom succeeded Ina. Conredus King of the Mercii, that is, of Nottinghamshire and Darbyshire, taking Offa the son of Sigerus King of the East-Saxons with him, at Rome puts on the habit of a Monk. In Spaine all the Jews are made slaves, their goods confiscated, and their children delivered to Christi∣ans, to be bred by them. Felix
Archbishop of Ravenna, for refusing to  bee subject to the Pope, looseth his Bishoprick and both his Eyes. In Spaine Iulianus a Grandee whose wife King Rudericus abused, called the Saracens out of Africa, who oppressed the Goths, and in a great battell over∣threw Rudericus and killed him. The Saracen Generall was Tarichus, from whom the Mountaine Gibraltar, upon which he pitched his camp, was called of old Gebel-Tarich. So now the Saracens possesse Spaine, and drive the remain∣ing Goths to Biscay and the Pyrenaean hils, and the Astures, whose Captain Pe∣lagius was the first King there. In France Pipinus Duke of Ostrasia was Master of the Palace under Theodoricus, Clodoveus and Childbertus the French Kings, whose power he exercised; he made Lambertus Bishop of Trajectum, or Utricht, who enveyed against Alpaida Pipins concubine, of whom he had Carolus Mar∣tellus. She caused her brother Dodon to murther the bishop, to expiate which wickednesse shee erected a Colledge of Canons; but the murtherer was eat up with vermine, the stink of whose body was so oious, that he was flung and drowned in the river Mosa. Egicas King of Spain was like to be murthered by the Jews, which was the cause of their hard usage there, as is said. Sergius was Pope 13 yeares, he added divers Litanies to the Masse. His successour was Iohn the sixt, who sate 3 yeares. Paulus Anazar of Heraclea in Magna Graecia is chosen the first Duke of Ve∣nice under Abismarus 252 yeares since the building of that City. The Egypti∣ans  fall off quite from the Empire, and choose themselves a King, whom they call Caliph. Afric which was recovered by Belisarius from the Vandals, and had continued since subject to the Romans 170 yeares, is now possessed by the Sa∣racens. The West Goths had now reigned in Spain 256 years, but (as is said) alrea∣dy, are driven into corners, which is 46 years since by the Huns they were thrust out of Scythia. So the Saracens have now all Spain (except Gallicia the seat of the Astures and Cantabrians) which they injoyed 800 yeares together. The Vi∣sigoths yet possesse Aquitania, but ten yeares hence they are driven out by Caro∣lus Martellus, Vitisa the sonne of Egicas King of Spain, orders the Clergy to keep what Concubines they will, and forbids them to obey the Pope. Ulid king  of Arabia destroyes the Christian church at Damascus, commanding the Ara∣bick tongue to be used in stead of Greek. To Pope Iohn succeeded Zosimus for 20 dayes, and after him Constantinus 7 years, whom Iustinian in Nicomedia hono∣rably useth, to whom hee confessed his sinnes, and received absolution, lying prostrate at the Popes feet. He was the first Emperour that ever kissed the Popes Feet. Philippicus Bardanes having murthered Iustinian, obtaineth the Empire for 2 yeares and 9 months. The Pope rejects him as an hereticall Emperour, for he abrogated the sixt Synod, and reestablished the Monothelites, upon the request of that Monkish Astrologer who foretold him, he should be Emperour. Cyrus  the Patriarch is deposed by him, and one Iohn an heretick is advanced. He pro∣digally exhausted the treasures which were left by his predecessors, suffering in the interim Thracia to be exhausted by the Bulgarians, and Asia by the Saracens: wherefore he was hated by his Peeres, two of which, to wit, Theodorus and Buramphus deprived him of his eyes, as hee was reposing himselfe after dinner, this was done by the advice of Artemius the chief Secretary, who the next day 4685. A. C. 715. is proclaimed Emperour. Pope Constantine, absolves the Emperours subjects from their allegiance to him. Artemius or Anastasius the second reigned one year and 3 months. Hee prepares a great Fleet against the Saracens, and takes order that Byzantium be furnished with 3 yeares provision. But the Army upon a so∣dain  sedition forceth one Theodosius of Adramyttum, a Collector of Subsidies, and a quiet man, to accept the Empire against his will. Anastasius upon this layeth down his Emperiall Ensignes, is made a Monk, and is sent to Thessalonica; he was both a good scholar, and a good Catholick. He put down Iohn the here∣tick, and set Germanus in the chair of Constantinople. About this time dyed Pi∣pinus. Carolus Martellus is imprisoned by his stepmother Plearudis Pipins wi∣dow; but Dagobertus being dead, he
escaped out of prison, and recovered his fa∣thers dignity, which he so managed, that he established his posterity in the king∣dome of France. Theodosius was Emperor not much above a year, for understand∣ing that Leo Isauricus was made Emperour by the Army, and that his son Theodo∣sius was taken prisoner; he resigned up his interest to the new Emperor, and having 4687. A. C. 717. received the publick Faith for his indemnity, he with his son enter into holy Or∣ders, in which they spent the remainder of their days at Ephesus, in his his time Mu∣salmas the Saracen took Pergamus. CHAP. IX. The Roman affaires under Leo the third, and Constantine the fifth. 2. Of Pipinus, and Forraigne affaires. 3. The Church affaires of these times. LEo the third called before Isaurus Conon from his country Isauria, had been Governour of Albania in Iustinian's time, and subdued the Abasgi a people of Scythia. Now in the beginning of his Empire he is exercised by the Sara∣cens, who with a Fleet of 3000 ships besiege Constantinople almost 3 years, but of this great number scarse 5 escaped, but were all consumed with famine, plague warre, thunder, stormes, and artificiall fires in the water. The Bulgarians alone killed 22000 of them, as they were plundering of the countrey. In the meane  while Sergius Praetor of Sicilia, with one Gregory, aime at the Empire, but they were quickly suppressed by Leo; Gregory was killed, Sergius upon submission is pardoned. Leo in his third year overthrew Nicetas Xylinites and seise upon his whole estate for assisting Artemius (who was now banished in Thessalonica) to recover the Empire. Artemius with his Bulgarian Forces arrive at Byzantium, hoping the City had been for him, but finding it otherwayes, the Bulgarians for money betray him to Leo, who put him, with all that were of his plot, to the sword. The plague at this time was so hot at Rome and Byzantium, that it consumed 300000 Inhabitants. Tybris overflowed the wals of Rome: the Jews were a∣gain deluded by a false Messias, a Syrian born. Which caused Leo to force bap∣tisme A. C. 718. upon them, for which some of them were so desperate, that they burned themselves with their families. One Radbodus a German Prince and Heathen, as he was ready to be baptized, asked whether there were most of his Ancestors in heaven or in hell, it was answered in hell; with that he pulled his foot out of the water, saying: I will rather follow many then a few; but within three dayes after he dyed: So Gizid a Saracen Prince was perswaded by a Jewish Im∣postour, that hee should raigne a long time, if hee would abolish the Im∣ages of Christ, and of the Saints, which he went about to doe, but dyed the next 4695. A. C. 725. year after. Leo in the 10 yeare of his reign commanded all Images to be abolished. Philip∣picus Bardanes had commanded the same before, but was resisted by Pope Con∣stantine, as Leo is now by Pope Gregory the second, who would not suffer any tribute to be payed to the Emperour out of Rome and Italy, because he took up∣on him to alter religion. This gave occasion of great troubles in Italy, between the Pope and the Exarch, till it came to that passe, that the Emperor lost all his power in Italy, and had almost lost it in Byzantium; for not onely were his offi∣cers murthered by the tumultuous multitude, but the City also was assaulted with new Fleets of Saracens and others, which were forced with losse to be gone. Leo deposeth Germanus the Patriarch and other Bishops, for resisting his command  about the Images, and sets up Anastasius Patriarch, whom Gregory in the Synod which he assembled condemneth, and then dyeth the 16 yeare of his Popedome, to whom succeeded Gregory the third, no lesse zealous for Images then his pre∣decessour, against whom Leo sent a Fleet of ships, which miscarryed in a storme. Upon this the Pope cals a Councell, and excommunicates all enemies to Image∣worship. This so inraged Leo that he did cruelly put to death divers learned men and others, who distiked his proceedings
against Images. Oecumenicus pro∣fessour  in the Colledge of Constantinople is burned with his bookes. Hereupon Rome and Italy by Gregories means fall off quiter from the Greek Empire. A league is made beteween the Pope and the French against Luitprandus the Lon∣gobard, who was now besieging Rome. Corolus Martellus causeth Luitprandus to raise his siege and be gone. Leo seeing all his revenues in Italy to be stopped, gave order to confiscate all the Popes revenues in Sicily and Calabria. He pur∣posed to be revenged upon Italy, but was hindred by the incursions of the Sara∣cens upon the Eastern Empire. Gregory having excommunicated the Emperor, 4711. A. C. 741. dyed the 10 year of his Popedome, whom Leo followed shortly after. He reigned 24 years and 2 moneths: before his death the wals of Constantinople, Nicea, Nicomedia, and other townes were shaken down with earthquakes. In his time dyed venerable Beda; and Iohn Damascen for patronising Images, was banished a∣mong the Saracens. Leo dyed of a bloudy flux. In this Leo's time Eudon Duke of Aquitania, calls into France the barbarous Saracens to suppresse the greatnesse of Martellus, they under Abdiran their General take Garunda and Burdeaux. Charles being aided by the Lombards and Ger∣mans, subdues the Saracens, and kills their Generall. Eudon, repenting for cal∣ling in the Saracens, turnes head against them. It's thought there were killed in that war 375000 Saracens, of the French onely 1500. Pope Gregory sent to congratulate with Martellus this great victory, and withall to implore his  help for the City and Church of Rome. The Venetians and Pantapolitans, by the Popes authority shook off Leo's Government, they kill the Duke of Cam∣panie with his son, and soon after Paul the Patrician and Exarch, whose successour Eutychius is excommunicated by the Pope. The Romans sweare to defend Gregory against the Emperour. The Exarch with Luitprandus King of Lombardy, en∣ter into a league to suppresse Rome, Beneventum and Spoletum, and to reduce them again unto the Empire. But Gregory made all quiet, and a peace is conclu∣ded. Tiberius who thought to be King is killed. Inas King of the West-Saxons commanded that each house should pay a penny to St. Peter yeerly. Luitpran∣dus confirmes the donation of the Alpes, the Patent whereof written in golden  letters was carefully kept at Rome. Pope Gregory the second, ordained that on every Friday in Lent there should be fasting and solemne masse. He sent Boniface or Vinefred to convert the Frisians and their neighbours, who is made the first Bishop of Ments. Under Martellus S. Willibore converted the Westphalians. Whilest Pergamus was besieged by the Saracens, they were perswaded by a Magitian to rip open the belly of a woman with child, and to wash their right hands in the childs bloud, which they did in hope of victory. But they lost it, with the town, in Gods just fury. Pelagius descended of the Gothish Kings, is made the first King of Asturia and Legion or Leon, by the remaining Christians of Spaine, four yeares after  Ruderic had lost Spaine to the Saracens. Hee tooke for his armes a red Lion in a white field, which yet the Kings of Leon wear to this day. From him is de∣scended without interruption Philip, the now King of Spain. The Kings of Na∣var and Aragon are descended from Garsias Ximenius the Goth, and first king that reigned among the Pyreneans. The Christians that were permitted to live in Spaine were called Mozarabes, because mixed with Arabians. This liberty con∣tinued till Alphonsus the seventh. About the yeare 1100 that the Almoad Arabi∣ans came into Spain, they suffered no Christians to live among them. Martellus subdued Burgundy and Aquitania, slew Eudon, and drove the Saracens quite out of France. Alphonsus the first King of Galicia, son in law, and heire to Pe∣lagius  drove Arianism quite out of his kingdome; for which he obtained the name of Catholick for him and his posterity. Abathaminus Calypha nephew of Abdimelech having subdued Egypt, built Cayro where Memphis of old stood. From him Cayliph became a title of honour, both in Egypt and Babylon, or Bal∣dac. About this time dyed Carolus Martellus, who would not be called Mejor Domus as his predecessours, but Prince of France. He left two sons Carolomanus and Pipinus to rule France. These suppressed the Saxons: then Crolomanus be∣came a Monk.
Constantine the fifth, sonne to Leo Isauricus called Iconomachus, for being an enemie to Images, was crowned at two yeares old, therefore the first that was called Porphyrogenitus. He was called Copronymus from fouling in the Font when hee was baptized, which some held as a presage that he would pollute Religion. He was suspected to be a Nestorian. Whilest he was imployed in the Saracen war, Artabasdus his sisters husband, by the aid of Anastasius the Patriarch, set up the Images in Byzantium again, and for this cause was saluted Emperour by the people; which caused three yeares wars. In the end Constantine took Arta∣basdus and his son, these he blinded. Anastasius the Patriarch he caused to be car∣ryed about the city upon an Asse, with his face to the Asses tail, but afterward restored him to his spirituall charge. In the fifth year of his reign, whilest the Saracens were involved in civill broiles, he overrun Syria and Assyria, he tooke the city Germanitia between Cappadocia and Cilicia, and there advanced the Christian religion; He made a league with the Bulgarians, and marryed with the daughter of Caganus, who after shee was baptized was called Irene. But his ha∣tred to Images, reliques, and intercession of Saints: his persecuting of Priests and Monks who sided not with him, forcing them to marry, causing them to be beaten and banished to Cyprus, which was then invaded by the Saracens: his buyring, burning, drowning and breaking of pictures and Church ornaments, made him odious to the people and Clergy, many calling him the young Leopard, and brat of the old Lion; some caled him Caballinus, because hee loved to wallow in  horse dung. The sixt and seventh yeare of his reigne were terrible by reason of a violent plague through Calabria, Sicilia, Greece and Thracia; at Byzantium, there wanted people to bury the dead: such darknesse there was for 10 days to∣gether in August, that mens hearts failed them for feare: such Earthquakes were in Syria, that hils were turned into valleys, and townes removed 6 miles out of their places. Constantine cals a Synod at Constantinople, in which were present 338 Bi∣shops, who condemned Image-worship. This Councell he named the seventh Oecumenicall, notwithstanding the Popes opposition. He was not content to de∣molish statues and Images, but violates the Temple of Euphemia the Martyr, in  flinging her odoriferous bones into the Sea, which being driven by the wind to the Isle Lemnos, were taken up and brought back to Chalcedon. He drew Ste∣phen the Monk out of his cloyster, because hee taught men to despise worldly greatnesse. He killed and banished many of his Grandees; he made all men swear against worshipping of Images. Constantine the Patriarch who succeeded to Anastasius, was accused of secret plotting and correspondency with the banished Princes, for which cause he was banished, and then basely murthered. It was trea∣son to say, Mother of God help us: or to watch at the tombes of the dead. He took some townes of Armenia from the Saracens, and filled Byzantium againe  with Armenians and Syrians, which had beene almost exhausted of people by the plague. In the 22 of his reign he tooke occasion to quarrell with the Bulga∣rians, whilest they were intangled with civill discords; he defeated Zeletines their new King, who was therefore murthered by his people, and shortly after his successour Sabinus was banished for desiring peace: but the Emperour comming upon them with new Forces, made them sue for peace, which they obtained: but Telerichus their King resolved to breake it, by assaulting suddenly the Roman Forces. For that purpose an ambush is laid, which was discovered to Caesar by some of the Bulgarian Nobles. He without shedding of bloud seised on the am∣bush, and took all that lay in it. Telerichus perceiving his plot was discovered,  thought to finde out the discoverers by these meanes. He makes shew as if he would submit himselfe to Caesar, for this cause he desires the names of such men as might be fittest to be imployed in this Negotiation, and such as Caesar might put most trust in; divers of Tilerichus his friends were nominated unawares; these the Tyrant murthers supposing they had discovered the plot. Constantine to be revenged on the Barbarian for his treachery, resolves to fall againe upon Bulgaria, but in the interim he is taken with a
burning Feaver, which was so  hot, that he cryed out, he was in burning flames, and so dyed, having reigned almost 35 years. He had been three times marryed, his first wife was Irene the Bul∣garian mother to Leo, whom he marryed with Irene Attica, who made him a 4745. A. C. 775. Grandfather, by the birth of his nephew to Constantine, in the 30 yeare of his Empire. In this Emperours time, the Turkes breaking out of the Caspian straits o∣ver-run Armenia and Iberia; and being richly laden with booties, return home. This was about the year of Christ 763 and 764. At which time there fell out such a cold winter, that the Euxin sea was frozen 30 foot deep, and 100 miles over. Upon this followed such a hot summer, that the springs were dryed up. Moun∣taines of ice broke down the wals of some towns. To Luitbrandus in Lombardy  succeeded Ratchesius, who forgetting the 20 yeares peace he made with Pope Zacchary, and which he confirmed by an oath, besieged Perusia. To his camp the Pope repaires, and so wrought upon him, with presents, and his eloquence, that to expiate the violation of his oath, he resolves to enter into a Monastery, and did accordingly, with his wife and sonnes: but his brother and successour▪ Ai∣stulphus tooke another course. For hee seised upon Ravenna, and the whole Exarchat, and drove Eutychius the Exarch to Byzantium. This Government had lasted in Italy 182 yeares under 10 Princes. Aistulphus withheld from the Pope those towns which hee said belonged to St. Peter. Wherefore Pope Stephen who was the first that sealed his buls with lead,  and the first that was carryed on mens shoulders to the Lateran, implores the help of France, which he obtains for the courtesie Pipin had received of Pope Zacchary; which was this: Pipin had two brothers; the one Carolomannus was entred in∣to a Monastery; the other Gryphon was killed; wherefore he affecting the king∣dome of France, by his letters desires to know of Zacchary, whether a stupid Prince or an active subject were fittest to rule. The Pope understanding his meaning, gives present order to Boniface being lately made Archbishop of Mints, to annoint Pipin King of France, so Chilpericus being held unfit for go∣vernment, was forced to lay downe the Scepter and Crown, and to content him∣selfe 4720. A. C. 750. with a Monks hood. He was the last of the Merovean race. Thus Pipin be∣ing established in his throne by the Popes meanes, could doe no lesse then assist him to recover his own; wherefore having passed over the Alpes with an Army, he wrests from Aistulphus the Exarchat, and Pentapolis: and for the good of his soul he bestowed as a patrimony on the Church Ravenna, Bononia, Imola, Fa∣ventia, Ferraria; and in Pentapolis, Ariminum, Pisaurum, Ancona, Auximum and Urbinum, of old these provinces were called Aermilia, Fla∣minia, and Picenum. At this day they are named Romandiola, and Marca An∣conitana. No sooner was Pipinus returned to France, but Aistulphus repenting of his bar∣gaine, besiegeth Rome with an Army, wasting all the countrey about with fire  and sword. Wherefore Pipins help being implored again, Aistulphus is forced to pay the third part of his treasures, and a tribute to the French. Shortly after he broke his neck with a fall from his horse, as he was hunting. Pipin having with a long war wearied Guaiofarius Duke of Aquitania, for denying of the Chur∣ches rights, and the Duke at last being killed by his people, enlargeth his Domini∣on by the addition of Aquitania. Constantine the Emperour in hope to reco∣ver the Exarchat of Ravenna, sends presents to Pipin, and among the rest a rich Organ, the first that was ever seen in the West. But to no purpose, for it was an∣swered him, that those countryes were purchased for, and given to S. Peter: so Pipin dyed at Paris. To Charles he left Austrasia, to Carolomanus his other son, Burgundy and Alemannia. Gascony is divided between them. He founded the A. C. 768. Bishopricks of Saltzburg, Ratisbone, Aichstart and Frisinge. Burchard founded the Church of Herbipolis or Wirtsburg, and Boniface the Abby of Fulden in Ger∣many. Aistulphus being dead, Ratichisus had a minde to recover the Kingdome of Lombardy, slighting Desiderius who from the
Duke of Tuscia came to sway  the Scepter of Lombardy, but Pope Stephen changed his minde; he having con∣firmed Desiderius, received from him Faventia and Ferraria. In Spain to Alphon∣sus succeeded his sonne Froolas, who overthrew Iuzaphus a Prince of the Sa∣racens on the borders of Gallicea, after which time Spain was no more tribu∣tary to Miromalinus the Babylonian. For Abderamen thrust out Iuzaphus and made himself king of Corduba. The Saracens were now distracted into facti∣ons, so that their Dominion was divided among divers. Abubales had Persia, Salimus Egypt, Habdallas Syria, who having killed the other two obtained the whole Empire of the Saracens 21 years. He laid heavy taxes on the Christians and favoured the Jewes, yet permitted the Antiochians to choose them a new Patriarch, having been 40 yeares without one. He punished 16 of the Persian Magi, for offering by the vertue of certaine inchantments to flye in the aire, whence they fell down and hurt themselves. Habdallus Prince of Arabia dyed the same month that Constantine did. The same year Adelgisus sonne of Desi∣derius King of Lombardy fled to the Emperour Charles the Great, having in∣vaded his Fathers kingdome, which had continued 206 yeares. Charles was set on by Pope Hadrian, because Desiderius laid claim to all the lands granted by Pipin to the Roman Church. And Charles had devorced his wife Ber∣tha the daughter of Desiderius, which made him a greater stranger then before, to the Lombards; wherefore passing over the Alpes with his Army, he gave  battell to Desiderius, whom he defeated, and drove into Ticinum; at last tooke him upon surrender of the town, whom he sent with his wife into France; for his sonne Adelgisus was gone to Constantinople. So Charles obtaines all Ita∣ly except Neapolis, and the Provinces belonging to Sicily. He restores to Pope Hadrian the Exarchat and Pentapolis. Who having called a Synod makes Charles a Patrician, and power is given him to invest Bishops. Two years be∣fore A. C. 775. this Italian war, the French made war upon the Saxons, as yet heathen Idolaters, who exercised Charles his armes 33 yeares. The Church was much beholding to these two Princes, Pipin and Charles, for their munificence to∣wards her, for propagating Christianity, and suppressing Heathenism, Judaism, and heresies, for a setled Parliament in Paris, the work of Pipin, who was the  first that brought the use of Organs into the Western Church, after he had been presented with one from the Eastern Emperor; he also brought into the Gallican Church, the regulated musick of Rome, for before him, the French musick was confused, and inharmonious. CHAP. X. The affaires of the Empire under Leo, Irene, and Constantine. 2. Of for∣raigne  affaires under Charles the Great. 3. Of the Church affaires in those times. LEo the fourth succeeded to his Father Copronymus. Hee was also called A. C. 775. Porphyrogenitus, because in his childhood hee was made Co-emperour with his Father, and was clothed with a purple robe. He banished his brother Nicephorus with divers more, upon suspition, that he aimed at the Em∣pire. By his preswasion Telerichus King of Bulgaria being banished by his own subjects, was baptized, and marryed with Irenes cousin german, then hee was made a Patrician. Leo was perswaded to make his young sonne Constantine  Co-emperour with him. Hee had warres with the Saracens in Syria, where hee killed 5 of their Amiras, and 6000 Arabians. Hee removed the Jaco∣bite Syrians into Thracia. By this war he exasperated the Mahumetans, so that they overrun Asia, but all provision being conveyed into strong towns, they were faine to return home without effecting any great matter. Mahdy con∣trary to his oath persecuted the Christian within his Dominion, so that di∣vers suffered Martyrdome. Leo
persecuted and punished the Image-wor∣shippers  as his Father did. The fift yeare of his reigne, hee woulds needs set upon his head the Sacred Crowne beset with rich jewells which Mau∣ricius had dedicated in the Church of S. Sophia upon the wearing of this 4750. A. C. 780. Crowne, his head swelled with carbuncles, then he fell into a violent feaver, and so dyed. Charles the son of Pipin succeeded prosperously in his wars against the Saxons, Westphalians, Huns, Angarians, Hessians. Rodgundus the Longobard with divers o∣thers. In all his conquests he settles Christianity. He gave many honors, and crea∣ted many Nobles, of such as had done him good service. He had also good successe in Spaine against the Infidels, but in his return he lost the greatest part of his Army among the Pyrenaean hils, the Vascones being better acquainted with those places deceived them, and cut them off. Herein were slaine Eginhardus, Anshelmus, Roland, and many more of his chief commanders. The Saxons un∣der Witskundus their Generall oftentimes rebelled, and were still subdued, they were supplyed still with Auxiliaries of Danes, and Vandals, but at last Witikundus was baptized in the year of Christ 785. Charles erected the Bishopricks of Paderborn, Minden, and Osnaburg in Germany. About this time Ximenius the first King of Navar dyed, to whom succeeded Garzicas Eunicus, who relieved Pampilona, and took many castles and garrisons from the Moores. One Lescus was the first that taught the Polonians about this time to shooe horses. Irene Leo's widow, with her young sonne Constantine rule the Empire. She was a great defender of Images. Having understood that her husbands brother had plotted treason against her, shee caused them to be shaven, and then made Priests of them, and banished all those that favoured them. To make her sonnes Em∣pire the more firme, shee contracts him to Charles the Greats daughter, for that purpose sends Eliseus the Eunuch to instruct her in the Greek tongue and customs. Shee overthrew in divers battels Elpidius Praetor of Sicilia, and forced him to flye over to the Saracens in Africa, because he would have set up Nicephorus Constantines Uncle. Shee let the Saracens enjoy Afric quietly, being afraid of their power, and made the Empire tributary to Aaron the Saracen Prince. Paul  the Patriarch repenting that he had withstood Image-Worship, enters into a Monastery; Tarasius his successour adviseth Irene to call a generall Synod, which was done by Pope Adrians assistance, whose Legats were there. The place was first at Byzantium, then Nicea of Bithynia. In this 7 generall Councell was undone whatsoever had been done by Leo Isaurus, and his sonne and grandchild concerning abolishing of Images. The 6 yeare of her reign a great commoti∣on was raised, which disturbed the proceedings of the Synod, so that the Bi∣shops being 350 in all were forced to rise: the Empresse making shew of an ex∣pedition against the Saracens, demands all the armes of those who were of the contrary side and enemies to Images, which when shee had gotten shee banish∣eth  them all from the city, and arms her own party, and calls the Councell again, the 8 year of her reign at Nicaea, Image Worship is their concluded, and by her au∣thority confirmed. After this shee dissolves the contract made between her sonne and Rhotilde, and made him against his will to marry with one Mary an Armenian. She sends also Adalgisus the sonne of Desiderius, with some Commanders to make new stirres in Lombardy against Charles; because hee had seised upon the Duke∣dome of Beneventum. But Adalgisus is overthrown by the French and Lom∣bards in a battell, wherein he was taken and put to death. Constantine per∣ceiving that his mother did what she listed, and was altogether ruled by Stau∣ratius  a Patrician; and that hee being the lawfull heire, and now of yeares sufficient to rule the State, was slighted, and kept like a child under the fe∣rula; resolves to take the government upon himselfe. But shee on the other side will not part with any share of her power; keepes her sonne at home under correction being 20 yeares of age; banisheth all who adhere to him, and makes the souldiers sweare fidelity to her alone, and not to acknowledge any power in him whilest she was
alive. But the Armenian Armies were constant  in their loyalty to Constantine, and would not acknowledge the mothers so∣veraignty, whose example moved other souldiers, against their oath, to fall off from the Empresse. Therefore Constantine by their helpe takes the reines in his owne hand, commands Stauratius to forbeare meddling with State affaires, and confines his mother to her palace at Eleutherium, which shee had lately built, in which shee was entertained with all princely respect, and the next year he intending an expedition into Bulgaria, and another into Arabia, restores her a∣gain to her former power; which when shee had obtained, shee fell to vex and  punish all his friends and acquaintance; hee makes an expedition into Bulga∣ria, but with ill successe, for his army was defeated, and his chiefest Nobility ei∣ther killed or taken prisoners. Upon suspition of treason, hee caused his three Uncles Nicephorus, Christophorus, and Nicetus to be apprehended, and their eys to be put out, which cruelty made him to be hated, chiefly of the Armenians, and to make himselfe the more odious hee puts away his wife Mary, pretending shee would have poysoned him, whereas it was known she was a vertuous and religious Lady: then he being puft up for some good successe he had lately against the Saracens, takes one Theodate a Virgin out of the Nunnery, and makes her his Empresse, which iucensed the Monks against him, who accused him of bigamy, for which he banished them. Constantine makes a second expedition into Bulgaria, to take off (if he could)  the tribute, which they so insolently demanded, but understanding that his wife was brought to bed of a sonne, hee repaires to the City, and commends the charge of the Army to his mother: shee takes this absence of her sonne, as a fit opportunity to reinvest her selfe in the soveraignty; to this end both shee and Stauratius with bribes and flatteries worke upon the Army, whose good will shee obtained. Upon this the Emperour is called home from the Saracen war, the intent was to apprehend and secure him, which was done accordingly; he thought to have escaped, but could not, wherefore hee is brought back to the City, and his eyes are put out, 5 yeares after hee had so served his Uncles, and 4768. A. C. 798. on that very day. Not long after he dyed, his death was accompanied with 17 dayes darknesse, the eye of the world disdaining to looke on those who had thrust  out the eyes of their Soveraign. Hee reigned 8 yeares alone. His mother after this reigned 3 yeares, in which time shee put to death her husbands Uncles, that they might not aspire to the Empire. Embassadours are sent by her to Charles for confirming a solid peace, for parting the Empire between them, and for the making up of a match between Charles and her; hee likewise sends Embassadours to Constantinople to the same effect; but whilest they were there a great change fell out; for Irene being sick, it was given out by some of the Grandees, that she had nominated Nicephorus the Patrician to succeed her in the Empire; upon this, he is saluted Emperour by the Armies, to whom hee gives the oath of allegiance, then besiegeth Irene in the Palace, makes her deliver up all her treasures; then banisheth her to the Isle Lesbos, where shee was secured with a strong guard, there shee pined away with griefe, and dyed, having reigned 23 yeares. Nicephorus dispatcheth the Embassadours with letters to Charles, desiring a ratification of the peace, propounded by Irene. Charles having again subdued the Saxons, hee translates a great number of them into Flanders and Bra∣bant. Hee beat the Sclavi and Vinidi, as they were plundering of Magde∣burg. Hee takes Thassilo sonne in law to Desiderius, who by his wifes per∣swasion had renewed the rebellion. Him hee condemnes of treason, and then sends him to a Monastery. Charles also suppressed the Hungarians, who were Thassiloes associates, and had invaded Germany. So having after 8 years warre subdued the Huns, and quieted Pannonia, Charles assembleth a Synod at Franc∣furd of 300 Bishops, wherein Nestorianism is condemned, which Elipandus and Felix two Bishops had renewed, and it was defined, that Christ according to his flesh was the true sonne of God, and not adopted, and that in his huma∣nity he should be worshipped, no lesse then in his Divinity. Image worship is condemned, and the second Synod of Nice
rejected. Alphonsus also King of  Asturia and Gallicia in Spaine wearyed with payment of Virgins which was ex∣acted by the Saracens, in way of attribute, resolves to fight them, and did ac∣cordingly, in which battell hee defeated them, took Lysbone, killed many 1000 of them, and freed a great part of Spain from the Saracens yoak. The Ensigns of this victory he sends to Charles. After Stephen the fourth, or third as some say, who sate 4 years succeeded Adrian the first, who sate 23 yeares. He ordained that every day 100 poore people should be fed in the Lateran Court. In Leo's time a coffin or chest of stone, was digged out of the ground. Christ shall be born of a Virgin. In him I beleeve, was ingraven on it, the dead body that was found in it, is thought by some to bee Plato's, this was found a little before the warres of Charles with the Avares and Boii, whose last King Tassilo hee tooke with his sonne, and put them in a Monastery. About this time England was invaded by the Danes. In the yeare 791. the University of Paris is erected by Charles, whose first professours were foure Monkes, all Beda's scholars, to wit, Rabanus, Albinus, Claudius and Scotus; not Scotus subtilis the Franciscan, who lived long after: he erected also the Universities of Papia, of Ticinum, of Osnaburg, and renews that of Bononia fonnded by Theodosius. To Hadrian succeeded Leo the third, who sate 4 yeares: he lost both eyes and tongue by the malice of the Romans. He escaped out of prison, and was restored by Charles. In his time the Empire was translated from Greece to France. But which was a greater wonder; Leo was resto∣red again to his eyes and tongue.
The fourth Booke OF THE SECOND PART INTREATING Of the times from CHARLES the Great, till PHILIP the Emperour in the West, and the French Empire in the East, containing 400 Yeares. CHAP. I. The affaires of both the Empires under Charles in the West, under Nice∣phorus, Michael, and Leo in the East. 2. Of the Nations subdued by Charles. CHARLES having obtained the name of Great for his con∣quests over the Saracens, Saxons, Danes and many other bar∣barous 4770. A. C. 800. Nations, is brought to Rome by Pope Leo, who having  beene condemned to prison, and to lose his eyes for some crimes objected against him, escaped out of prison, and either by miracle received his sight again, or else hee did not totally lose it, the executioner taking pity on him. Charles was at Paderborn in Saxony with his Army, when the Pope came; who made no delay to follow his ghostly Fathers conduct to the Imperiall City with his Army, where having called a Synod to examine the crimes objected against the Pope; he was told, that the Bishop of Rome was not to be judged by any man. And therefore no crime being there alleadged against him, hee cleared himselfe by his owne oath, and so was absolved, and placed again, to the great griefe of his enemies, in his pontifi∣call  chair. To requite this favour of Charles; in S. Peters Church upon Christmas day▪  Pope solemnly pronounces him Emperour, setting the crown on his head, and the people with loud acclamations, saying: Long life and victory to Charles Augustus, crowned by God, the Great, the Peace-maker, Emperour of the Romans. Hence came the custome, that the Western Emperours received their Crowns from the Popes. For the Eastern Emperours had been now for a long time slighted at Rome, ever since they opposed Images. Charles now intends to subdue Sicily, but is retarded by Irenes Emhassadors, who promised marriage with her; this Embassie was acceptable to Charles, who hoped by this marriage to unite the two Empires again. But Aetius the Eunuch, who endeavoured to have his brother Leo then Governor of Thracia and Macedonia to be Emperour, marred this match; and he was also de∣ceived, for Nicephorus (as we have said) obtained the Empire. Nicephorus a perfidious and covetous man, spared not those by whose helpe hee obtained the Empire. Hee got by his faire promises Bardanas the Patrician whom the Eastern people had proclaimed Augustus, to relinquish his title, swearing hee should receive no prejudice by it; no sooner had Bardanas devested himselfe, and entred of his owne accord into a Monastery, but Nicephorus under hand caused his
eyes to bee thrust out, and then wept, as if this had been done without his know∣ledge. Then hee makes Stauratius the sonne (for the father was dead) his Co-Emperour, and shortly after fighting against the Saracens, hee lost the battell, nar∣rowly escaping himselfe. He fortifieth Ancyra of Galatia, and other townes to keep off the Saracens incursions: but basely hee made himselfe, his sonne, and his Empire triburaries to the Mahometans, who under Aaron being 300000 strong, overrun Romania. Hee promised to pay yearly 300000 peeces of silver for the Empire, and 3000 for himselfe and his sonne: binding himselfe also not to repair the Forts demolished by the Arabians. But shortly after Nicephorus as his man∣ner was broke the league; which brought the Saracens upon Cyprus, who overthrew  the Churches of that Island, and drove out the inhabitants: they also invaded Rhodes, but could not take the town, having lost their Fleet in a storm. Shortly after Aaron dyeth, to whom succeeds his sonne Mahomet, hee had civill warres with his brother which was pernicious to the Christians and Arabians of those places, many Churches and Monasteries were destroyed. In the interim Nicepho∣rus gives himselfe to wantonnesse, hee abuseth two Ladies of great beauty, and bestowes one Theophania another mans wife, an Athenian, and of kin to Irene, upon his son. Nicephorus fearing Charles his increasing greatnesse sends Embassadors to prof∣fer A. C. 810. him Italy, except so much as lay upon the Sea between Naples and Sipontum  or Siponio in the Apulia. He desired they two might live as brothers, that one might injoy the East, the other the West. It was also covenanted that Venice which had now stood 350 yeares, should be free from both the Empires. Yet this same year they drew upon themselves, both the Grecian and French Forces, for they had expelled Iohn their Duke: whom Nicephorus would have forced again upon them. But the French under Pipinus were sent by Charles to assist the Venetians. Who finding Obelerius the Tribune thrust out of the City, for favouring the French, fell fowle upon the Venitians; but having lost many of his men, and done no good, was forced to make a dishonourable retreat to Ravenna: yet Charles suffered the Greekes to enjoy Venice. Nicephorus the 9 yeare of his reign invades Bulgaria, to be revenged on Crunnus king thereof, who had seised upon the souldiers pay by the way, as it was conveying from the Emperour to the camp. Hee had also taken Sardica, and killed many 1000 Romans. But was willing to make his peace with Nicephorus; and to give satisfaction; which proffer was rejected, and an army is sent to wast Bulgaria. But suddenly in the night Crunnus fals upon his camp, made great slaughter among the Romans, and killed Nicephorus himselfe in his pavil∣lion, whose head Crunnus fastned on a long pole, and carryed it about. Most of the Nobility were slain, all the arms and the imperial wealth in the Camp were carryed away; Stauratius Caesar received a wound in his neck, and fled to Byzantium, where many who hated the sonne of Nicephorus, intended to make Curopalates  husband of Procopia Stauratius his sister Emperour. Michael Curopalates perceiving the peoples inclination towards him, and fearing lest hee should bee prevented, procured also the souldiers good will, so the next day the Senat being called, he was saluted Emperor the third month after the death of Nicephorus. Stauratius hearing the acclamations of the people, put on a Monks habit, in which 3 months after he dyed of his wound, which did stink and fester. Michael being setled desired the friendship of Charles and Pope Leo, propound∣ing a match between his son and one of Charles his daughter. After this he led an Army against the Bulgarians, but with ill successe, for the Barbarians prevailed, who wasted Thracia and Macedonia, and drove the Christians out of Beroea and An∣chialum; many imputing these miseries to Image-worship, and wishing that the sonnes of Copronymus were sent for out of Panormus, to free the Empire from the Barbarians: these Michael punished with banishment, and the losse of their eyes. Crunnus propounded peace to Michael on this condition, that he might enjoy the ancient bounds of Bulgaria, and have liberty to receive fugitives; which being denyed him, hee fals upon Mesembria, and by the help of a certain Arabick Chri∣stian, whom Michael had defrauded of his pay, tooke it, and in it much trea∣sure.
Shortly after he gave such an overthrow to Michaels Army, that he having lost all, and in despaire ever to recruit again, fled and changed his robes with a Monks habit, and left the Empire to Leo the Armenian. Theophylact Michaels sonne, being already called Emperour, had his genitalls cut off, and hee with his mother Procopia and brothers were banished. Nicephorus reigned 9 yeares. Stau∣ratius the younger one year, and Michael almost 2 yeares. The Danes afore this had invaded England, and carryed away great booties, they were called Normans, a generall name to all the Northern people, their King Godefrid had warres with Charles, with whom hee quarrelled for invading the Nordalbing Saxons, now called Holsatians. Two years after Godefrid with 200 ships arrived in  Frisia, where having bdued the Frisons in a battell, imposeth a tribute upon them: but before hee could encounter with Charles, hee was killed by a souldier. To him succeeded Hemingus his brothers sonne, the same yeare that Pipinus king of Italy, Charles his eldest sonne who beat the Beneventins, and Venetian Captaines, departed this life; when upon the restoring of Venice to Nicepho∣rus, peace was concluded between the Greeks and Francs. The next year peace was concluded between the Francs and Danes; Hemingus sent him divers presents A. C. 811. and then dyed, to whom succeeded Sigefridus and Anilo, who both were slain in battell, and 11000 with them of the Danes; Hazald and Reginfrid obtained Denmark the same time that Michael got the Empire of Byzantium. But these brothers were driven out of their kingdome by another faction, who had lived  in exile among the Suiones now called Swedes. This fell out the same yeare that Charles dyed of a Feaver and Pleurisie the 72 yeare of his age; having 4784. A. C. 814. been King of France 47. of Italy 42. and Emperour 14. yeares. Hee was ho∣nourably buryed at Aquisgranum, now called Aix, (where he dyed) in our Lady Church built by himselfe. He was a wise, valourous, learned and fortunate Prince. He built divers religious houses, Churches and Colleages, hee instituted the 12 Peeres of France. He built a most sumptuous bridge over the Rhene neer Mintz. This bridge was counted halfe a mile in length, ten yeares were spent in build∣ing it: which a yeare before his death was burned downe, some say by casualty, others by Ricolphus the Archbishop, because in the night time many robberies were committed there. He gave Teutonick names, (that being his own tongue) to the windes and moneths. Hee appointed proper Lessons for each Festivall day, to be read in Churches. He was canonized by Pope Alexander at the de∣sire of Frederic the first Emperour; and a hymne appointed to be sung to him at Aix. He subdued the greatest part of France, of Spain, of Italy, besides Pannonia, Saxony, Histria, Dacia, Liburnia, Dalmatia, and many barbarous Na∣tions. The Greeks with presents sought his friendship, so did Aaron Prince of the Saracens, who sent him an Elephant, a rich clock, and other Princely gifts. He bequeathed by his last will all his treasures on charitable and pious  uses. Hee never miscarried but that time he returned from his victory over the Moores in Spain, for as he was comming downe the Pyrenaean mountaines hee lost his Army, by the treachery of the Vascons, as we have shewed. 23 Me∣tropolitan Churches inherited his treasures; to wit, Rome, Ravenna, Millan, Fri∣uli, Gradus, Colen, Mintz, Saltsburg, Rowen, Trevers, Sens of old Senones, Vi∣sontium or Bisontium, Lions, Rhemes, Arles, Vienna, Tarentasia, Ebrodunum, or Yuerdon, Burdeaux, Turones or Tuos, Bituriges. Charles had four wives, 1. Hermingardis daughter to Desiderius King of Lombardy, whom hee put away. 2. Hildegardis daughter to Godefrid Duke of Alemans, who bore to him 3 sons, Charles, Pipin, and Lodovic, and four daughters. 3. Fastrada a French Lady.  4. Luitgarda an Aleman. By his Concubines he had other children, one of them called Pipin, who was crooked, with some others plotted treason against him, which he prevented, and cast his son into a Monastery. Among his three sons lawfully begotten he divided his Empire, to Pipin he gave Italy, to Charles Germany, to Ludovic France and hither Spain, but Pipin and Charles dyed before their Father. Pipin left one son Bernhardus and 5 daughters. Charles dyed the yeare after his brother, having subdued the Sorabi a people in Lusatia, and killed their King Mi∣loducus.
After the death of Charles the Great's two sonnes, the Saracens and Moores in∣vaded Italy, Charles sends his Grandchilde Bernardus, who tooke from them Ni∣cea in Gallia of Narbon, and Centum cellae in Hetruria, which some thinke to be Civita vechia. Pope Leo the third, after he was restored by Charles, sate 16 years, so in all he was Pope 20 yeares. Egbert subdued all the South part of Great Bri∣tain, and ordained it should be ever after called England. In Charles his time 10000 Saxons with their wives and children are planted in Brabant and Flan∣ders, and many Flemings are sent into Saxony. The 12 Peeres of France which Charles instituted were 3 Archbishops, 1 of Rhemes, 2 of Laudon, or Laon, 3 of Lingon or Langres. These were also Dukes: three Bishops; and Counts or Earles: 1. of Bellovacum or Beauvais in Piccardy. 2, Of Novion or Noyon in Piccardy likewise. 3. Of Catalaunum or Chalon in the Dutchy of Burgundy. The six of the Laity were 1 three Dukes, 1. of Burgundy, 2. of Normandy, 3. of Aquitan or Gascony. Then 3 Earles: 1. of Flanders, 2. of Tholouse, 3. of Campania, which at this day are changed according to the pleasure of the King. Among other Nations subject to Charles, England also submitted to him, who sent thither Guido to subdue it. The clock and candlesticks which the Persian king sent to Charles he bestowed upon our Lady Church at Aquisgranum or Aix in Province. The Saracen King of Gallicea being subdued by Charles, received the Christian Faith. The Northern people that molested the Christians in Ire∣land  are driven out by the Scots. Crunnus the Bulgarian King was not con∣tented to carry about Nicephorus his head on a pole, but hee also at last made a cup of it to drink in. Charles erected 9 Cathedrall Churches, to wit, Monster, Winden, Osnaburg, Brem, Paderburn, Verden, Hamberg, Hildemen and Halberstad in Saxony. He used to have read to him in supper time S. Austin of the City of God. He caused Paulus Diaconus write the lives of the Saints. In the East to Michael succeeded Leo the fifth. Hee subdued Crunnus that was now puft up with so many victories, and gave him a deadly wound by an arrow, who after this victory over Crunnus, commanded the abolition of Im∣ages, banished Nicephorus the Patriarch, for withstanding his edict, and set up Theodatus in his roome. Michael Balbus conspired against him: for which treason hee is condemned to bee burned, but by the intreaty of his Empresse hee put off the execution to his owne destruction, till the solemnity of Christs Nativity was passed. In the meane while hee kept the key of the prison: but in the night time not being able to sleep, hee riseth and goeth into the prison, where hee seeth Balbus sleeping soundly upon the bed, and Papias his Keeper lying on the ground. At which Leo was much moved, and with his hand gave threatning signes, for Papias affection to his prisoner: one of the watchmen upon Leo's departure awaked Papias, and told him of the Emperours being there, and of his anger; hee awakes Balbus and tells him what had happened: upon this they tell the Assasinats, that they must dis∣patch the Emperour quickly, or else Balbus who was condemned, would dis∣cover them. They being affrighted at this, without delay put on Priests habit, and joine themselves with the singing men in the Quire, having their swords under their garments, so while the Emperour was singing Divine Hymnes, with the rest they fall upon him, cuts off his head and hand; then run into the prison, breaks off the fetters from Balbus, and proclaimes him Emperour: then crowns him in the same Chappell where Leo was killed: they banish his wife, and 4 sons, after their privy members were cut off. Leo reigned 7 years and 5 months.
CHAP. II. The affaires of the Empire under Ludovic and Lotharius, in the West, under Mi∣chael Balbus, Theodosius, Theodora, Michael the second, in the East. 2. For∣raign affaires of those times and of the Church. LUdovic (called the godly from his bounty to the Clergy and the poor,) about A. C. 814. a month after his fathers death, removes from Aquitain to Aix; where hee began his reign. He renewes the league with Leo the Emperour of  Byzantium. Pope Leo being dead succeeds Stephen the fifth, who crowned Lu∣dovic at Rhemes the third yeare of his reign. To Stephen who sate but 4 months succeeded Paschalis who was Pope 7 yeares. Ludovic was like to be killed by the fall of a porch or gallery at Aix, by which fall hee was hurt in his body, and mortified in his minde. At the same time Sclaomirus King of the Eastern Sclavo∣nians revolted from him, and Bernhard in Italy raised an Army against him. But when Ludovic was marching with his Forces against Bernhard, his souldiers forsooke him, and so he surrendered himselfe to his Uncle. Ludovic having as∣sembled a Councell at Aix, condemnes the chief authours of Bernhards sedition; the Clergy men he punisheth with degradation, and the Laity with losse of their  eyes, and both with banishment. Among these were Anselmus Bishop of Millan, and Theodulphus bishop of Orleans or Aurelia. Bernhardus a few dayes after hee had lost his eyes dyed, which made Ludovic grieve for his rash sentence. Not long after this Irmengardis his wife dyed, by her he had 3 sons, Lotharius, Pipinus, and Ludovic: but the losse of his wife was recompensed, by the regaining of a lost king∣dome: for Sclaomir was brought captive, who not being able to excuse his rebel∣lion, is devested of his kingdome. Ludovic after this marryed with one Iuditha, a Bavarian and his neer kinswo∣man, A. C. 826. this marriage cost Frederic bishop of Utrecht his life, for he spoke against it, as unlawfull, whereupon Iuditha sent some Assasinats who murthered him at the  Altar. About the 7 yeare of his reigne, he had a cruell warre with Luidevicus King of Hungary; which war ended with the death of Luidevicus. Bernhard King of Italy being dead in the monastery, where his Uncle put him, Lotharius is made King of Italy, and Caesar by his father Ludovic, who marryed to him Irmengardis the daughter of one Hugo. Afterward he sent him into Italy, and desires Paschalis the Pope to proclaime him Emperour. This Paschalis was elected Pope by the Romans, without the Emperours knowledge; at which he was dis∣pleased; but quickly pacified again by the Popes excuse: who purged himselfe by oath, that hee had no hand in the murther of the Emperors servants at Rome. To Poschalis succeeded Eugenius the second who sate 4 yeares, and then gave  place to Gregory the fourth, who sate 16 yeares. In Ludovic's time the Danes by Ebbo Archbishop of Rhemes were converted to Christianity, who caused Heraldus (that was lately after his banishment; set∣led again in Denmark by Caesar's means) to be baptized at Mintz, with a great multitude of Danes. About the time that Ranimir successour to Alphonsus in Spaine obtained a great victory of the Saracens, wherein were slaine 40000 Bar∣barians: but this joy lasted not long, for the Dane was expelled by Godefrids sonnes; the Saracens out of Spaine wasted Barcinone or Barcellone in Arragon now, but in Aquitain of old: the Bulgarians plundered Pannonia; for which cause many of their Commanders and Officers for their neglect were casheered. The spoile that was done by the Saracens in Spain is repayd by Boniface Earl of Corsica who plunders the coasts of Africa, and doth not suffer the Saracens to settle their wealth in Sicily, which they tooke lately from the Governour there∣of under Balbus. Ludovic was severe against the rich apparell of the Clergy. But the Nobility perceiving that hee was altogether ruled by his wife Iuditha, they stir up Pipin King of Aquitania against his Father, as unworthy to reigne any longer; with him in this conspiracy Lotharius is joined,
lately come out of  Italy. Iuditha is commanded from the Court, and the Emperour himselfe is threatned to be put into a Monastery, but the controversie was quickly taken up, the Emperour and his sonnes are reconciled; the Authours of the rebelli∣on are shut up in Monasteries, Iuditha is absolved, and restored to her dignity again, and Ludovic to his Empire by the Germans help. Barnhard Earle of Barcilona who was accused of adultery with her, (which was the maine cause of this rebellion of the sonnes against the father) profferred to vindicate his inno∣cency by his sword; but no adversary being sound, hee cleared himselfe by oath, and is also restored to his honor. Pipin would not give his consent to this, wherefore hee is confined to Aquae in Aragon: but he escaped thence into Gascony. Which  when his father understood, hee commanded that Pipin should be secured at Tre∣vers; but he having made his party in Gascony strong, and his brothers being animated by bad Counsellours to joine with him, they resolve to take armes, and to force their father to give over the Empire, the rather because they thought his love was altogether set on Charles the balde, his sonne by Iuditha. With these Pope Gregory the fourth combines, threatning to excommunicate the Emperor, out of a grudge, because Ludovic commanded that the Popes election should not be valid, unlesse it were examined and confirmed by his Legat. At length both Ar∣mies meet neer to Basil, ready to fight, but the Pope cunningly goeth over to Ludovic, pretending to reconcile him to his sonnes, but indeed to protract time, that the Emperours army might be wrought upon his followers, to fall off to his sonnes: which partly by promises, partly by threatnings was effected. Ludovic being thus forsaken, went over to his sonnes camp hoping to be kindly used by them, but he was put in prison, and his power wrestedd from him. This unnatu∣rall fact was so odious to Varinus and Bernhardus, that they send Lotharius a challenge, either to set his father at liberty, or else to fight with either of them. He laid the fault upon the Bishops, and so leaving his Father in the Monastery of St. Dennis, retires to Burgundy, where he begins to fortifie himselfe, and to raise arms: in the meane while Ludovic by the help of his friends is restored againe to his right, and Lotherius being forsaken by his brothers, Ludovic and Pipin,  came humbly to his father and submitted himselfe to his mercy, who having sharply reproved him, gives him the oath of allegiance, which he took, and then returned to Italy. Ludovic stopped all passages towards Italy, that none might come thence into Germany without his knowledge. Ebbo that converted the Danes with divers other Bishops are degraded, and banished for their seditious counsels, the rest of the evill counsellours are pursued by Divine justice, for in the space of 7 weekes the plague swept them all away, in whose destruction Lu∣dovic rejoyced not, but prayed for them. Pipin the fifth yeare after he was repos∣sest in his power was struck with an untimely death, which was ushered by a co∣met, at the fight of this Ludovic presaged some evill comming, wherefore hee by alms giving and prayers labours to divert Gods anger. After this, by the perswasion of Iuditha, hee divides his Dominions among his sonnes. To Lotharius he gives the Empire, with Italy, and the South part of France, even to the river Maesa. The rest of France he bestowes on Charles the Balde Iuaitha's sonne, and to Ludovic he bequeathed Germany; who not con∣tented with his portion, laid claim to all beyond the Rhene, and so began to make new commotions. Augustus hastning to appease them is forewarned by a ter∣rible eclipse of the sun, that the light of the Empire should be removed, which fell out true the same month. For the Emperor dyed of grief, and of an Inposthume neer Mintz the 64 year of his life, the 28 of his Empire. Drogo his brother Bishop 4810. A. C. 840.  of Metz in Lorrain, sometime the Capitol City of Austrasia, performed his fune∣rals there with great solemnity. Michael Balbus a Phrygian born, a defender of heresies, a hater of disputations, a countenancer of all Religions, a denyer of the Resurrection, and of Divels, a maintainer of whoredomes, a rejecter of lawfull oaths, the sink of all wicked∣nesse: as he nefariously got the Eastern Empire, so he ruled it, or rather mis∣ruled it. He was called Balbus from his
stammering tongue. He could neither  read nor write, and therefore suffered no children to be taught to read, left they should be learneder then himselfe. One Thomas who called himselfe Constantine, a Tribune, and who had defeated the Hagarins, strove to be Emperour; there∣fore with a great army besiegeth Byzantium: but Winter comming on he was forced to raise the siege, and return the next spring. Many encounters he had with Balbus: but at last by the help of the Bulgarians Thomas is defeated, & flyes to Adri∣anopolis where he was apprehended, upon the surrender of the City by famine, and tortured to death, his hands and feet being first cut off. Perinthus the Metropolis of Thracia, called also Heraclea from Heraclius, held out a great while against Balbus in defence of Thomas. So did also Panium, but they were at last taken. In the  meane while the Agarens of Spain seise upon Crete, and there settle, having made 823. 828. slaves of the Islanders. The Saracens of Afric invade Sicily, which they took by the treachery of one Euphemius, whom the Praetor of the Island should have executed for the abusing of a Nun; Balbus strove to recover these, but was still beat off with losse. Dalmatia likewise shook off the Graecian yoak, and became a kingdom. Thus the Eastern Empire being torn, Balbus dyed of a Phrensie and Strangury, or as 829. some say of a Bloudy flux, having reigned 8 yeares. To him succeeded Theophilus his son, who justly punished the murtherers of Leo Armenius, though they advanced his father Balbus from the prison to the Throne. He punished his wifes brother for building so close to a widows house,  that he stopt up her windowes. Many other acts of justice he did; and was a great enemie to Images. He burned off the fingers of one Lazarus a Monk, for painting or colouring of Images. He confessed that he never had to doe with any woman but his own wife, except one Lady, for which hee was sorry. He was a great lover of Musick. With divers successe he made excursions upon the Arabians. He took Sozopetra in Syria, Amira's native place, in requitall of which Amira took A∣morya in Phrygia (whence Theophilus derived his pedigree) killed many thou∣sands in it, and imprisoned the Nobility, whom Theophilus would have ransomed, 841. but could not, whereupon with griefe hee fell sick and dyed the 13 yeare of his reign, the next yeare after Ludovic's decease, but before his death hee  had overcome and stain Theophobus whom the Persian Army of 30000 men had named Emperour. In the reign of these Emperours Garsias King of Navar dyed, to whom after 4 years interregnum succeeded Eùnicus who was anointed King. The Bulgarians had received the Christian Faith the former age, but were since returned to Gen∣tilism, they are made Christians again under Ludovic. A. C. 817. afterward An. 860 they were totally converted under Theodora. Near Tulle in Belgica a maid lived 3 years without meat or drink. The Paulicians then flourished in Phrygia and Lycaonia, these were a new sect of Manichees patcht up of Judaism, Gentilism, and Christianism; these were favored by Balbus. By the skil of George a Venetian Priest,  at the charges of Ludovic water Organs were made at Aix. Ludovic parted with his right of election of the Popes and confirmed the Emperors former grants to them. S. Marks body is translated from Alexandria by Sea to Venice, to which a mag∣nificent Church is erected. The Feast of all Saints which had been 220 years before this time, observed in Rome, is now by Ludovic imposed upon France and Germany: the Saracens plunder in Italy, and rob the Vatican at Rome, but in their returne they made shipwrack. Alphonsus the third sirnamed the Great, reigns in Spain, Egbert in England, Kenneth the second son of Alpinus in Scot∣land. To Ludovic succeeded his sonne Lotharius in the Empire. He would have sub∣jected  his brothers to him, as Emperour, and attempted to deprive them of their inheritance; making Ludovic to content himself with Bavaria, and Charles with Gascony, which they must hold of him in Fee. These scorning to be subject to their brother, and to loose their Patrimony, understanding also that hee had raised an Army against them, resolve to join their Forces together, and to withstand Lotharius: a bloudy battell is fought neer Antissiodorum or Aexer in Province, in this conflict above 100000 men were slain, on both sides,
Lotharius  lost welnigh all his Army, and he was fain to fly to Aix, where he recruits his army; the next year his brothers meet him again in the field; but his souldiers being mind-full of their last great defeat, forsook him, so that he was forced to flye again. Yet doth not mean to give over, but recollects his Forces, and encampeth neer Matiscon a town in Burgundy, thither his brothers came with their Army; as they were ready to fight, the Peers of the Empire did so mediate between them, that Ludovic should have Germany for his share, Charles should injoy France, and Lotharius Italy with the Empire, and so much of Germany as lay between the two rivers, the Rhene and Mosell, hence the countrey was called from Lotharius Lotharin∣gia. Pipin the sonne of Pipin had Aquitania, which Charles not long after aim∣ed at, not without great losse of his men, yet at last by force he got it, and shut up Pipins two sons, to wit, Pipin and Charles into two Monasteries, whence they made an escape, but were brought back at last. Ludovic Germanicus bestowed on Charles the Archbishoprick of Mints. Charles killed also Bernhard, his mothers favourite of old. Ludovic Germanicus subdued the Abotriti a people bordering upon Bulga∣ria, and killed their King, who was the cause of their revolt, and set Dukes or Go∣vernours over them. He caused 15 Bohemian Dukes to be baptized, and brought all their countrey in subjection. About this time, the Normans with a great Fleet plundred the coast of France, and by the river of Loire entred into the bowels of the countrey as farre as  Paris. King Charles not being able to force them, perswaded them by mony to be gone out of his Kingdome. They had first infested the Spanish shoare, but were beat off by King Ranimirus, they molested also England, Frisland, and Sax∣ony, they overthrew Hamburg, which Charles the Great built as a bulwark to keep them out. At last they took the Isle Valacra, and called it Seland: so after they had done much mischief abroad, and had vexed France 20 years, they returned to Den∣mark laden with gold, where they destroyed one another with civill wars. Lotha∣rius the Emperour understanding that the Romans had a minde to deliver up the City to the Greek Emperours, hee made a journey thither; punished the authors of this plot, changed the Magistrates and reassumed his ancient right in confirm∣ing  the Popes election. Returning from Italy, he divides his Kingdomes among his 3 sonnes. He declares Ludovic Emperour and Lord of Italy. Hee placeth Charles in that part of France which of old was called Gallia Narbonensis, and Braccata, containing Languedoc, Provence and Dalphine. Lotharius the youngest is setled in Lotharingia or Lorrain: so being weary of the world, and sorry for the great mortality that was in all his Dominions by the plague, willing also to expiate his rebellion against his father; layeth aside his Empire, and entereth in∣to a Monastery called Brumia neer Trevers, where the next yeare after hee dyed, having reigned 15 yeares. His sonne Charles did not live long after his father. Lotharius having put away his wife Ditberga, marryed his Concubine Baldrada  the Bishop of Colens sister, wherefore he was excommunicate by the Pope, which cost him a journey to Rome; where he obtained absolution then having assisted his brother in suppressing the Saracens, in his return homeward he dyed of the plague at Placentia having lost a great part of his Army. This Lotharius had two sons by his Concubine; Lotharius the third and Hugo Duke of Lorrain. Ludovicus Ger∣manicus 869. had long wars with the Sorabi, Bohemians, and Marcomans. He had three sons, Carolomanus the eldst who dyed of an Apoplexie, Charles surnamed the grosse and Ludovic. His daughter Ludgarta, lived a monasticall life; to Ludovic the third son of Germanicus the Empire fell. In the reign of Lotharius the Arabian Mores plundered the coast of Campania,  seised upon Beneventum, sackt Cassinum and pillaged the Suburbs of Rome: then was Sergius the second Pope, before his Popedom he was called Os porci or Swines face, of which being ashamed hee changed his name to Sergius, whence it came to be a custome afterward for every Pope to change his name. He sate 3 yeares, to whom succeeded Leo the fourth, who fortified the City against the Saracens, and by the help of the Neapolitans and Cajetans overthrew their fleet. The Islan∣ders of Corsica and Sardina, were forced to leave their
habitation to the Saracens,  and to dwell at Rome, Leo was the first that forbid laymen to be in the Quire at Masse time. He caused Cloysters or Schooles to be built neer the Churches. Leo fate 8 yeares, to him succeeded Benedict the third, who sate 2 yeares. After whom sate Nicholaus the first 9 years. He excommunicated Lotharius. In Spain Halàaragmau the third, and after him his son Mahomet reigned, who 3 times per∣secuted the Christians. The Saracens take the Isle Lipara, and in it they found the reliques of S. Bartholomew, which they abuse and disperse. At Constantinople Theodora the wife of Theophilus the Emperor, reigned in her son Michael's his minority. She was given to Images, therefore repeals the acts of Theophilus against them, deposeth Iohn the Patriarch, and sets up Methodius,  who being accused of whoredome, cleered his innocency by shewing to the Judges his shrunk and dryed genitals. The Bulgarians rebell against Bogores their king, for being a Christian, but hee overcame them in a battell, and by Theodora obtained the inlargement of his territories. The Paulician Manichees, fell off totally from the Arabians, and infested the Provinces of the Empire with many incuisions. About this time Godaliscus the Monk mis-understanding St. Austins Doctrine of Predestination; taught that God absolutely decreed the salvation and damnation of men; and that Christ did not dye for all. Af∣ter Hincmarus Bishop of Rhemes, and Rabanus Bishop of Mints had refu∣ted him, Lodovic drove him out of Germany. Then lived Etelwoolph King  of England, who made his Kingdome tributary to the Pope. Kenneth the great in Scotland was yet alive. He by a stratagem of fish skins, with which in the night he was clothed, and speaking through a bugles horn, incouraged his Nobles to give battell the next day to the Picts which they did accordingly, supposing they had been warned by an Angell; and obtained such a victory as quite extinguished the Picts Nation. Michael having shut up his mother in a Monastery, undertakes the Easterne 855. Empire. He was a drunken foole, a slave to his pleasures, his belly, and his flat∣terers, hee spent the whole treasure his mother Theodora left, upon his luxury and pleasures, and at last was fain to make money of his robes and houshold∣stuffe. He was twice defeated by the Saracens: but his Uncle Petronas gave them such an overthrow, that hee killed their King Amirus, and tooke his sonne prisonner: but after Petronas was dead, the Saracens tooke head again, and seised on the Cyclades Islands, and with their incursions infested the Greekes in Sy∣ria, Michael besiegeth the City Samosata in Syria, but was beat off with almost the losse of his life. Hee made Bardas his Uncle by the mother, Caesar, and committed all to his managing. This Bardas advanced learning, by erecting Schooles, and professours of all Arts, to whom hee allowed good maintenance. Hee made great use of one Leo a learned man, who in the Isle Andros had been taught Rhetorick, Arithmetick and Philosophy by Michael Psellus. Amirumnes  the Saracen Prince offered to Theophilus this Michael's father, a great summe of money, if he would part with Leo, to teach the Sciences in his Dominions: but Theophilus considering the great happinesse and honour that learning brought to Greece, and unwilling the Agarens should out strip the Grecians in knowledge, would not part with Leo whom hee made Bishop of Thessalonica, which dignity hee lost under Theodora, for subscribing against Images. But Bardas for his Bi∣shoprick, gave him the Mastership of all the Colleges which hee erected. This same Bardas was excommunicate by Ignatius the Patriarch for devorcing his wife. But hee thrust Ignatius out of his place, and set up Photius a learned man: whose Bibliothec and Nomocanon are yet extant, with Balsomons  Notes. In this Emperours time the Rossi or Roxolani, whom at this day wee call Moscs and Moscovites, inhabiting the North side of Taurus, with a Fleet invade the Euxin Sea, and lay siege to Byzantium, but were forced to return by stormy weather, without effecting any thing. Michael grew every day worse and worse and still more sottish: one time being in his sports, news were brought him that the Beacons were on fire, which signified the
Saracens had invaded the Em∣pire.  He caused the watchmen and Beacons to be removed, that his sport might receive no interruption. He mocked all reverend ceremonies in the Church, cau-sing them to be acted in an Apish way, by histrionicall young fellows. He had raised one Basilius an Horse-courser, to be master of his horse; he was a poor ex∣ile; but said to be descended from the ancient family of the Arsacidae. He was so 866. well beloved by Michael, that he heard his false accusations against Bardas, whom hee suffered to be murthered in his own sight, because he used to reprove him for his fooleries. Then he marries this Basilius to Eudocia his owne Concubine, and proclaimes him Caesar; in his mad humour he used to cut off the noses or hands and heads too sometime of his most familiar friends, in sport. The new Caesar  fearing lest he might be thus used, endeavours to prevent it, by the death of the tyrant, which was hastned by this occasion. A certain waterman highly extolling and flattering the Emperour, was by him clothed with the purple robe, then turn∣ing to Basilius (who frowned to see this sight) Have not I power (saith he) to make this man an Emperour as well as thee? Basilius fearing that Michael might speake in earnest; in the night when he was drunk and a sleep, he brake into his chamber 867. with his associates and murthered him, having reigned alone 11 yeares with his mother 14. Basil of a horse-courser becomes Emperour, and rules the East 17 yeares. CHAP. III. The affaires of the Empire under Ludovic the second. Carolus Calvus. Lu∣dovic the third, and Carolus Crassus in the West, and of Basilius in the East. 2. Offorrain affaires of these times. LVdovic the second Lotharius his eldest sonne was made Co-emperour with his Father, hee with the help of his brother Lotharius stoutly opposed the Saracens at Beneventum: but having lost a great part of the Army by sick∣nesse,  he left the defence of the town to Adalgisus Prince of Salernum, who in the Emperours absence revolted to the Greeks, with all the towns of Samnium, Cam∣pania and Lucania. Ludovic to be revenged of this treachery, returnes into Ita∣ly, and recovered the revolted townes, even Capua at last which had made long resistance, and drives the Saracens out of Campania. But hee shewed himselfe a weak Prince, in suffering himselfe to be deluded and perswaded by Adelgisus, to disband his Army; which when hee had done, Adelgisus with fire and sword set upon his Palace having no sufficient guard, and forced him to sweare that hee would never come again within the confines of Beneventnm, and that hee would not revenge this wrong. But Ludovic was absolved shortly after by the Pope from this forced oath, and so comming upon Adelgisus with an Army, drove him out of Italy into Corsica, and punished his friends that remained. So having setled I∣taly, he dyed at Millan the 20 year of his reign, without issue male, which ministred 875. occasion of quarrell for the Empire, betweene his Uncle Charles surnamed the Balde king of France, and Ludovic king of Germany. But this controversie was betimes composed in a Synod, called by the Pope, in which by generall consent Charles is named Emperor, and is crowned by Pope Iohn the eight, at Rome whom some call Iohn the ninth. Basilius the Macedonian having by the murther of Michael obtained the Greek 876. Empire. He first of all redemands the money which Michael had profusely spent, causing every man to restore who had not right to it. Yet when it was restored, he was content with the halfe, returning the rest again: hee preferred none to places of judicature, but such as were uncorrupt, and free from covetousnesse. His ears were open to all complaints, and he was a carefull provider for the poore. Photius the Patriarch suspended him from the Communion for his murther, wherefore he deposeth him, and sends for Ignatius who had been banished: having discovered a plot of his Grandees against him. Hee
invests his three sonnes Constantine, Leo,  and Alexander with the Imperiall Ensignes: Of his fourth son Stephen hee made a Clergy man. Against the Eastern Agarens hee fought with good successe, and o∣verrun all Asia even to Euphrates, where hee tooke in many Castles, and so re∣turned in triumph to new Rome. Hee restores Photius againe to his Patriarchat, Ignatius being dead; and yet Photius for opposing Images had beene condemned 878. by a Synod at Constantinople. Basilius by Nicephorus Phocas drove out of Apu∣lia (which with some other places adjacent belonged upon agreement to the Greek Empire) the Carthaginian Saracens which had invaded it, and took Ragusium (a city in Sclavonia, where Epidaurus of old stood) from them, by the help of Lu∣dovic the second Emperour, and of the Venetians. Hee overthrew the Saracens power at Sea, and converted many Jewes to Christianity, to the profession of which he perswaded also the Rossi: and so he did the Bulgarians, whose King having entred into a Monastery, delivered the government to his sonne; but shortly after perceiving that he was falling back to Gentilism, reassumes his own power, depo∣seth his sonne, and puls out his eyes, and then makes his other sonne King. Basi∣lius also overthrew the Mahumetans, and slew Chrisochires their Prince, who had invaded the Greek Territories. Hee tooke in Caesarea of Cappadocia, and laid waste many of the countreys of the Agarens. The Saracens of Tarsis with their Amiras wrote defying letters to Basilius shewing that neither he, nor the sonne of Mary should be able to breake his power: against these Bragadoces Andrew a  Scythian and Patrician is sent, who so quelled them, that few of all that bragging Army were left: but Andrew is deposed for not taking in of Tarsus, and Stypejo∣ta, whose tongue was nimbler than his hand, was sent. He carelessely sate down be∣fore the wals, and neglected to intrench himself, wherefore he was suddenly surprised by the Saracen horse. Ludovic and Basil joining their Forces together suppressed the Western Aga∣rens, and tooke the Sultan prisoner, who being brought in triumph to Capua, and suddenly laughing at the volubility of the chariot wheeles, was asked why he laughed, he answered, that he saw in the whirling about of the wheeles, the Symbol of humane inconstancy. For this saying Ludovic received him into favour, but hee was deluded by him, when he perswaded him to transplant to some other places  the chiefe families of Beneventum and Capua, to prevent insurrections, then he in∣formed those against whom hee gave this advice, that Ludovic meant to remove them, whereupon they fell off from him, and carryed back the Sultan into Afri∣ca, yet at last they were forced to submit to Ludovic. Basil having reigned 20 years, one day in his hunting was wounded by a Stagge, of which wound he dyed: the Stagge got him by the girdle on his horns, a Courtier for drawing his sword to cut the girdle, was unjustly put to death, as if hee intended to kill the Emperour. Hee left behinde him three sonnes above named, the fourth Constantine was dead, his daughters hee shut up in Monasteries. About these times some write that Pope Ioan the woman lived, whom some call Iohn the seventh, some Iohn the eight. Nicolaus the first sate 9 years, to him succeeded Adrian the second, who was Pope 5 years. Photius the Patriarch calls a Synod at Byzantium against Pope Nicolaus, upon this a schism is made between the Greeke and Latine Churches; and then openly the procession of the Holy Ghost is opposed by the Greekes. Cyrillus and Methodius preach to the Sclavonians, and Dalmatians. Pope Adrian the second was the first that crowned Elfred the sixt King of England. Then was the Uni∣versity of Oxford erected, where 3 Colleges were built by the King. Some think the foundation of this Academy was laid in the Britains time in Wiltshire, and from thence translated by Elfred to Oxford. In Scotland reigned Donadus the fifth,  who overthrew the remainders of the fugitive Picts assisted by the English, and not long after was overthrown himselfe, in another battell by the English. His suc∣cessour Constantine the second defeated the Danes in Fife, and in a second bat∣tell was defeated by them. Charles the Bald Grandchilde to Charles the Great, succeeded in the Empire, to Ludovic. He by bribes got the Popes good will, and therefore was preferred 875. to his elder brother Ludovic, who entred upon France in his brothers absence,
but shortly after dyed abroad. About 37 years after the decease of his father Ludo∣vicus Pius; his sonne Carolomannus held Bavaria, Bohemia, Moravia, Carinthia, Pannonia three yeares. His other sonne Ludovic held Belgium, France, Saxony, and Thuringia, with the Earoli. Charles the grosse obtained Suevia, Alsaia and Lorrain, till he got the Empire▪ Carolus Calvus his second wife was Rothildis the wi∣dow of Lotharius, the deceased Emperour, by whom hee had children, but they all dyed. Hee was a proud, but a cowardly prince; having made Boson his wifes brother Duke of Italy, prepares an Army against his brother who had invaded France, but understanding hee was dead, resolves to imploy his Army of 50000 men against his brothers sonnes, therefore hasteth towards Germany. Ludovic 876.  the younger laboured what he could to make peace; but not prevailing, e with his people betake themselves to fasting and praying; after which hee marcheth with his small Army against his Uncle, whose great Army he so defeated, that he was faine to flye for his life. Carolus Calvus falls desperately sick upon this over∣throw, but being recovered, hee is sent for to Italy against the Saracens, who were fallen upon the Popes territories; as soone as hee arrived thither, hee makes Boson King, and sends his Army against Caroloman his cousin German; and then out of feare flyes to Rome, Caroleman forsakes Italy. Calvus about to return to France falls sicks at Mantua. It's thought he was poysoned by Zedechias a Jew 877▪ his Physitian. His brother Ludovic King of Germany dyed the year of Christ 882.  Caroloman of Bavaria deceased two yeares before A. C. 880. Charles the Grosse succeeded in the Empire. About that time Pasquintan and Varfrand Dukes of Britanny, having killed Sa∣lomon their King, fell at oddes between themselves; a cruell battell is fought, in which Pasquintan though backt by the Normans, is defeated by Varfrands small Army, and when Pasquintan renewed his Forces, hee was put to flight by Varfrand though sick in bed. Pope Iohan, the eight who sate ten yeares, crowned 3 Emperours in 4 yeares space, to wit, Charles the Balde, Ludovic the Stammerer, and Charles the Grosse. Swarmes of Locusts in France for one dayes space dark∣ned the air; till flying to the British Sea, with a sudden blast of wind are all drown∣ed; 874▪ upon this followes the plague and famine, which consumed the third part of the people. Ludovic the third sirnamed Balbus or the the Stammerer, the son of Calvus, ha∣ving with much pompe and magnificence intertained Pope Iohan the eight at Ly∣ons is by him invested Emperor, and crowned by Hincmar Archbishop of Rhemes▪ 879▪ He did not live long after, nor did he any memorable act: for he dyed the second year of his reign, not without suspition of poyson. He sent his crown as he was dy∣ing with his regall robes to his son Ludovic as yet but young. To whose share France fell, to his other son Caroloman, Burgundy. Ludovic in the year 882 dyed, Carolo∣man 882. in 884. The Normans under Rollon their Captain seat themselves in that part, which is from them called Normandy, it was called Neustria before. Theodoricus was created the first Earl in Holland. Carolus the third sirnamed Crasso or Grosse, the youngest sonne of Ludovic the second King of Germany, obtained the Empire from the posterity of Ludo∣vic the third, he was brother to Ludovic the French King (who dyed a year after his eldest brother Caroloman) and great grand childe to Charles the Great. His two bro∣thers being dead, all Germany, Italy, and France did now belong to him. He was forced to let the Normans quietly injoy that part of France called Normandy from them: and upon Godefrid the Norman he bestowes Frisia with the daughter of Lotharius. His brother Ludovic tooke a part of Lorrain from the French. He defeated 5000 Normans neer Scaldis, and was defeated by them in Saxony having lost 12 Earles, and 2 Bishops, among which was Duke Brunno the builder of Brunswick. His brother Caroloman dyed of the Palsie. This Charles the Grosse overthrew Hugo and Boson, who laid claim to the Kingdome of France. He thrust out Hugo's eyes, and clapt him up in a Monastery. He drove Boson out of Vienna, then posted to Rome where hee was crowned by Iohn the eight. Ludovic be∣ing dead, the Normans rage with fire and sword in Germany, they plunder
Utricht, Collen, Trevers (whose Bishops they slew) with many other townes. Lu∣dovic's only sonne at Ratisbone falling from a window broke his neck. Charles having made peace with Godefrid King of the Danes o the Normans, he caused him to be baptized. Pope Iohn the eight having sae 10 yeares was poysoned, and then knockt in the head, his successor Martin the second sat not much above one yeare. Vido Earle of Tuscia, and Duke of Spoleto being guilty of treason, to a∣void punishment, cals into Italy the Mauritanian Saracens against him. Charles sends his Kinsman Berengarius, who overthrowes Vido. Hee at last cleered him∣self  by oath of the treason objected against him, and so is received again into Charles his favour. Caroloman the sonne of Balbus is wounded by a Boare as he was hunting, which cost him his life. Charles after much happinesse, and many victories, was faine to come under the tuition of his brothers sonne Arnulphus, whom the Francs, Saxons, Bavarians, and other Germans made their King at Francfurt. Because Charles had cast off his chaste and lawfull wife, and had gi∣ven too much advantages to the Normans enemies of his Kingdome: therefore 888. finding all his friends to forsake him, he sent presents to Arnulphus desiring some maintenance for his life, which he obtained, and the next year dyed, having reigned almost 9 yeares. In his time Rollon being setled in Neustria or Normandy bordering on the Bri∣tans, and Gallicocean, the capitall City whereof is Rothomagum or Roan, re∣ceived  the Christian Faith, and with it Charles the Simples (or as others say) Charles the Grosses daughter in marriage, and a new name also, for he was named Rupert, from whom descended the Norman Dukes, among whom was Richard the second, who by his sword conquered Apulia, Calabria and Sicilia, having dri∣ven out thence the Greeks and Saracens. This Carolus Crassus had for wife Richar∣dis daughter to the King of Scotland. About these times the African Agarens, overthrew Syracusis; Abdalla a new Caliph of Africa, abjured Mahomet, and fol∣lowed Haly; and withall changed the Saracen rites and Prayers; his nephew Elmedinallas having obtained Egypt set up his regall seat at Cair, equall to that of Babylon. The Rossi or Russi were miraculously converted to Christianity;  for the Bishop whom Basil sent for that end, cast his Bible in a flaming fire, which was found among the ashes untouched by the fire. It is reported of the Emperor Basil, that desiring to see his sonne Constantine who was dead, one Theodorus a Monk, represented him, as if he had been alive, for this Basil's other sonne Leo, accuseth him for a witch, but Basil favoured and admired him. Theodorus to bee revenged of Leo, counsels him to weare a dagger in his bootes privately, as a spell against all danger, and then informes his Father, that Leo meant to kill him, for he carryed a dagger in his bootes for that end: the dagger being found, Leo is laid in Irons, at which the people were much afflicted, crying out, Alasse Lord Leo: these words a Parrat learned, and one day as Basil was at dinner speaks them; at which he being moved, and earnestly intreated by the people, Leo is set free. About that time also the Danes invade England again, and are expulsed, except such as became Chri∣stians. Theophylact is sent by Photius the Patriarch to be Bishop of Bulgaria. Charles the Grosse was the first that dated his Letters and Patents with the year of Christ: whereas the Eastern Princes, even untill the Councell of Basil used no other com∣putation in their subscriptions, but that of the World, according to Eusebius his ac∣count, which is erroneous. To Martin succeeded in the Popedome Adrian the third, who sate one year. He renews the Decree of Pope Nicolaus the first, to wit, that the Pope should be chosen by the Clergy and people of Rome without the Emperour. To him succeeded Stephen the sixt, or as some say the fifth, he sate 6 years.
CHAP. IV. Of Carolus Crassus and Ludovic the fourth in the West. 2. Of Leo and his son Constantine in the East. 3. Of the affaires of Italy, Germany, Spain, Scotland, and other passages of those times. THE posteritity of Charles the Great, lawfully begotten failed in Carolus Crassus; for Ariulphus was of the fourth degree from him, or his Nephews 887. Nephew, that is, the sonne of Carolomanus Germanicus by a Concubine He succeeded his Uncle Crassus, who had a sonne called Bernhard, by a concubine: and Ludovic Balbus had a posthume sonne named Charles, but these were passed by, and the French choose for their King Odo or Otho the Earl of Paris, who had stoutly defended the City against the Normans▪ Him Arnulphus permitted to be King, conditionally that hee did homage and fealty to him: the Italians chose for their King Berengarius the sonne of Eberhard, Duke of Friuli: others chose Vido Duke of Spoletum, who defeated Berengarius in a battell, and forced him to flye to Arnulphus. Vido having got the Empire of Italy, enjoyed it but 3 years. For Berengarius by the help of Arnulphus obtained it, who stript him of his Empire, and drove him to Spoletum. Hee dyed the 3 yeare of his Empire, 894. 899.  vomiting bloud. His sonne Lampertus Emperour in name dyed in hunting. Ro∣dulphus the sonne of Conradus and Grandchilde of Hugo Abbas makes himselfe King of Burgundy, the Normans breake in upon France and Germany: the Hungarians upon Italy, Pannonia, Carinthia, and Moravia: the Christian Bri∣tains in a battell killed 15000 of the Inhabitants that were Gentiles. Arnulphus brought the Hungarians first into Germany, by whose help hee overthrew the rebelling Bohemians. The Normans at first defeat Arnulphus his Army, but in a second battell are so defeated by him that scarse were any left to carry home ti∣dings. The Danes who were then the chief of the Normans lost two Kings Gode∣frid and Sigfrid with 16 Ensignes▪ Berengarius being assaulted by an Army under Lambert Vido's sonne was forsaken for his tyranny by his own souldiers, and so lost his Kingdome. Otho King of France is driven out by Charles the simple sonne to Balbus. Arnulphus is forced to make another journey into Italy against Lambert, who was crowned by Pope Formosus. He layeth siege before Rome, and enters it by the guide of a Hare: which the souldiers pursuing with hooting towards the walls, and the Watch thinking that they were comming to assault runne away: and so the imperiall City, which from Pope Leo was called Leonina is surprised 896. by a Hare. Arnulphus is crowned there by Formosus, and his enemies are put to death, the Romans take the oath of allegiance to him: the government of the City is committed to one Foroldus. Lambert in hunting was killed by Hugo Earl  of Millan, whose Father for rebellion hee had put to death, when he was King. From this time that Arnulphus is crowned, the Germans claim title to the Empire. The wife of Vido and mother of Lambert was then at Firmum, which shee held out against Arnulphus. Shee cunningly sends to him by his servant a 899. poysonable drink, which put him in a Lethargy, and so the siege broke up. Ar∣nulphus the third year after his imperiall inauguration dyed of the lousie disease. This Kingdome of Italy begun by Berengarius, continued 80 years, till the 32 year of Otho the great, who thrust out Adelbertus. The Italian Kings were these, 1. Berengarius. 2. Vigo. 3. Lambertus. 4. Ludovic the sonne of Boson. 5. Hugo.  6. Lotharius with his father. 7. Berengarius the second. 8. Adelbertus. To Adri∣an succeeded Pope Formosus who sate 5 yeares: some thinke that Charles the simple; the French King after the death of Otho, was the first that wore in his coat the three lillies. Rodulphus about this time erected the kingdom of Burgundy. To Formosus succeeded Boniface the sixt, or as some say Romanus, who was Pope 26 dayes. His successour Stephen the seventh sate one yeare. Hee hated Formo∣sus so much, that hee
condemned and abrogated all his Decrees: drew his body out of his tomb, robbed it of all its pontificall ornaments, and having cut off three of its fingers, commanded it to be flung into Tibris. Romanus succeeded who sate 3 months, and to him Iohn the ninth, who was Pope 2 yeares. It was agreed that the Bishop of Rome should be called Pope, and the Bishop of Constantinople Patri∣arch, and both Oecumenicall or Universall. To Basil in Constantinople succeeded Leo his sonne, called the Philosopher 899. for the love he had to learning. Hee remembring the wrong done him by The∣odorus Santabarenus the Monk in belying him to his Father, first degraded him (for now he was a Bishop) then caused him to be whipt, and then banished to Athens, where his eyes were thrust out by his command: and because Photins favoured him, hee is deposed from his Patriarchall chaire, sent into a Monastery, and his brother Stephen placed in his roome. Hee was disliked by his people, for doat∣ing upon his Concubine Zoe, whom after his wifes death hee marryed. He made warres upon Angaeus or Berengarius Duke of Lombardy. Hee raised such cu∣stomes upon the Bulgarian goods, that they tooke up armes against him. Leo not being strong enough to master Simeon the Bulgarian King, cals in the Turkes bordering upon Isther, these were called then Hungarians, they at first de∣feated the Bulgarians, but at last were defeated by them: the battell was so great, that of the Bulgarians were slaine 20000. and most of the Imperialists were killed. One Basilius cousin german to Zoe, conspired with some others against Leo, but the plot was discovered by Samonas an Agaren, and Basil is banished. Leo's third wife was Eudocia who dyed in childebed. On the day of Pentecost as Leo was going into the Church, hee was knockt down with a cudgell, and nar∣rowly escaped death. One Alexander was suspected to be the Authour of this plot: but nothing could be proved against him, yet hee was quartered and burned. Leo entertained friendship with Arnulphus, and sent him divers pre∣sents. He would one night try how vigilant his guard was, by disguising him∣selfe, and bribing them with money, the first and second guard tooke money and let him passe, but the third would upon no tearmes, but beat him and impri∣soned  him. So knowing who were false, who true, hee expels the one from his Court, and advanced the other: hee reigned 25 yeares, then dyed, having left the Empire to his son Constantine which he had by his last wife and to his bro∣ther 911. 900. Alexander. Ludovic the fourth son of Arnulphus succeeded his father in the West-Empire. His tutors were Otho Duke of Saxony, and Hatto Archbishop of Mints. In his minority there were many civill broiles. Zuendebold Arnulphus his bastard was killed by his own subjects whilest hee was striving to reduce them to his obedi∣ence. Ludovic the Emperour for a great summe of money made France tributary to the Hungarians, who upon this becoming insolent fall with fire and sword upon  the Italian cities beyond Padua. Ludovic the sonne of Boson drove Berengarius out of Italy into Bavaria, and upon this disbands his army thinking all was safe, but Verona which favoured Berengarius calls him again into Italy, who comming suddenly with his Army in the night seiseth upon Ludovic, and deprives him both of his eyes and kingdome: so Berengarius is saluted Emperour. About this time Nicolaus the Patriarch excommunicates Leo the Greek Emperor for his fourth marriage; Nicolaus was entreated to absolve him, but would not, where∣fore Leo deposeth him, and sends him into a Monastery, and then sets up Euthymi∣us Sincellus in his room. After Leo's death, his brother Alexander governed the Empire, or rather neglected it, giving himself to voluptuousnesse & gormandising. He thought to have emasculated his pupil, but he was hindred by death, for having overcharged himself with too much meat and drink, as he was taking horse hee broke a vein, so that he dyed bleeding. In Germany there were civill wars also in Ludovic's time; for Adelbert Earl of Bamberg, for 7 yeers stood out in rebellion against the Emperour, the Bishop of Mitzburg, and Conradus Earl of East Franconie, opposed Adelbert or Albert, who in this expedition lost his two brothers, wherefore to be revenged he treacherously
murthered Conradus. Ludovic summons him to appeare and to give account of this murther; but refused, whereupon an Army is levyed against him. Hato Bi∣shop of Mintz perswades Albert to submit himselfe to the Emperour, which he did; and then immediately being condemned of high treason, he lost his head: his posterity afterward became Marquesses of Austria. There brake out also civill wars in Lorrain, and other places of the Empire, which brought the Hungarians out of Thrace into Bavaria, wasting Pannonia by the way. Ludovic with all the strength he could make fights them for three dayes together; in this battell hee lost the flower of all the German Nobility, and himselfe was forced to flye▪ the Hungarians pursue their victory with fire and sword, so that Ludovicus was faine  to buy peace of them for a great sum of money, which cost him his life; for up∣on this he grew sickly and melancholy, and in the 24 year of his age dyed, having reigned 12 years: in him ended the issue male of Charles the Great, from the be∣ginning of whose Empire, to the death of this Ludovic were 111 years. He dying childlesse ministred occasion of much trouble in the Empire, till by consent Henri∣cus 912. Auceps was elected. Alexandor Leo's brother on his death bed recommended the care of his brothers sonne Constantine being yet but 7 yeares old, to his mother, and to some of the Nobility: having made Phocas Generall of all the Land Forces, and Romanus an Armenian Admirall of the Seas: but Constantinus Ducas the son of Andronicus aiming at the Empire, raised a faction against the young Emperour, which was quickly appeased by the Tutors and Praetorian Guard, who seised upon Ducas, and cut off his head. Then these Tutors began to tyrannise, which cased com∣motions in the City; and drew the Bulgarians against them, who sate down twice before the city; the siege could not be raied without much intreaty, and great sums of mony: they pillaged Hadrianople twice, and in their last expedition they wasted Thracia, and made incursions upon Macedonia. Constantine longing to see his mo∣ther Zoe, who was banished from the Court by Alexander; she is sent for, who short∣ly after takes upon her the government, and removes most of Constantines Tutors. Romanus the Admirall having removed Constantines mother from the govern∣ment  and mued her up in a Monastery, he marryeth his daughter to him, and then setting him aside, makes himselfe and his own sonnes Emperors, and so ruled the Empire 26 yeares, but at last hee was taken by his sons and banished. These sons Constantine seiseth upon whom he shaveth and makes Priests of them: and then ruled all alone. He recovered in Italy from the Lombards Beneventum. Hee had no luck against the Saracens. He quieted the Turkes with money which he could not doe with armes, and converted many of them to Christ, at last he was poy∣soned by his owne sonne Romanus, after he had reigned 54. years, 13 with his fa∣ther, Uncle and Mother, 26 with Romanus his father in Law, and 15 years alone: but the poyson being not strong enough to kill him, he recovered and betook him∣selfe  ever after to a private life; sequestring himselfe from the world, in hill O∣lympus with one Theodor cus Syzicus a devout man: his life was equall to his reign, for he lived 54 yeares. Phocas Generall of the Land Forces was oppressed by the greatnesse of Romanus, and his eys put out. Romanus slighting his son in law Constantine so much, that he was fain to get his living by painting; Had made his owne sonne Christopher Emperour, but he dyed shortly after. At last Constan∣tine being deluded and abused 26 yeares together by Romanus, and his two other sonnes; by the help of Stephen his kinsman he layes hold upon Romanus whom he shaved, and banished to Prota a small Isle in Bosphorus Thracius. His 2 sons as they were with him at dinner, were suddenly by his command layd hold  on, put in Irons, and sent to keep their Father Romanus company in his exile, in which one of them Constantine by name, as he was striving to escape lost his life. To Pope Iohn the ninth, who called a Synod at Ravenna in which he rescin∣deth all the decrees of Pope Stephen, succeeded Benedict the fourth, who sate 3 yeares: after him came Leo the fifth or sixth, who after 40 dayes was cast into pri∣son by Christopher the Priest, who invaded the Popedome; this having sate 7 moneths, was by Pope Sergius the third assisted by the French King
imprisoned  and afterward made a Monk: so was also Christopher after he had sate 7 months. Ser∣gius the third succeeded, who was Pope 7 years. He rebuilt the Lateran church from the ground which fell down in his time. About these times Gregory called the Great, King of Scotland, subdued the Danes & Northern Britaines, went over to Ireland, besieged Dublin, and took it, where he was made Protector of Ireland, during the minority of young Duncan the Prince. After his returne into Scotland, he be∣gan to build the City of Aberden in a pleasant place betweene the two rivers of Dee and Done famous for Salmons, which beyond Seas are of more account, and dearer then any other Salmons. In King Milcolumbus his time, about the year of Christ 943. Cumberland with Westmerland are annexed to the Crown of Scot∣land conditionally, that the Scots King should swear fealty to the King of England for those lands. The race of Charles the Great having now failed; Conradus Duke of East Franconi (his sonne that was killed by Adelbertus) is by the Peeres of the Em∣pire 912. made Emperour. Against him conspire Arnulphus Duke of Bavaria, Gisel∣bert Duke of Lorrain, and Burghard Duke of Suevia, who send for Carolus Post∣humus out of France, with whom Henry the son of Otho joyns his Forces. This dissension had broke out into a civill war, but that the eruption of the Hungari∣ans into Germany hindred it; these came with their whole strength upon Bavaria, but were defeated by Duke Arnulphus, with whom having made their peace, they fell upon Italy: where they were overcome by money, not by armes, and so they return to Germany, making havock of all before them, so that Conradus was faine to buy his peace, by payment of an annuall pension. After this he proscribes his enemies, and drives Arnulphus out of Bavaria, who returns thither again, after the Emperours death. He beheaded the two brothers of the Duke of Lorrain: hee suspected the greatnesse of Henry the son of Otho Duke of Saxony, and the ra∣ther because he was one those who had formerly conspired against him; there∣fore he imployed Hatto the Bishop of Mintz ocatch him; Hatto by a golden chain thought to have intrapped him, or else by Conradus his army to force him; but Hen∣ry very wisely avoided the treachery, and fortunately defeated the Army. Hatto  being troubled in conscience for causing so much bloud to be spilt, removed himself from the Court, and was eat up by rats. After this Conradus fals sick; who notwith∣standing that Henry was his enemy, yet knowing his power and worth, names him Emperor, & so dyed: he reigned 7 years, & was the first of the German Emperors. To Pope Sergius the third, succeeded Anastasius the third, who sate 2 yeares. 918. About this time a new order of Benedictin Fryers, was instituted in Burgundy by one Otho or Oddo. Ennius the Goth King of Arragon drove out the Moores that were returned to Arragon and Celtiberia: there were at this time three eminent men in Spain, namely Ferdinand, who obtained the Kingdome of Castle and Legio. 2. Garcias King of Navar, and 3 Sanctius King of Arragon. Garcias his posterity lasted not long, therefore Navar hath been subject sometimes to the French, sometimes to the Spaniard. CHAP. V. The affaires of Italy, Germany, France, and other neighbouring countreys under Henricus Auceps, and Otho the Great. 2. The Easterne affaires under Constantine and his son Romanus. 3. The affaires of the Church. HEnricus Auces or Henry the Fowler (so called because he loved fowling)  the Nephew of Arnulphus the Emperour by his daughter Ludgarda was 919. the first Saxon Emperour, Arnoldus Duke of Bavaria, thought by force of armes to obtain the Empire: but when both his Army and Henrys were ready to fight, he so mitigated Arnold with his wisdome and eloquence, that he sub∣mitted to the Emperor, and from him received power to establish the bishops of his own jurisdiction. The Hungarians for non-payment of the tribute promised by
Ludovic the Emperour, over-run Henry's countreys of Saxony, killing all the men that were above 14 years of age. Henry though sickly at that time, yet raised an Army, and fought the Hungarians neer Meburg in the confines of Saxony▪ Hee charged his souldiers to keep off with the Targets the first flight of arrows shot at them, and then suddenly to rush in upon them as they were making ready to shoot again, which they did accordingly, and by which meanes they got the victory, driving these Turkish Farmers-like sheep before them: few of them escaped, but either then were killed, or shortly after by the imprisoned malefa∣ctours who were set at liberty to pursue and destroy the rest of those Hungarians. So having quieted Germany, hee erects divers Offices called Marquisats, for  guarding and securing the Marches and borders of the Empire from forraigne force. Against the Danes he set up the Marquisat of Schlsic, whence came the word Danimarchia or Denmarck: against the Henets he erected the Marquisat of Brandeburg: against the Polonians and Bohemians the Marquisats of Lansberg and Misne: and against the Sorabi or Suevi, the Marquisat of Lusatia. He began also to build the Churches of Misnie or Meyssen in the upper Saxony, of Bren∣deburg, and of Havelburg. He caused Charles the simple (so called for his stu∣pidity) to submit the kingdome of France to the Empire, and to restore the king∣dome of Lorrain, which he took from Rudbert the sonne of King Odo, which Rud∣bert he killed in a battell, when he claimed from Charle the kingdome of France.  This Charles was shortly after apprehended in Gascony, and there committed to prison where he dyed the year following: his son flew into England. Rodulphus King of Burgundy takes possession of France, his kinsman Ludovic having extor∣ted from Berengarius the kingdome of Italy, which he shortly after lost, and his eyes to boot. But Berengarius recovered Lombardy, who would have forced Lambert to buy the Bishoprick of Millan, and put divers of his Princes in pri∣son, wherefore the Italians call in Rodulphus of Burgundy▪ Berengarius to re∣sist him, hires the Hungarians, and by their help takes or kills his factious sub∣jects, except Earl Giliberd whom he dismisses; but within 30 dayes Giliberd forgetfull of this courtesie, brings Rodulphus back into Italy, who being received  by all; Berengarius hath nothing left him but Verona. Three yeares after Berenga∣rius got an Army together of persons disaffected to Rodulphus; a bloudy battell is fought, in which Berengarius is defeated, and shortly after murthered by one Flan∣bert whom he had advanced, who for this murther was hanged by Melo Berenga∣rius his friend. The Hungarians after the death of Berengarius rage through Italy, take and burn Ticinum. Rodulphus doats upon Ermengardis the strumpet, and neglects the publick affaires; wherefore he is forsaken by his friends, is forced to fly back into Burgundy and to leave the kingdome of Italy to Hugo Earle of Arles, who kept good correspondency with both the Emperours. In this meane time  great commotions are at Rome. Guido Marquesse of Tuscia husband to Marozia, who was thought to be Sergius the third's Concubine, enter's the City with an Army, kills Peter Pope Iohn's brother, in his presence stifles the Pope himselfe in prison with a pillow held to his mouth, sets up Iohn the eleventh, who was thought to be the bastard of Pope Sergius by this Marozia. After the death of Guido this King Hugo marries her; by whose meanes he got Rome, but was ex∣pelled again by Albericus the sonne of Guido the Marquesse by this Marozia. The King raging at this affront, revengeth himselfe upon Lambert Guido's brother, and puts out his eyes, then creates Boson Duke of Thuscia, and bestowes Pro∣vence upon Rodulphus, that he might not lay claim to Italy: after this Hugo o∣verthrows Arnoldus Duke of Bavaria at Verona, and drives him back into Ger∣many. But he could not recover Rome from Abericus, though he had bestowed his daughter upon him, nor could he hinder the Saracens from wasting Fraxien∣tum▪ or keepe off the Africans from plundering Genua. God blasting all his en∣terprises, for his sacriledge nd whoredomes with his Concubines, among which was Brtha the widow of Rodulphus King of France. Henry the Emperour overcame the Sclavi, besieged
Prague, and made a league  with Wenceslaus Duke of Bohemia, who the yeare after was treacherously mur∣thered by his brother Boleslas in the Church. He killed also 120000 Vandals in a great battell neer the Baltic sea, for wasting Saxony. He made Vornius King of 925. 936. Denmark pay him tribute, he suppressed also the Rhedarii a people of Sclavonia, and caused many of the Northern people to receive Christianity. Among the rest he made Chiupa King of the Danes to be baptized. At last having againe de∣feated the Hungarians, and distributed among the poore, that tribute for which they had raised this war, Hee dyed of a palsie the 18 yeare of his 936. reign. At Constantinople Stephen the Patriarch was now dead, Tryphon a Monk is named his successour, but conditionally, that after a certain time he should re∣sign his Bishoprick to Theophylact, sonne to Romanus the Emperour, being yet very young, this Tryphon was unwilling to doe, till he was perswaded to write down his name on a blank; and then Caesars friends filled it up with a resignation of the Patriarchat; to which Tryphon was forced to stand, being (though ignorant∣ly) subscribed by him: and so a boy of 16 yeares old was made Patriarch. Inger King of Russia with 15000 saile besieged Byzantium, but they were so de∣feated and dispersed that few of them returned home. Ludovic son to Charles the Simple, after his Fathers death is called home by Hugo. This Ludovic was called transmarin from his his travelling beyond the Sea. Hee found France full of troubles, therefore marcheth with his Army to Lorrain, hoping to recover that which his Father resigned to Henry: but hee was thrust out thence 939. againe by Otho the sonne of Henry, and Giselbert Henry's sonne in law, and Governour of Lorrain, with the rest of those that rebelled are killed by Otho. Otho the first surnamed the Great, for his happy government of the Empire 36 yeares, the sonne of Henry by Mathilda the Saxon was annointed at Aix by the Bishop of Mintz. Hee first suppressed the Bohemians, and then put an end to a long and seditious war raised against him by disaffected persons, to their own ruine. Tancmarus Otho's brother because he had not the Marquisat of Brande∣berg conferred on him, joines himselfe to Eberhard, Count Palatin, and Giselbert Duke of Lorrain, and so fell upon the town Barduic, and sackt it, but shortly af∣ter hee was taken and slaine. Eberhard armes Henry Otho's other brother against him, who is assisted by Frederic of Mintz, the Emperour having subdued the sons of Arnold Duke of Bavaria, who were in armes one against the other about their Fathers inheritance, and having repaired Magdeburg or the confines of Saxony, which he bestowed on his wife for her dowry, marcheth over the Rhene against his enemies, whom he subdued by good counsell more then by force. Many of them being struck with Divine terrour flung down their armes; and the rather when they perceived how resolute he was in defending the Churches rights, and  that hee would not consent to part with that upon any tearmes, which was de∣dicate to God. As he was at prayer in a Church of Alsatia, newes came to him that his chief enemies were overthrown by Conradus Duke of Suevia, that Eber∣bart was slain, and Giselbert drowned in the Rhene, that the Bishop of Mintz was forsaken by his people and gone they knew not whither. Henry Otho's brother find∣ing all had failed him, comes in black apparell to the Emperoar at Franckfurt, falls down at his feet, cals for mercy, promising ever after to be faithfull and obedient, and so he was pardoned. Ludovic the French King, let fall the war hee undertook for recovering of Lor∣rain, and marryed with Otho's sister the widow of Gillebert. Bertholdus Duke  of Bajoaria marryed her daugher. Conradus took to wife Luidgard Otho's daugh∣ter, with whom he had Lorrain. Hermannus Duke of Suevia marryed his only daughter to Liuthulsus Otho's sonne. In Italy Berengarius the younger put him∣self under Otho's protection, which occasioned King Hugo to enter into a league with the Saracens whom he might have destroyed, after hee tooke Fraxinetum their strong garrison; but Berengarius by Otho's help got in a short time the I∣talians love, who disliked Hugo's government, whereupon Hugo retires
to  Provence, where he dyed, and left his sonne Lotharius to the courtesie of Beren∣garius: who being setled in Italy, received in a tax 10 bushels of money towards the removing of the Hungarians thence: so much Hugo had payed heretofore. After this Otho with 32 Legions enters France, and sets Ludovic their King at liberty, who was confined for hanging up Herebert his fathers enemy, and for kil∣ling William of Normandy. Shortly after this Otho made wars with the Danes, whom he caused with their King Harald to embrace Christianity, which Harald afterward was deposed for hisll government by his own son Sueno: who destroy∣ed Religion again, for which he was highly beloved of his people, and 3 times by them redeemed from the pyrats, who had taken him. Shortly after this Lotharius Hugo's sonne dyed of a Phrensie in Italy. Beren∣garius his Governour besieged his widow Adeheide daughter to King Rodulphus and heir of Italy: the Queen with Pope Agapetus the second, implore Otho's help, who sends his son Luithulphus, and comes after himselfe with a greater Army. Berengarius and Albert or Albericus, are thrnst out of their kingdome. Adelheide is set at liberty, and marryed to the Emperour. The daughters of Berengarius are sent into Germany: then Conradus Otho's son in law is made Governour of Italy, who having taken Berengarius with his son conveys them into Germany: but Luithulphus or Ludolphus Otho's son disliked his fathers marriage: and Con∣radus found the Emperour not well pleased with his service in bringing Berenga∣rius  into Germany, wherefore they two conspire against Otho; and Berengarius having sworn fealty to the Emperour is sent back to Italy. But Aquileia and Ve∣rona are assigned for Henry Otho's brother: this dissension cost much bloud▪ but Conradus by surrendering Mintz to Otho, was made friends with his father in law: Ludolphus having seised upon Bavaria, seated himselfe in Ratisbone, where he was so stictly besieged, that being pinched with famine, was forced in a poore habit to submit himself and to beg for pardon, which was granted him by his father, but he was sharply reproved by Henry his Uncle. After this the Hungarians who were brought into Germany by the rebels, com∣mitted 955. many outrages, but neer Augusta 100000 of them were overthrown by  eight Legions of Othos; Conradus who had heretofore called them in was slaine in this conflict. The Sclavi also at this time were destroyed in Germany. Her∣mannus Bilingus received from Otho the Dukedome of Luneburg. So after that Otho had overcome his brother Tanguardus, and subdued the Bohemians, Hun∣garians, and defeated the conspiracy of his brother Henry with his complices; and had forced Hugo Capetus Earle of Paris to restore France to Ludovic, in which expedition he lost his English Lady Editha: and after hee had broken the strength of Berengarius in Italy, and delivered the captive Queene Adelheide whom he marryed: after he had broken the plot of his sonne Ludolphus, and his sonne in law Conradus. After he had vanquished the Danes, and by the help of  Adaldagus Bishop of Hamberg, had converted them to Christianity, and setled 3 Bishopricks amongst them: after he had overcome the Heneti, and brought them also to Christianity: after all these noble exploits and good successe, hee is visited with an affliction, as it were with some water to temper his wine, in the death of his sonne Rudolphus, who had done him good service in Italy a∣gainst Berengarius, his body was honourably buryed by William his brother Bishop of Mintz in the Church of St. Alban. Ludolphus and William were Otho's sons by Editha. The death of Ludolphus occasioned Berengarius to flie out again, being urged thereto by Pope Iohn the twelfth: so that Otho is called again into Italy; but be∣fore he went, he called a Diet or Parliament at Ratisbone, where he declared his son Otho being 7 yeares old Emperour, and committed his education to William his brother; upon this he enters Italy, takes in Ticinum and the other Townes, pursued Berengarius, and in the way enters Rome, where he is by Pope Iohn sa∣luted Emperor, and all both Senat and people take the oath of allegiance: after this 962. hee pursueth Berengarius, whom he tooke prisoner, and brought him to Germany, where hee was condemned to
perpetuall imprisonment in Bamberg, where hee  dyed, with his wife. In the mean while the Pope repenting of what he had done, cals Albertus the son of Berengarius into the City; whereupon Otho makes ano∣ther journey to Rome; the report of whose march made the Pope and Albertus to flye: the Citizens take the Oath of allegiance the second time to Otho, and sweare never to create any Pope without the Emperours consent. Withall he cals a Synod here, in which Pope Iohn the twelfth, for his perfidiousnesse and other 963. crimes is deposed: and Leo the eight is set up in his roome, who confirmed the Emperours assent in the election of Popes, with Anathema to those that should oppose this decree. Otho also swore not to order any thing in the City without the Popes assent, which oath some think to be supposititious, but when Otho was gone, the Romans being corrupted by Albertus call home Pope Iohn, and depose Leo: after the death of Iohn one Benedict is chosen. Otho hearing of the Romans revolt, returnes again with his Army, and besie∣geth the City so close, that they were forced by famine to yeeld. Pope Benedict 964. is banished and committed to the custody of Adaldagus bishop of Hamburg, where he dyed: so Italy after 60 yeares trouble under divers Lords is setled by Otho. Pope Leo being dead, the Romans desire the Emperour to name his successour, he names Iohn the thirteenth, whom they presently imprisoned. Upon this Otho in a rage returnes to Rome, sets up again the Pope, hangs thirteen of the prime Authours of his imprisonment, whips the City Governour, sets him on an  Asse with his Face backward, and condemnes him to perpetuall imprisonment, then because he meant to stay sometime in the City, the better to settle the people, he sends for his sonne Otho, and there causeth him to bee declared Emperour. Nicephorus of Constantinople sent to Otho to renew the old league between his Ancestors, & the French Emperors; to that purpose Otho demands Theophania the daughter of Romanus, and daughter in law to Nicephorus for a wife to his son; which the Greeks refused, and affronted his Embassadours, wherefore he pillageth Calabria and Apulia, and at last in spite of them carryed away Theophania, and married her to his son, then returns into Germany; where he makes one Her∣mannus Duke of Saxony, a man of mean extraction, but had done Otho good ser∣vice; and had faithfully governed Saxony in his absence. He bestowes on him  the inheritance of the Marquisse of Steden there. The last Duke of this race was taken by Henry the fourth, and imprisoned, where he dyed without issue-male. Then Otho among the Heneti erects the Bishopricks of Aldeburg, Havelburg, and Brandeburg, and subjects them to the Metropolitan of Hamburg. Amongst the Sorabi he makes bishopricks of Magdeburg, Mersburg, Cicen, and Wisnen. At last he dyed suddenly of an Apoplexy the 37 yeare of his reign being begun. 973. He was buryed at Magdeburg: a little before his death, Hatto Bishop of Mintz, who succeeded William the Emperours son, was eat up by rats, for deluding the poore people whom he burned in a barn, calling them the rats of a common∣wealth. Otho by Adelheide had 3 sonnes, Henry, Bruno, and Otho his successour, and one daughter Adelheide, whom he marryed to Hugh Capet Earl of Paris, and King of France. Otho founded a Church in Denmark called from his name O∣tensia or Othonia. In his time Pope Iohn the fourteenth called a great bell by his own name, whence came the custome of naming and baptizing bells. About these times the University of Lovan is founded by Iohn Duke of Brabant. Parnassus a City in Lombardy is overthrown by the Neighbours, and all the Inhabitants killed, for maintaining the heresie of the Anthropomorphites, they who recanted their heresie were spared, and permitted to build Crema, a town hard by. Ste∣phen the first King of Hungary, for his piety was canonised. William the se∣cond  Duke of Normandy was killed by Rollo: shortly after that Dukedome was turned into an Earldome, and seised upon by the French Kings, which mini∣stred occasion of long warre betweene France and England. Ethelstan King of England got from Otho Constantines sword, in the hilts of which was one of the nailes that fastned Christ to the Crosse. He obtained also the Lance with which his side was pierced, a peece of the Crosse, and of the Crowne of Thorns.
Romanus the younger having poysoned his father Constantine, reigned in Constantinople 13 yeares, 10 yeares whilest his father was alive, and 3 yeares alone. Hee was much addicted to luxury and wantonnesse, therefore was sur∣named the Childe. Nicephorus Phocas his Generall took Candace the chief town of Crete, whence the whole Island is called Candy, and expelled all the Saracens. 961. Hee beat also the Saracens in Syria. At last Romanus having spoiled his body with lust and glottony, dyed, being 24 years old, a childe both in years and man∣ners. His first wife was Berta Hugo's daughter King of Italy: his second Theo∣phania of whom he had Basil and Constantine, and one daughter Theodora who mar∣ried 963. to Zimisca, who afterward was made Emperour. To Pope Anastasius the third, succeeded Landus who sate 6 moneths. After him came Iohn the tenth 13 yeares, then Leo the ninth followed 7 moneths. Af∣ter Leo, Stephen sate 1 moneth. Iohn the eleventh his successour 4 yeares. Leo the seventh followed 3 yeares. Then came Stephen the ninth or eight 3 yeares. Martinus the third succeeded 3 yeares whose successour was Agapetus the second 7 yeares. To him succeeded Iohn the twelfth 9 years, then Leo the eight 1 year. Iohn the twelfth returning from his banishment sate 3 moneths. Benedict the fifth set up by the Romans against Leo the eight, was Pope 2 months. Leo being re∣stored sate 8 moneths: to him succeeded Iohn the thirteenth, who sate almost 8 yeares. In Scotland a great Army of Danes were defeated by means of one Hay  a country man and his two sons; the Scots at first were forced to flye being over∣powered by the Danes; but this Hay with his two sons being at plough, met them in a narrow lane, and upbraiding their cowardise, made them for shame return, who fell with that violence on the Danes, that they utterly destroyed them. Hay was rewarded with as much land as a Falcon could flye over at one flight, which was 6 miles in length. Whence came the noble family of the Hays, whose chief is Earl of Arroll. CHAP. VI. The Eastern affaires under Nicephorus Phocas, Zimisces, Basilius, and Constan∣tinc. 2. Of the Western under Otho the second. 3. Of the Turks, and some other passages of those times. Romanus being dead and his two sonnes Constantine and Basil, as yet too young to meddle with publick affaires, Nicephorus Phocas is by the Ea∣stern Army declared Emperour. He marryed with Theophania the wi∣dow of Romanus, He defeated the Saracens in Cilicia, recovered much of Asia and Syria, and took in Antiochia the Metropolis: but by Sea his successe was not so good, for Manuel his Admirall lost his Fleet and Army, and was taken him∣selfe by the Saracens. Bringes the Chamberlain thought to have beene Emper∣our, and to that purpose was incouraged by Zimisces Generall of the Land Forces, to look after it; but he was hated by the people, therefore Nicephorus carryed it. Polyeuctus the Patriarch would have dissolved the Emperors marriage with Theo∣phania, pretending a spirituall affinity, because hee had been Godfather to one of her children; but in the Synod which was called for that purpose, it was conclu∣ded, that the Emperours marriage could not be hindred by such affinity. This Nicephorus was a good souldier, but a bad Emperour, for he oppressed the peo∣ple with heavy taxes, pinched them with hunger by ingrossing the corn, and rai∣sing  the price thereof. He abased the coin, and yet raised the value of it. Where∣fore knowing how hatefull he was to the people for his covetousnesse, and bad successe his Fleet had in Sicily, being spoiled upon the Syrtes by the rashnesse of young Manuel the Patrician; hee caused an high wall to be built round about his Palace; but that could not save him; for soon after the wall was finished, although he kept the keys of the gates himselfe, yet he was found out by Zimisca and the o∣ther conspirators, who being pulled up in baskets, got over the wall, and in
the  night time break into his chamber, where the murthered him▪ Not long before his death, as he was in the Forum, the people railed and flung stones at him; some think his wife Theophania had a hand in his death, being jealous that hee would 969. defeat her sonnes by her former husband, of the Empire, and confer it on his brother Leo. He was no friend to the Church, but envyed her wealth complain∣ing that it was mispent by the Clergy, therefore would not suffer any lands or money to be given by legacies, or other wayes on Churches or Clergy men. He dyed the 57 yeare of his age, and reigned 7 yeares. The Saracens be∣ing  inraged at the great losses they had sustained by Nicephorus in Syria, they burned downe the goodly Temple of Christs Sepulchre, with the Patri∣arch in it. Nicephorus being murthered, Zimisces invades the Empire, whom Polyenetus the Patriarch would not crown, till he had cleered himselfe of the murther, and 969. banished Theophania, (whom others call Theodora) and all the rest of the con∣spirators, and till he had repealed Nicephorus his Act concerning the election of Bishops, to wit, that none be chosen Bishops without the Emperours consent: all this being performed by Zimisces, and having sworn that he did not touch Nice∣phorus, He was crowned by the Patriarch, who about a month after dyed, to whom succeeded Basilius the Monk. Zimisces obtained a great victory over the Sara∣cens as they were besieging Antiochia. He made peace with Otho by sending  him his wife Theophania, who was crowned at Rome by Pope Iohn the fourteenth, He made Basil and Constantine the sonnes of Romanus, consorts with him in the Empire. He subdued the Rossians and Bulgarians, by Bardas Sclerus his wifes brother, who tooke the Bulgarian King prisoner, and made them sue for peace. After which victory he rode into Constantinople in a triumphant manner, carrying in waggons the plunder of Bulgaria, and the Image of the Virgin Mary with great solemnity▪ He caused stamp upon his gold and silver coin, this inscription, Iesus Christ King of Kings: at last having reigned almost 7 yeares, he was poysoned 975. by Basil his Chamberlain, for reproving his covetousnesse, and threatning to take his place from him. Zimisces favoured the Manichees, and called them out of A∣sia into Europe. About these times Mieslaus Prince of Poland received the Christian Faith, and 965. was baptized: from which year the Polonians began their Calender. Harald King of Denmark with his wife and sonne Sueno are baptized; who before worshipped Christ and Idols together, now they flung away their Idols being induced there∣to 966. by Poppo a Clergy man, who carryed before the King a burning Iron in his hand, without hurt. Edgar King of old Albion (as he was stiled then) perceiving how England was obnoxious to forraign invasions, as first by the Romans, and then so often by the Danes and others; for want of shipping, causeth a great Navy to be built, which like wals should secure his Kingdome. Egbert had built some ships before, and 30 years after him Alfred, but they were either disused  or consumed by the enemy. Otho the second being twice declared Emperour in his fathers time, once at Aix and the second time at Rome, is by all received, after his fathers death, except 967. by Henry Duke of Bavaria his cousin german, who by the help of some Bishops, caused himselfe at Ratisbone to be proclaimed Emperour. Otho summons him to shew cause why he assumed that title, he perceiving his owne errour, and how few came to aid him, layeth aside his claime, and submits himselfe to the Emperour, who gave him his life, but banished him, and bestowed the govern∣ment of Bavaria upon Otho Duke of Suevia, his nephew by his brother Lu∣dolphus.  He caused also Harold the Dane, Mesico the Polonian, and Boleslaus the Bohemian, who had entred into league with Henry, to lay downe their Arms. But whilest Otho is thus imployed, Lotharius the French King by force of armes la∣boureth to regain Lorrain. Otho marcheth against him with an Army, at the re∣port of whose approach Lotharius flyes; upon this Otho pursues him, wasting and burning all before him, even to the walls of Paris, then having burned the suburbs, retreats with his Army
homewards, Lotharius pursueth him in the rear; many of Otho's souldiers were drowned in the river Axona, and many hee lost at Arduenna: and if he had not made the more hast, he had fallen into the hands of the French. Yet shortly after peace is made, and Lorrain is restored to Otho, though the French Peers stormed at it. Some parts of the country the Emperor assigns to the Bishops of Collen and Leege; the rest he bestows on Charles the brother of Lo∣tharius, conditionally that he should hold it in fee of the Emperour, as a Province of Germany. Things at home being thus composed, Otho intends an expedition against the Greeks and Saracens. In his minority he had done his Father good service in A∣pulia and Calabria, against the Greeks: whom he drove out thence: but whilest  hee is busie at home, the Greeks by the help of the Saracens of Sicily, under Basil and Constantine recover these countreys again, being lost by Nicephorus▪ Otho to regain them raiseth a great Army of Germans and Italians, which under Otho Duke of Suevia expelled the Greeks out of their Garrisons of Istria and Dalmatia. At Beneventum a great battell is fought, in which Otho was defeated, and he himself hardly escaped: for he flung away his arms and clothes, that he might runne the more nimbly towards the Bay of Tarentum, where his wife Theopha∣nia was, but before he could get to the town, he was intercepted by the Sara∣cens, and so was fain to leap into the Sea, and there was taken by the enemies ships, who not knowing him, let him goe again for a peece of money, so he came 982.  safe home; where he raiseth a new Army, and returneth into Italy, to fight the Saracens, whose Forces he utterly destroyed; after the battell he punisheth the Roman and Beneventan souldiers, who treacherously forsooke him in the first conflict; the chief Romans he put to the sword at a Feast, and the Beneventins he punished by the totall destruction of their City which he levelled with the ground. 983▪ Shortly after he dyed at Rome, having reigned 10 years, and was buryed in St. Pe∣ters Church in a porphyrie tomb. About this time Adelbert Bishop of Prague being weary of the Bohemians, went down to Pannonia, and baptized Geisa King of Hungaria; thence he went to preach in Borussia, where hee was torn in peeces by the Barbarians. To Pope  Iohn the fifteenth succeeded Benedict the fifth or sixth one year; he was starved to death in the castle of St. Angelo. His successour was Donnus the second, one year. Bouiface the seventh followed who sate 7 moneths. Benedict the sixth or seventh his successour sate 8 yeares. Stephen King of Hungarie sends to Pope Benedict to have the title and Crowne of a King conferred on him, which he obtained; but this favour was denyed to Miecislas Duke of Polonia, who sent to Benedict the Bishop of Cracovia. St. Edward the sonne of Edgar King of England, and a hopefull Prince was murthered by his step-mother to advance her owne sonne Ethelred; whose Kingdome layd in bloud prospered not, but became tributary to the Danes; who laid heavy and yearly taxes upon the land, before which  time impositions called then Dane-gelt were not known in England. Otho had by Theophania Otho the third, yet a childe; Hugo or Ulricus Marquisse of Saxony, and 5 daughters. Otho's minority occasioned new troubles in the Em∣pire. Zimisces being poysoned by Basil the Eunuch, the Eastern Empire came to Ba∣sil 975▪ and Constantine the sonnes of Romanus the vounger. Constantine was more ad∣dicted to his pleasures, then to government. Basil being 20 years old; and Constan∣tine the 17. began to manage publike affairs by the advice of Basil the Eunuch. He recalled his mother Theophania to the Court, being banished thence. Fearing the greatnesse of Bardas Sclerus, so called from his harsh or hard disposition, who had done in the East great service, he tooke much of his power and command from him, making him content with the government of Mesopotamia. But hee would not be content to be thus affronted, therefore raiseth all the power he had in the East against Basil, defeats his Army, and takes in Nicaea the Metropolis of Bithyna: upon this Phocas Bardas is sen for from his banishment, and is made Generall of all the Forces of the two Caesars. He in a Duell having wounded Sclerus, put to flight all his disturbed Legions. Sclerus was ain
to flye to Cosroes  the Sultan of Babylon; but being accused of treachery, he was imprisoned: So Basil being freed from civill wars, resolves to recover Calabria, and Apulia, Theopha∣nias dowry. Otho in the sixth yeare of his reign, marcheth into Italy with a great Army, to defend his wifes dowry. In the first conflict he defeated the Greeks and Saracens, in the second he was defeated, as we have said. About this time Olaus King of Noraway converted his country to Christianity, and sent shortly after some to convert Island. Basil understanding that George Lord of the inward Iberia, had invaded the  bounds of the Empire, sends an Army against him, and forceth him to buy his peace for a great summe; till payment of which he gave his son as hostage, but he afterward stood not to his promise; therefore Basil's Army fell upon him, and utterly defeated his Forces. Hee subdued also the Saracens in Sy∣ria and Phaenicia. Shortly after he and the Bulgarians fell at variance for some wrongs offered by them to the Greeks. About which time the regall family of Bulgaria ended in Peter who was now dead. Thereupon 4 brothers of an ancient family strove for the principality: Three of these failed by death, the fourth Sa∣muel by name, taking advantage of the civill wars of Greece invades divers of their towns which he tooke. Basil upon this undertakes an expedition against Bul∣garia, where his Army miscarryed by the treachery of his Commanders. And withall Phocas who before had defeated Sclerus, now rebels against Basil. For he finding himselfe slighted by Basil, whom hee had delivered from so great an enemy, invades the Empire; but hee was overthrowne in divers battels, and at last dyed suddenly. Basil also had good successe against the Bulgarians, by the industry of his Generall Uranus. He took some townes beyond Mount He∣mus, and the next year he invaded Bulgaria himself, and rebuilt the Greek Garisons in Thessalia that had beene demolished, about the time that Veremundus King of Spaine had overthrowne Almansor Lord of the Corduban Sara∣cens. Samuel King of Bulgaria could not be quiet from molesting the Greeks, where∣fore Basil in the 38 year of his reign suddenly falling behinde the Garrisons that  kept the narrow passages between the hils, put them to flight, and withall tooke 15000 Bulgarians, whose eyes hee thrust out, leaving onely for every hundreth a Captain with one eye, to conduct the rest, these hee sent to Samuel, who be∣ing affrigted of so many calamitous people, became suddenly verriginous, and within two dayes dyed. His cousin German Bladislabus to be revenged, raised an Army, but this also was defeated, and he himselfe slain, so at last Bulgaria was to∣tally subdued, and the chief Nobility was transported to Constantinople. Hereupon shortly after the Crabits and Syrmium the chiefe City of Pannonia submitted to Caesar. At the same time the Turkes, a race of Hunns inhabiting the North side of  Caucasus, were sent for, and imployed by Mahomet, Sultan of Persis and Media against the Persians, who were animated by Inargus (who was of the bloud royall of Persia) to rebell, and vindicate their liberty, from the Saracen yoake. Cosroes then had Bardas Selerus with many other Christian souldiers, he promised to set them at liberty, if they did defeat the Persians, which they happily did. So Sclerus having obtained the victoty, returnes to the Christians, and joines him∣selfe to Bardas Phocas, who was then contesting with Basil for the Empire. He cunningly sent his sonne Romanus as a fugitive to assist Basil; whilest he himselfe stayed with Phocas, to the end that if Basil prevailed, Romanus his sonne might procure his Fathers pardon; if Phocas prevailed, that then hee might obtaine his  sons pardon. Basil having got the victory, Romanus who was now become his favourite, perswades him to remove the Eunuch Basil, (by whose meanes Ze∣misces was murthered) from all government being he was hated by the people; this was accordingly done, Zemisces shortly after dyed of griefe▪ Phocas also dyed suddenly. Sclerus by his sonnes meanes is made the chiefe Steward of the Palace. But before came to Byzantum, hee lost his Eye-sight with age. The Prince of Iberia being now dead, Basil seiseth upon
it. He recovered also  Media and Chazaria the 4 yeare of his Empire, and made the Princes of Tripoli, Damascus, and others who were plundering the Territories of Antioch, to become his tributaries, thus being puft up with victories and wealth (for he had heaped to gether 200000 talents of gold, besides jewels, pearles, and an infinite masse of silver) hee began to slight both citizens and souldiers, and to account of learning as a thing uselesse, which made him more feared then loved of his people. So intending to recover Sicily from the Saracens, sends his Flt before with a purpose 1025▪ to follow himself, but his journey was hindered by death. He had lived and reigned 72 years, 50 alone, and the rest of the time he was Co-emperour with his Father; then with Nicephorus, and after him with Zimisces. After the death of Basilius his younger brother Constantine ruled the Empire 3 years, by others rather then by himself. For he could scarse spare so much time from whoring, drinking, dicing, hunting, and Stage playing▪ Under him divers towns of Syria and Phenicia, re-assumed their liberty, and killed their garrisons. He sent twice to suppresse the Saracens in Italy and Sicily, but did no good. Yet by his Generall Constantinus Diogenes, Governour of Syrmium and Bulgaria, hee drove away the Scythians beyond Isther. The Governour of Samos over∣threw the Saracen Fleet which had wasted the Cyclades. Hee caused Ro∣manus Argyrus to marry his daughter Zoe, having taken his former wife 1028▪ from him, whom hee shaved, and put into a Monastery; but the third day af∣ter  the marriage, he died the 70 yeare of his life: in his hast and furie he used to kill or blind his chiefe Courtiers, and then to weep and repent when it was too late. Cosroes the Saracen being dead, Mahomet his successour inferiour in strength to Pisasirius Prince of the Babylonian Arabians, was fain to call in the Turkes (as we have said) for his assistance: by whose help he overcame the Babyloni∣ans and Indians: but having other enemies to buckle with, he was loath to let the Turkes goe home, till they had done the rest of his work; therefore hee de∣taines them in Persis, and besets the river Araxes (over which they were to pass) with strong guards. The Turkes were highly incensed, that they should be forci∣bly kept from their native countrey by him who quietly injoyed his own country by their meanes: wherefore in a rage they forsooke him, and being about 3000 tooke possession of the mountaines, and fell to plundering the Saracens. Mahomet to drive them out of their strong holds sends 20000 men, who were put to flight by Tangrolipex Mucaletus the Turish Prince. The Sultan inraged at this disgrace, blindes many of the Captaines who were sent against the Turkes, and so terrified his Army with threatnings, that most of them fell off from him to the Turkes. The Sultan to be revenged raiseth an Army of 500000 men, who were all defeat∣ed by the Turkes. So Araxes being now made passable, the Turkes came swarming in upon the Territories of Babylon, and so they obtaine the Saracens  Kingdome. CHAP. VII. The affaires of the Western Empire under Otho the third, Henry the second, and Conradus the second. 2. Divers passages of England, Scotland, Italy, France and other parts of Europe. 3. Of some Popes. OTho the third, as yet a childe succeeded to his Father, for whose sake hee 984▪  was beloved, though disaffected by some because his mother was a Greek. Therefore Henry his cousin german, and Duke of Bajoaria took upon him to be young Otho's Protector, and to rule the Empire: but the Saxons being mindfull of their oath and allegiance to Otho, by the help of the Princes got the young Emperour again out of Henrys hands, and restored him to Theophania his mother, and Adelhida his Grandmother, under whom he was bred in all kind of divine and humane learning. His mother
some few years after dyed, so that his  Grandmother had the sole education of him, till he by the evill counsell of some green heads, puts her away. In his minority new troubles sprung up, Crscentius the Roman Consul will have the City choose an Emperour of their own, and cast off the Germans in France. Lotharius makes wars upon Germany for the Duke∣dome of Lorrain, which Oho the second took from him. In Germany Henry the Bavarian returning from banishment, after the death of Otho Suevicus, not onely recovered Bavaria, but aimed also at the Empire. When Otho was come to yeares of discretion, he falls upon setling the Empire: in the interim Lotharius was forced by death, to give off his challenge of Lorrain. His sonne survived his Father but one year: Charles also dyed, the brother of Lotharius, as he was challenging the kingdome of France, which Hugh Capet Earle of Paris invaded and obtained now the whole race of Charles being ex∣tinct. This Hugh began the third race of the French Kings which hath lasted till this day: the first race began in Meropheus or Clodoveus, and ended in Hilde∣ricus. The second which began in Pipin and ended in this Ludovic the last. Hu∣go acknowledged Otho for Emperour, and permits Otho the son of Charles to en∣joy Lorrain as in fee from the Emperour. But debarres him from his right in France. Otho having setled Germany, bends his whole strength to appease the distra∣ctions of Rome and Italy. Therefore understanding that Crescentius did domi∣neer in Rome, and had thrust out the Pope, he marcheth thither with his Ar∣my,  but in the way at Ravenna, newes came to him, that the Pope was dead, wherefore he appoints for his successour Brunno his kinsman, son to Otho, Duke of Suevia, and nephew to Ludolphus, whose name was changed to Gregory the fifth. He is sent before to Rome, the Emperour with his Army followes, who be∣ing let into the City, pardons Crescentius upon his submission, and then is crowned Emperour by the Pope. All things being there setled, he marcheth back toward Germany, but he was not gone far, when Crescentius thrusts out Gregory, and sets up Iohannes Placentinus a wealthy man, and withall fortifieth the City with Bul∣warkes against a siege. Hee shuts himselfe up within that strong and spacious building called then Moles Hadriani, being his buriall place, then the tower of Cre∣scentius, now the castle of St. Angelo. Otho hearing of this, returnes to Rome, the Citizens open the gates, presuming on pardon, which was promised to Cre∣sentius, if he did deliver up his strong hold, which he did; but the promise was not kept; for Crescentius being carryed on a jade through the City, with his face backward, and torn by the people, was at last hanged with 12 more of his associ∣ates, Iohannes Placentinus had his nose cut off, and his eyes put out, and then was flung down headlong from the Capitoll: the other Senators that were ac∣cessary to this plot Otho banished into Saxony. Upon this sedition it was agreed between the Emperour and Pope, that the Germans alone should have power to  choose their Emperour, and the Pope to confirme the Election. When hee is chosen he was to be called Caesar, when confirmed by the Pope, Augustus. By which meanes all factions both in Italy and France, for the imperiall place and dignity should be prevented. And Italy with Germany should be the stronger u∣nited against the incursions of Saracens, Turkes, and other barbarous Nations. This would be a meanes also to quiet the Italian Princes, who fell out among themselves, and ambitiously striving for the Empire destroyed one another, and chiefly by this the Popes power was bridled, who tooke upon him to nominate Emperours, which caused much bloud shed. There were 7 electors appointed to avoid confusion and quarrels, to wit, 3 Bishops of Mintz, Colon, and Tre∣vers,  and 4 secular Princes, the Palsgrave, Duke of Saxony, Marquesse of Brandeburg, and King of Bohemia: but whether these were ordained then by Otho or afterward, when the Empire was in the Family of the Suevi, is uncer∣taine. Otho having setled the Empire, undertakes a pilgrimage to the bones of Adel∣bert in Polonia, where being magnificently entertained by Boleslaus Duke of Poland, by way of recompence, hee
named him King: and erected there an  Archbishoprick at Gnesnau, under which were Crocovia, Colberge, and Vioti∣slaen, Suffragans. He was forced to make a new journey to Rome, to appease the commotions there raised by the Pope, for being excluded from the Emperors election. There he fell in love with the widow of Crescentius pretending to marry her, but when she perceived, that hee meant no such thing, upon his returning to Germany, she presents him with a paire of poysoned Gloves, which killed him the 30 yeare of his age, of his Empire the 19. He dyed childlesse, his former wife 1001. Mary, daughter to the king of Arragon, he caused to be burned, because she had false∣ly accused and caused to be put to death a young Noble man, with whom shee was in love, for that he would not pollute the Emperours bed at her instigation; to be revenged of him, she accuseth him as if he meant to ravish her, where∣upon he was condemned and executed. But his wife shortly after to prove his in∣nocency, carryed in her hand a burning iron without hurt: Which induced Otho to doe justice on his perfidious Empresse. Otho's bowels were interred at Augusta or Ausburg, by Henry of Bavaria his successour, who bestowed on them a marble tomb: his body was buryed at Aix. He was a prince indowed with so much wisdome, learning and piety, that hee was called the wonder of the World. In Otho's time are recorded strange prodigies, as uncouth earthquakes and 995. Comets, showres of wheat and little fishes out of the clouds. In Sicily neer Ae∣tna  were heard strange cryes and yellings, which were then supposed to be the complaints of tormented soules in purgatory, whence the feast of All souls was or∣dained. 997. Fire brake out of the river Rhene which burned down the neighbouring villages. Great Frosts in the midst of summer, which destroyed grasse and corn, whereupon followed plagues and famine, and the eruption of the Sclavonians upon Saxony. Vlodomirus Duke of Russia is made a Christian. To Benedict succeeded Iohan the fourteenth, who was Pope 3 months, and then was imprisoned; whereupon Boniface the sixth was re-inthroned, and sate foure months, his successour Iohn the fifteenth sate 8 moneths: to him succeeded Iohn the sixteenth, who was Pope 10 yeares. Gregory the fifth his successour 2 yeares. Iohn the seventeenth a Greek and Magician, thrust out Gregory for 10 months, but was himselfe deprived both of his dignity, eyes, and life by Otho, and Gregory restored, to whom succeeded Cerebertus or Sylvester the second, a Mathemati∣cian and Philosopher, and therefore in that rude age, he was thought to bee a witch. He was first Archbishop of Rhemes; then of Ravenna, lastly of Rome, where he sate 4 years. Much about the same time the Empire of Germany, the kingdom of France, Poland, Hungary, and Bohemia were established; and the kingdome of the A∣rabians in orduba which had continued 300 yeares, had its period: and then 1000. began the Hebrew tongue to flourish there, under R. Ioseph, who turned the Thalmud into Arabick, then an Academy of Saracens was erected at Ba∣bylon. In England the Danes were generally massacred for their intolerable tyranny and oppressions, whereupon Swain King of Denmark armed with rage and power, came with a great Fleet, and conquered this land, drove King Ethelred to Normandy, but upon the death of Swaine he was called home; whose Forces Knute or Canutus Swaines sonne defeated. Ethelred being dead, his sonne Ed∣mund Ironside fought divers battels with the Danes, not without good successe, till at last he was betrayed and utterly defeated, and so Canutus obtained the Kingdome. But neither Swaine nor his sonne Canutus had such good successe in  Scotland, for in two severall battels they were worsted: in the first Swaine was utterly defeated, and hardly escaped with his life: in the second Canut was so weak∣ned, that hee was forced to sue for peace, in which it was agreed, that the Danes should depart Scotland, and that neither Scots nor Danes should molest one a∣nother, during the lives of Micolumbus the Scots King, and Swaine the Dane. Yet this Millcolumbus or Malcolme, whom the Danes could not hurt was after∣ward murthered by some of his own subjects in his bed, because of some oppres∣sions
committed, or at least permitted by him upon his Nobility; but ven∣geance pursued the murtherers immediately after, even the same night; for ha∣ving mistaken their way in the snow, they fell into a lake, in which they were all drowned, men and horse, as they were flying away, the ice breaking under them. Otho the third being dead without children, Henry the second succeeded: hee was Duke of Bavaria, a Saxon by bloud, but a Bavarian by birth: He was the ne∣phew of Otho the first by his brother. In the beginning of his reign he was oppo∣sed by Ethard, Marquisse of Saxony, whom Lotharius and Benno Dukes of Saxony killed. Henry also Marquisse of Austria, with his brother Brunno Bi∣shop  of Ausburg made insurrections against him, but they were quickly suppres∣sed. So having setled things at home he went against the Heneti, who had fallen off from Christianity, which they had imbraced in Otho the firsts time, and were now become heathen Idolaters, having first destroyed their Churches, and mur∣thered their Bishops. But Henry brought them again under the obedience of Christ, and made them rebuild their Churches, then he endowed the Bishopricks with new reveneus, chiefly that of Marburg, to which he assigned a great part of the Earldome of Marburg. Having subdued the Heneti, he made wars upon the two Boleslaii, the one king of Poland, the other Duke of Bohemia: these having flowen out into open hostility against him, he caused to submit to his obedience,  and to doe him homage. He converted also the Earldome of Bamberg (Earle Rinold being dead without children) into a Bishoprick, and so inriched and ho∣noured it, that hee made the chief Princes of Germany the Bishop of Bamburgs Vassals, and to doe him fealty, so that the Electors as yet hold of him in Fee, whatsoever they enjoy as Electors. He suppressed also the insurrection of Henry, and Theodoricus brothers to Cunegunda his wife, who stormed because they could not enjoy their sisters estate being now dead, and which the Emperour had distri∣buted among the Clergy men. These two brothers raised an Army against him; invaded and took Ausburg, then thrust Brunno the Emperors brother thence; but the Emperour overthrew them both in a battell, and deposed Henry from his  Dukedome, yet afterward upon submission, restored him. Hermannus Duke of Suevia being dead, he made Ernesius husband to Gisel his cousin german Duke thereof, and so having setled the troubles of Germany, he addresses himselfe for Italy, to take possession thereof as Emperor, to suppresse 1005. the Greeks and Saracens there, and to subdue Arduinus whom the Bishops and Nobility had proclaimed Emperour at Millan, who in two great battels was over∣thrown by the Emperour and slaine. Henry was taken prisoner himselfe, but ha∣ving deceived his Keepers, leapt down from the wall, and so broke his thigh, which made him halt ever after, whence he was called Henry the lame. After this victory he was crowned Emperour by Pope Benedict. After this hee marcheth 1014. towards Apulia and Calabria, against the Greeks and Saracens, who were strug∣ling for that part of Italy, a share whereof William Duke of Normandy had ta∣ken from them under Otho the third, and at last that whole country of Magna Grae∣cia became subject to the Normans. But at this time Henry subdued both the Greeks and Saracens, and tooke from them their New Troy, which the Greeks had lately built in Apulia; in that same place where anciently Hannibals campe lay. This was the third journey that Henry made into Italy, and the last. In his re∣turn 1022. homeward, he had conference with Robert King of France, about setling the State and Church: and to that purpose they appointed to give the Pope a meeting at Ticinum, but death prevented this, for the next yeare after he dyed at Gro∣ning 1024.  the 52 yeare of his life, and was buryed in his own Church of Bamburg. Hee reigned 22 yeares. Being childlesse, hee nominated Conradus for his successour. Hee was a pious and a munificent Prince who, (as they say) lived perpetually chast with Cunigunda, though marryed. Hence hee was called Saint. In his life time he had many wars with the Polonians, Bohemians, Italians, Rus∣sians, Greeks and Saracens, in all which he had good successe. He
had a danges  war with Baldwin Earle of Flanders about the Dukedome of Lorrain, which he gave away after the death of Duke Otho, to Godefrid Prince of Arduenna: but Henry by the helpe of Robert King of France, and Richard Duke of Normandy took Gant and wasted Flanders, so that Baldwin was fain to submit, who recei∣ved in Fee from the Emperour, the Isle of Zeland, with the City Valentina. In the time of this Henry, the Turkes tooke Jerusalem from the Saracens, and over∣threw the Temple which Constantine had built there. The King of Denmark with a great train went to Rome, to intreat the Pope that the Churches of his king∣dome might be exempted from the jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Hamburg: the Pope promised to send a Cardinall thither, for that purpose, but nothing was  done in that matter till Gregory the seventh, who subjected all the Churches of Denmark, Swethland and Noraway to the bishop of Breme. The Transilvani∣ans by the meanes of Stephen King of Hungary received the Christian Faith: for he tooke Giula with his wife and children prisoners, who being released were all baptized. Canutus King of Denmark and England, obtained also the kingdome of Norraway. Rainimir the sonne of Sanctius Major was first King of Arra∣gon. To Sylvester succeeded Pope Iohn the seventeenth or eighteenth, who sate 4 moneths: his successour Iohn the nineteenth sate 4 yeares, to whom succeeded Sergius the fourth, who was Pope two yeares. Benedict the seventh or eight sate 11 yeares: and so many yeares sate his successour Iohn the nineteenth or twentyeth. Canutus King of England marryed Emme widow to king Ethelred. He went a∣bout to extirpate those of the royall bloud of England; therefore sent away the two sonnes of the late king Edmund, and his brother, to be murthered abroad; but they were by divine providence preserved. Hee went to Rome, and freed the Saxon Schoole which the Kings of England had erected there, from all im∣position. From the Saxons the Empire of the West is translated to the Francs in the per∣son 1024. of Conradus the second, who is called Salicus because the country of Franco∣nia was called Salia, from the river Sala, whence came the Salique law, with the French, which by the Salii or Francs were driven out of Franconia. The Em∣pire continued in the Saxon Family about 100 years; this Conradus was de∣scended of the ancient Gibelins in Franconia. Hee marryed with Gisil Henry the Emperours kinswoman by whom hee had a sonne called also Henry. In the beginning of his reign he was threatned with wars by his cousin german, and competitor for the Empire, Cuno the younger. By Ernestus also the Emperors sonne in law, by Frederic of Lorrain, by Boleslaus King of Poland, and Ro∣bert King of France, but all these clouds he dispelled by his wisdom and dexterous carriage. The third yeare of his Empire he prepares an Army for Italy, to quiet the commotions there: and withall holds a Parliament at Aix, where he declares his  sonne his successour: whom 3 yeares after he made Duke of Bavaria, Duke Henry brother of S. Cunigunda being dead. Hee caused those of Papia who had demolished his Palace to rebuild it, hee quieted the people of Ravenna, who would have driven him out of the City, and rewarded a souldier who for him had lost a leg in that skirmish, with a boot full of silver. From thence he went 1026. to Rome, where he was crowned Emperor by Pope Iohn, and was conducted to his chamber by two Kings, namely Canutus King of England, and Rodulphus king of Burgundy. At Rome two souldiers falling out about an Oxe hide, the one being an Italian, the other a German, raised such a tumult that many were slain in it, the Romans being worsted, were fain to beg pardon bare footed with ropes about their necks; which they obtained. Conradus bestowed Apulia upon the Normans to be  held by them in fee of the Emperour for the defence thereof against the Greeks. Whilest Conradus was in Italy, Frederic of Lorrain, Cuno of Wormatia, and Ernestus of Alemannia Dukes conspired against him; but Frederic dyeth be∣fore the plot came to maturity. Cuno was glad to demolish all his fortifications to oain the Emperours favour.
Ernestus having pillaged Alsatia and Burgundy was  at last forsaken by his souldiers, and so yeelded himselfe a prisoner; but afterward flying out againe, was so hotly pursued by the Emperours guard that they inclo∣sed him within a wood, and slew him. About this time Conradus brought Mi∣seco the Polonian in subjection, who had expelled his brother Otho out of the king∣dome by the means of Gisell the Emprisse, he was reconciled to Conradus, and was restored to the third part of Poland. He qiered also the Francs, French, 1032. and Bohemians and Stephen King of Hungary, who made war upon Conradus for the Dukedome of Bavaria, which he claimed as his sonnes right, being the childe of Henry the Saints sister: but the war ended by the death of Emericus Stephens sonne. Rodulphus King of Burgundy by his will bequeathed his kingdome to Conra∣dus: but Otho nephew to Rodulphus by his sister laid claim to it, and thought by 1035. the sword to obtain it, but he lost both it and his life to boot, being killed in the battell, and so Burgundy was made a Province of the Empire, having continued a kingdome, from the death of Carolus Calvus 144 years. It was made a king∣dome under Arnulphus, it was afterward parted into the Dutchy, which the Emper∣our retained, and the county which fell to the King of France, this Rodulphus who gave it away was the tenth and last king. After Conradus by his sonne Henry had subdued the Bohemians, he marryed him to Cnelinda daughter of Canutus king of England and Denmark; she being brought to bed of a daughter to him, dyed in Italy, and was buryed in Limburg, at that  time the bishop of Millan with some other bishops of Lombardy, raised a faction against the Emperour, which he supprest by taking in of Millan, Parma, and the o∣ther rebellious towns, and by banishing the seditious bishops. So having quieted Lombardy, he returnes to Germany, and puts his sonne in possession of Burgundy. Hermannus Duke of Suevia being dead of the plague in Italy, the Emperour be∣stows that Dukedome on Otho nephew to Otho the third, Emperour by his sister, 1039. at last he dyed suddenly at Utricht in Frisia the 15 yeare of his reign, the year be∣fore dyed St. Cunigund, and St. Stephen, king of Hungary. Conradus was a valiant and wise Prince; he shewed princely magnanimity in his warre against Miseco  king of Poland, whom Vdalricus the Bohemian tooke prisoner, when hee fled to him for shelter. The Emperour hating the treachery of him that did betray his trust, would not countenance the Traitour, nor receive the King as a pri∣soner. Hee was buryed at Spire in the Church which he built himself. About this time in Ferdinand the Great, were united the kingdomes of Castil, Navar, and Legido, by the marriage of Sanctia the onely sister and heir of Vere∣mund, and at last Aragon also by the death of Ramirus his base brother. In Eng∣land to Canutus succeeded his sonne Harald, who reigned but 4 yeares, in which time hee banished his stepmother Emme, and put out the eyes of Alfred her sonne by Ethelred, and cast him into a loathsome prison, where he dyed. In Scotland king Donald did homage to Canutus for Cumberland. Hee was murthered by Macbeth his cousin german, who got himselfe to be proclaimed king. The Danes had so ma∣ny overthrowes in Scotland, that they vowed never to returne thither in a hostile manner, for not onely were they destroyed by the sword, but many of them were poysoned with the juice of seeds of Solanum somniferum, an hearb we call Night∣shade mingled with their bread and wine.
CHAP. VIII. The affaires of the Eastern Empire under Argyropolus, Michael, Calaphates, Zoe, Theodora, and Monomachus. 2. Of the Turkes and Popes of those times. 3. Of the Polonian, Hungarian, English, Scottish, and other affairs. COnstantine the Greek Emperour being dead, Romanus the third, called Argyropolus, from his too great bounty, or rather prodigality, succeeded. Hee to ingratiate himselfe with the people took off the tribute, which  they called allelengium; imposed on all rich men by Basil. This was to bee paid by wealthy men to the children of those souldiers which had dyed in the warres to confirme his title. He put away his wife, and married with barren Zoe the daugh∣ter of Constantine, she being 50 yeares old, and he 60. He inriched the bishops who had been beggered before: and banished Theodora Zoes sister into an Island upon suspition: and sent Constantine Diogenes for affecting the Empire into a strong tower, where he killed himselfe by leaping from a high window, lest he should be forced to discover others that were of the plot with him. He beat the Saracens at Sea, but was beat by them on the land: for as hee was striving to reco∣ver the townes of Syria, which his predecessour had carelessely lost, he was over∣come and forced to flye to Antioch; whereas hee might have had these townes  without losse of bloud, had hee hearkened to reason rather then to ambition, whilest he stived to extort that by force, which was proffered in love; yet by the help of Amiras of Tripolis, who had fallen off from the Egyptians, he tooke in two castles in Syria: but could doe no good against the Saracens in Sicily nor against the Normans in Apulia being aided by Conradus Caesar. Under him George Ma∣niaces took Edessa by storm, where finding the Epistle which as they say Christ wrote with his owne hand to King Algarus, he sent it to Constantinople: but short∣ly after this Romanus by exactions oppressed the people: and because hee could not make his old barren wife fruitfull, hee began to slight her, at which the libi∣dinous woman being impatient, began to dote upon Michael the Paphlagonian.  This the Emperour suspected, but Michael by oaths denyed there was any af∣fection betweene Zoe and him, for which perjury he was taken with the Falling∣sicknesse, which abated Romanus his suspition; for hee thought that Zoe could not affect one troubled with that disease: but at last Romanus was poysoned by Zoe, and being one day in the bath, the adulterer held downe his head in the water, till hee was almost stifled, and then being laid in his bed, dyed immediately, having reigned 5 yeares, and 6 moneths, to whom by Zoes help succeeded Michael. Michael for his adultery and murther is rewarded with the Eastern Empire, at first he shewed himselfe a good Governour, but not so good a Scholar as his pre∣decessour, 1034. who was skilled in the Greek tongue, in Philosophy, and in the laws. All the while that Michael was Emperour, his Dominions were vexed with co∣mets, plagues, siccity, sterility, earthquakes and locusts, which so devoured the fruites of the earth, that the Inhabitants were faine to change their habitations: these locusts were by a strong winde carryed into the Hellespont, and there drown∣ed, but after they were left dry upon the shoare, they revived, and for 3 yeares together wasted Thracia, till at last they were destroyed at Pergamus. At first Michael made much of Zoe, till hee was throughly setled, afterward he kept her up so close, that all her servants were removed from her, and none suffered to see her, or speak with her▪ but by leave of the Captaine of the watch, who exami∣ned  the cause of their comming. Some thinke Michael was visited with an evill spirit, which to palliate, he called the Falling sicknesse. Hee made three yeares peace with the Amiras of Egypts widow. Under him George Maniaces by the help of France recovered all Sicily from the Saracens, after they had possest it 230 yeares, who were at civill warres among themselves. But Stephen foolishly let the Sultan escape, for which being sharply reproved by Maniaces, hee was accused by Stephen as if he had aimed at
the Empire. Upon this George is imprisoned,  and Stephen made Governour of Sicily, who in a short time lost it all againe; Michael falling into an Hydropsie, and so unfit for government, and being touched in conscience for his murther and adultery, entred into a Monastery, where hee 1041. dyed, having first named for his successour Michael Calaphates, his nephew by his sister, he reigned 7 yeares. In his time a Thracian woman killed a certain stran∣ger with his own sword, for offering to ravish her, which fact was so approved by the Thracians, that they crowned her with garlands, and flung out his body into the streets, who as a self-murtherer lay there unburyed. Michael Calaphates the sonne of Stephen who lost Sicily, was adopted successor by Paphlago, and confirmed by Zoe, who made him swear, he would be faithfull  and loving to her, but he quickly forgot his oath and duty. For he banished Zoe, and deposed his Vncle Iohn from his Government, by whose help he obtained the Empire, when he fell on his knees to Zoe, beseeching her to confirm Michael's adop∣tion. He emasculated most of his kindred: but for this his insolency, the people of Constantinopl rose in armes against him, calls home Zoe with her sister Theodora, makes them lay downe their monasticall habit, and assume the imperiall; in the tumult 3000 Citizens were slaine by the Praetorian Guard, yet the Citizens prevailed who thrust Michael▪ with his uncle Constantine into a Monastery, and then put out their eyes, and drove them out of the City. Not long after old Zoe marryed againe to Constantine Monomachus whose former wife was  the nephew of Romanus Argyropolus, him Michael had banished upon suspition of his too much familiarity with Zoe. But now hee is called home, with his wife Sclerena: so now the Empire is guided by one man and three wo∣men. This Constantine Monomachus is confirmed in the Empire, which he much weak∣ned 1042. by his prodigall wasting of the treasure, which made him lay heavy taxes on the borderers of the Empire, to keep off forraigners, but the borderers grew carelesse, and let all break in that would, when they saw the treasure exhausted, and the burthen lye on them, they knew their condition could not be worse under strangers. Michael Governour of Dyrrachium, (now Durazzo a City in Mace∣donia on the Adriatic,) under Monomachus was killed with 40000 souldiers by the Scythians, who had wasted the Triballians and Servians people in Mesia join∣ing upon Pontus. George Maniaces, was animated by his Army to invade the Empire, which he did; but he was slaine in Bulgaria; though his Army had the better of the Imperialists, and so this war ended. Leo Torencius kinsman to Mono∣machus did also enter in competition for the Empire, which Monomachus percei∣ving, caused him to be shaved with intent to put him in a Monastery. But hee be∣ing well beloved by the Maccdonians, was received at Adrianopolis, where hee quickly raised an Army, with which hee besiegeth Byzantium, and had taken it, but that he was dull and neglected his opportunity, permitting the Emperours Forces to increase, by which in divers battels he was overthrowne, and at last taken alive by his enemies, who thrust out his eyes. Vladomirus Prince of Russia, for having had one of his men killed at Byzantium in a quarrell, raised an Army of 100000, which in boats made of one peece of timber, called Monoxyla hee brought afore Constantinople; conditions of peace were offered him, which hee refused, therefore his Army and Fleet in Gods just judgements were utterly o∣verthrown. The Bossini a people of the East, were subdued by Monomachus. At this time the Turkes were grown so strong, having taken Babylon, and subdued Media, that they send an Embassie to the Emperour Monomachus offering to make a league with him, conditionally that he will become tributary to the  Sultan, but the Embassadour was slighted, and sent back without any answer; whereupon the Turkes overrun the Eastern Provinces, even to the Sea Coast of Byzantium, where they encampe over against the City. Monomachus had lately subdued the Pazinacae a people of Scythia; and having converted them to Chri∣stianity, placed them in Bulgaria: he sends 15000 of these to Iberia to fight a∣gainst the Turkes; who had taken Liparit the Iberian King prisoner, and made him swear never to raise as against the Sultan any more. But these
Pazinacae would go no further then Chrysopolis, therefore they swim their horses over the Hellespont, and join themselves to their country men, wasting Thra∣cia, Macedonia, and other parts neer Constantinople: at last, after divers skir∣mishes, they make a league for 30 yeares: in the meane time the Turkes make ha∣vock of all without control; for the borders lay open, being the Garrisons were discharged for want of pay. But the Turkish conquests were a little stopped by a victory obtained against them by the President of Media, and by the ci∣vill warre that fell out betweene the Sultan of Persia and his brother A∣braham. Monomachus being long troubled with the Gowt, fell at last into a Pleurisie and 1054.  dyed, having reigned almost 13 yeares. He left the Empire to Theodora Zoe's sister, who dyed not long before, being 70 yeares old, Shee reigned alone almost 2 yeares: so finding her selfe aged and sickly, by the intreaty of the Peers, she names Michael Stratioticus for her successour and then dyed. To Pope Iohn the 1055. nineteenth or twentyeth succeeded Benedict the eight or ninth, who sate 13 yeares. But his chair was invaded by Sylvester the third, who sate one moneth, and then was forced to surrender his pontificate to Benedict again, and in this schism Gregory the sixth is chosen, who sate 2 years: so that now Rome is like the three-headed Cerberus. After them came Clemens the second, who sate 9 moneths: and after him Damascus the second, who was Pope 23 dayes; then came Leo the ninth, who sate  5 yeares. About these times Casimir of a Monk and Deacon became King of Po∣land, being the next heir, with whose orders and vowes the Pope dispensed Queen Raxa the mother of this Casimir, for her mis-government was fain to flye from the fury of the people, with this her young sonne; for not onely had shee incensed her own subjects, but the Russians also who broke in upon the North, and the Bohemians who pillaged the South part of Poland. In memory of this dis∣pensation given to Casimir, the Polonian Knights, at certain solemnities in the Church use to weare long white surplusses, after the manner of Priests and Dea∣cons; the Plebeians were taxed by the Poll to pay yearely one penny towards the maintenance of a perpetuall light in Saint Peters Church: they were  also injoyned to bee shaved on the crowne like Monkes, and to weare short haire. Berengarius the Archdeacon broached his doctrine against Transubstantiation, which afterward he recanted, whether willingly or by force, is doubtfull. The dignity of Cardinalls began about this time to be in request. At Rome was found a Gyants body uncorrupted, which being set up right, was higher then the City walls: Its Epitaph was this, Here lyeth Pallas the sonne of Evander, killed by Turnus his Lance. The Hungarians fell off again to Pelagianism, and killed the Clergy: but Andrew the fourth King of Hungary, made it death for any man in his Kingdome to professe Paganism. In England Hardiknut son of Knut by Queene Emme succeeded to Harold, whose body he caused to be untombed, the head struck off, and flung into the Thames. He punisheth such as were guilty of the death of Alfred his brother by the mother. Hee offended the whole State by grievous taxes; he called home Edward his other halfe brother out of Normandy; then dyed suddenly the se∣cond year of his reign: and in him ended the Danish Kingdome in England, ha∣ving lasted but 26 yeares under these 3 last Kings. Edward the Confessour is crowned. He was son of Ethelred, and is commended for his gentlenesse, con∣tinency, 1042. and piety, who with his touch cured certain diseases. Yet the Earl God∣win made insurrections against him, because hee favoured the French too much  that were about him, being led altogether by them: till at last hee made his peace with the King; whereupon the French forsook both Court and Kingdome: which occasioned the first difference with France. This Prince having reigned 24 yeares 1065. dyed, his corps was interred in the Church of Westminster, which hee had founded a little before. In Scotland Macbethus having treacherously murthered King Duncan, invaded the Kingdome, and for 17 years possessed it, untill Milco∣lumbus the slain Kings sonne being assisted by King Edward of England with 10000 men, recovered it from Macbethus.
CHAP. IX. The troublesome affaires of the West, under Henry the third, and Henry the fourth. 2. The affaires of Italy, Spain, Portugal, Sicily. 3. The Popes of those times. HEnry the third, sirnamed the Black, from the colour of his hair, succeed∣ed to his Father Conradus, against him Vratislaus king of Bohemia made 1039. warre by the assistance of Peter King of Hungary; in this warre Henry lost the chief Commanders of his first Army. His expedition against the Bohemians was frustrated, because they had stopped all the passages and high-wayes by cut∣ting downe the woodes. But in his second expedition hee forced them to sub∣mit, and to pay the annuall tribute which they had refused. Hee had another war against the Hungarians, who had deposed King Peter grandchilde to Stephen for being too favourable to strangers, and for maintaining of Christian Religion: but pretending his mis-government; Ovo was the King they set up against him. Henry employes Leopold Marquisse of Austria, who having recovered a great part of Hungary, forced this new King to beg for peace and pardon, which was granted him: but afterward falsifying his oath and promise, hee renewed the war in which hee was utterly defeated, put to flight, and at last being apprehended, was brought to Peter, and was by the sentence of the Peeres of Hungary beheaded. But Peter would not bee induced to forsake Christianity and to professe Paganisme, wherefore the Hungarians conspired against him, and 1050. sent for his kinsman Andrew whom they had banished; him they made King, and put out Peters eyes, who shortly after dyed at Alba Regia. After this Henry marryed with Agnes the daughter of William Prince of Picta∣via: hee rejected the Musitians and Players that came to the wedding, think∣ing these fooleries farre below his imperiall gravity: but hee could not enjoy peace long; for Godefrid Duke of Lorrain entred into league with the French king▪ and with Baldwin of Flanders, to expell his brother Gottello out of his part of the Dukedome, that so hee might injoy all alone: this so incensed Henry that hee caused him to bee apprehended and imprisoned, yet upon his submissi∣on hee let him goe, and sent him with aid to Pope Leo the ninth against the Normans. In the meane while Benedict the ninth, Sylvester the third, and Gregory the sixth. Anti-Popes made such stirs in Rome and Italy, that the Emperor was forced to repaire thither, and to call a Synod at Sutrinum not far from Rome. In this Benedict, who had set up his residence in the Palace of Lateran, Sylvester at S. Peters, and Gregory at S. Marks, were all three deposed, and Sindeger or Suideger Bishop of Bamburg was elected, who was named afterward Clemens the second.  In this Synod also was confirmed the former Act, that no Pope should be chosen without the Emperors consent. After this Henry being crowned Emperour by this Clement, marcheth with his Army into the farther part of Italy, to compose the differences betweene the Normans and Lombards, some whereof were yet remaining there: so all things there being setled, Hee returnes for Germany; but before hee could get out of Italy Pope Clement the second is poysoned, and immediately after him Pope Damasus; therefore hee was faine to choose Pope Leo the ninth, who was the third hee chose before his departure from Italy. This Leo being af∣terward to stay in Rome, accompanies the Emperour into Germany, where in  the Councell at Mints assembled there by Henry; the Pope was forced to submit and give way to the Bishop of the place, who claimed it as his due. After Henry returned from Italy, hee made an expedition into Hungary, a∣gainst Andrew their King, to revenge the death of Peter; but hee had no successe in this interprise: onely Andrew the King was slaine by a fall from his horse, and trode under foot. Hee banished Conradus of Bavaria, for his mis-govern∣ment,
and for entering into league with the Hungarians, who at last made their peace with the Emperour by promising to pay a yeerly tribute, and to furnish him with Auxiliaries upon all occasions. Conradus dyed in his exile: where∣upon Henry made his young sonne Henry the fourth Duke of Bavaria, being but 2 yeares old, and got him to bee declared Emperour. Then hee sent back Pope 1053. Leo into Italy with an Army under the conduct of Godefrid Duke of Lorrain to suppresse the Normans, who at first were put to flight, but recollecting their dispersed Forces overcame their overcommers. Shortly after Godefrid marryed with Beatrix the widow of Boniface Marquise of Tuscia in Italy, Henry suspe∣cting 1055▪ that Godefrid (whose Faith was wavering, and spirit ambitious) by this mar∣riage aimed at the Empire, returnes with an Army into Italy to put a stop to Godefrids intentions; in the interim hee crownes his sonne at Aix, being 4 yeares old. Hee stayed a yeare in Italy, where having setled all things hee in∣vades 1056. the Sclavi of Lusatia, by whom his army was totally routed, and he shortly after dyed of grief, after he had lived 40 years, and reigned 17: he was buryed at Spi∣ra neer his Father Conradus, he was a good and mild Prince: his first wife was daugh∣ter to the King of England, who dyed childlesse. His second wife Agnes bore him Henry the fourth. This Henry the fourth was 7 yeares old, when his Father dyed, who committed to his wife the care of this Prince: and his education to Conra∣dus  a Noble man of Suevia. Shee was also trusted with the Government of the Empire, which prudently shee managed for 5 yeares space: but afterward be∣ing deposed by the plot of some Princes in Saxony, shee lived privately in a Mo∣nastery. The young Emperour is conveyed fraudulently into Saxony by the Bishop of Colen. Ecert Marquisse of Saxony, and Otto the Saxon who lately had obtain∣ed Bavaria of the Empresse, pretending that they would breed the youth in Mili∣tary Discipline, and State affairs which he could not learne under his mother, but rather effeminateness; whereas indeed their aime was, either to procure to themselves the Empire, or at least the administration thereof during the childes minority. In the interim the souldiers grew licentious and outrageous for want of disci∣pline,  and having got to themselves a fit Captaine Otto the brother, begot of William Marquisse of Thuringia by a Concubine, they began to rob and plunder Saxony, this theevish Army of robbers was at last defeated by Bruno and Ecbert brothers, Marquisses of Saxony, being assisted by the Emperours Forces, the battell was fought above Mesburg, where the young Emperour was placed a little way off from the Army, as a terrour to the enemy, and a spectatour of the victory. In this conflict Bruno was slaine, and so was Otto the ring-leader of the robbers, whose in∣heritance in Thuringia was seised on by Ecbert Marquisse of Saxony, who erected a Colledge of Canons at Naumburg, and translated thither from Cyzicum, the Epi∣scopall Seat. Henry being 13 yeares of age, undertooke the managing of the State; and first hee assisted Salomon his kinsman King of Hungary, against Bela who thrust him out of his kingdome: this Bela's Army Henry overthrew, and re∣established Salomon in his kingdome: then hee waged warre against the Sclavi of Lusatia with good successe; but the Saxons storming that the Empire should bee any where, except among themselves conspired against the young Emper∣our, the authour of this conspiracy was Otho Duke of Bavaria, whom a little before Henry had sent into Italy with the Bishops of Colen and Trent, to confirm the Italians in their allegiance to the Emperour, and to demand the ordinary tri∣bute. Otho by insinuating himselfe with the Princes of Italy, brought a suspition  upon himselfe, that hee aimed at the Empire. The chiefe actors with him in this conspiracy were the Bishops of Magdeburg and Halberstad, with some Dukes and Marquisses. But he quickly overthrew their Forces by the help of Rodulphus of Suevia, and others. This Rodulphus being desirous to take up the differences, and end the war, interposed himselfe as a Mediator between the Emperour and them; but they rejecting all meanes of reconciliation, were apprehended and imprisoned,
after∣ward  escaping out of prison, they grow more eager and fierce against the Emper∣our then before. Otho the Bavarian was not indeed in the battell, yet he was con∣victed of treason against the Emperours life, wherefore hee lost Bavaria: which caused him to raise new Forces against Henry out of Saxony and other places. Pope Gregory the seventh, called Hildebrand before, was chosen without the 1073. Emperours consent against the ancient lawes of election, Henry to bee revenged of this wrong; raiseth an Army, but hee was pacified by Gregory for the pre∣sent, who not long after makes a decree, that henceforth the Emperour should have no hand in the Popes election, and withall cites Henry to make his appear∣ance in the Court of Rome, to answer to such things as should bee objected a∣gainst him, concerning his wicked life and simoniacall practises in permitting all Bishopricks and Church-dignities to be bought and sold. At this the Bishops of Germany stormed, but the Saxons were glad, who assist the Pope against Henry. Hee therefore to cleere himselfe repaires to Rome in the midst of 1076. Winter, that the sentence of excommunication against him might bee taken off. Hee was forced to stay from morning to evening bare-foot, and without any ood before the Popes Palace, ere hee could bee admitted into his presence, which was not till the fourth day after, then being admitted, and sharply reproved by the Pope, hee is injoyned to dismisse his Army, to orbeare medling  any more with the government of the Empire, or else to hold it of the Pope, and withall to call a Parliament. The more fierce was Gregory against him, because hee had called a Synod at Wormes: wherein Gregory was condemned of Simonie. To cleare himself of which he took the Sacrament, imprecating against himself sudden death, if hee were guilty of the crime of Simonie, and wishing the Emperour to doe the like, which he refused, affirming that he would make it ap∣pear in the Parliament, how he had discharged his duty in managing the Empire. But the Pope fearing lest Henry should gather strength again, and revenge the affronts put upon him, sends his Decree to bee proclaimed in Germany, whereby Henry is excommunicate, and by the instigation of the Saxons a crown  of gold is sent to Rodulphus Duke of Suevia, with this inscription; The rock gave to Peter, and Peter to Rodulphus the Diadem. Rodulphus upon the perswasions of 1080. the Bishops of Mints and Colen, that hee was bound to obey the Pope and not to keepe Faith to him who was excommunicate; accepts the Title of Caesar, and is crowned at Mints; and so takes possession of the Empire; forgetting what favours hee had received heretofore from the Emperour. Then he prepares an Army against him, relying on his owne and the Saxons power, with whom joined divers Bishops and Dukes. But the Francs and others abhorring this perfidiousnesse; under Duke Godefridus Bilioneus in the Emperours absence at Rome, raise an Army to defend his right. Henry understanding by the Bishop  of Strasburg what was done, steales away out of Rome, sends a new Duke in∣to Suevia, drives Rodulphus his Garrisons out of Mints, encounters with the Saxons in nine severall battells, in the fourth whereof Rodulphus is de∣feated, deadly wounded, and his arme cut off; which when it was present∣ed to him as hee was dying, confessed that with this hand he had confirmed his faith to Henry which he falsified, and so accusing the Bishops for their wicked counsels, dyed. When it was told the Emperour that Rodulphus was richly intomb∣ed. I envy not that honour to him (saith he) but wish that all my enemies were thus entombed. Rodulphus being slaine Henry converts all his force and fury against the Pope,  from whom hee meant to recover his rights, which hee had invaded, but first hee calls a Synod at Brixia, wherein hee causeth Gregory to be excomunicate and depose, and imprisoned in the Castle of St. Angelo, having named for his suc∣cessour Clement Bishop of Ravenna: whom hee brought to Rome after two years 1084. siege, and there placed him being consecrated in the Pontificall chair, and was by the same Pope declared Emperour, and crowned with his wife Bertha. In this
expedition Henry corrected the Normans for assisting the Pope. But the Saxons after Rodulphus his death renew their Forces, and make Hermanus Prince of Lorrain Emperour by the Popes command. He fought with Henry, and over∣came him neere the town of Wurcburg: but hee was quickly driven thence in∣to Saxony, where he thought to reew the warre, but was forsaken by his souldiers. Hee at last by the fall of a gate which hee was besieging was 1088. slaine with many others. After him Ecbert Marquisse of Saxony invaded the Empire: but hee shortly after was slaine by Henry's guard in a Mill, whither he had fled. Thus the fury of the Saxons was by so many bad successes some∣what abated; but the Popes indignation increased: for Urban the second, stir∣red up against Henry, his sonne Conradus by his first wife; who by his fa∣ther had beene made Governour of Italy, but he being taken away by untimely death, Paschalis the second sets up his other sonne Henry against him whom his Father had named his successour in the Empire. Hee by the help of the Saxons, wrung the Empire from his Father, whom the Bishop of Mints in 1105. the presence of his sonne disgracefully devested of all his imperiall ornaments. But whilest the old man went about to raise new Forces to revenge this 1106. wrong, he dyed at Leodium the 56 yeare of his age, and the 49 of his reign▪ whose Body was not buryed in 5 yeares space after his death, at last it was removed from Leodium to Spira, where it was intombed neer his Fa∣ther.  This war against Henry lasted 38 yeares from the time he went out of Rome till he dyed. He had two wives, by the first he had Conradus, who having marryed Rogers daughter of Normandy, called himself King of Italy, but shortly after dyed, and was buryed at Florence He had another son Henry the fifth, who succeeded him. In Henry the fourths time divers Bishops & Princes of Germany made an expedi∣tion into the Holy land, but with ill successe, for most of them were destroyed by the Turks & Saracens, for of 7000 scarse 2000 returned home. In Spain Anful king of Gallicia after some years siege took from the Saracens there greatest City Toledo, and there established the Christian Religion. This age produced the Carthusians  by Bruno of Colen: and the Cistertians by Robert Abbat of Molismum: the old Benedictines were much degenerated from the rules of their Ancestors. We shewed before that the Normans had taken Apulia from the Greeks; William the son of Tancredus was the first Prince there, then Drogo, to whom succeeded Hunfrid. After him came Robert Wiscardus, who were all brothers: this Robert helped the Pope 1074. against the Emperour, and subdued Calabria with Sicily, whereupon Gregory the seventh excommunicated him; but afterward he submitted to the Pope, and was 1080. contented to hold these Provinces in fee of the Church, paying a yearly revenew to the Pope. The next year Robert with 15000 overthrew Alexius the Greek Em∣perours great Army of 100 and 70000. Hereupon Alexius for a great summe of money procures Henry the fourth to invade Roberts Territories, but he imployes the money against Pope Gregory the seventh, whom he shuts up in prison; takes pos∣sion of the Palace of Lateran where he placeth Guibert the Anti-Pope. Robert re∣turning with his Army, drives home the Emperour to Germany, punisheth the re∣bellious City, sets Gregory free, and brings him to Salernum where he dyed: and 1085. shortly after followed the death of Robert, who left the Dukedomes of Calabria and Apulia to his son Rogerius. About these times Henry by extraction a French man having marryed Theresia 1100. the daughter of Alphonsus the sixth King of Castile, with her got the Earldome of Lusitania or Portugall. He by his valour drove out and subdued the Saracens, and  so obtained the principality of Lusitania, which was the beginning of the kingdom of Portugal: The Temple of the holy Sepulchre, which was demolished by Sultan Calipha, is rebuilt by the permission of Daber Caliph of Egypt, at the cost of Mono∣chus and Argyropilus. The Vandals and Sclavi having killed Gottschalus their Governour with all religious persons they revolt again to Paganism, which is now the third time.
The Church service or Liturgy in Spain was compiled by S.  Leander and S. Isiodor called Mozarabum is changed by Gregory the seventh. One Peter an Eremit, and afterward a Captain in the Holy War, was the first that taught to pray upon beads. The Dukedome of Bohemia is now erected into a 1086. Kingdome: for Vratislaus because he subdued Leopoldus Marquisse of Austria, is by Henry the Emperour at Mintz declared King, and crowned by Gilbert Arch∣bishop of Trevers. The Italians by the perswasion of Pope Victor invaded Africa, where they killed 100000 Saracens, and overthrew their chief Cities. Abstinence from flesh on Saturdayes is injoyned by Gregory the seventh. The States of Ve∣nice and Genua contend for the mastery of the Sea, both of them having done good service for the Holy War. But at last the Venetians obtaine the totall com∣mand  of the Sea. Roger Duke of Normandy was the first King of Sicily, Apulia and Calabria: to whom succeeded his sonne William surnamed the Wicked. To Pope Leo the ninth succeded Victor the second, 2 years after him came Stephen the seventh, by some the 9, by others the 10, he was brother to Gotfrid of Lorrain. He being sent to Byzantium cals a Synod, at which because the Emperor and Patri∣arch would not be present the Cardinal departed, & with Apostolicall indignation, beat the dust from his Sandals, he was chosen Pope after this without the Emperors suffrage: and subjected the Church of Millan to the See of Rome, having been in∣dependent 200 yeares. He sate but 7 months, to him succeeded Benedict the ninth or tenth, who having sate 9 months, was thrust out by Gerard Bishop of Florence,  called Nicolaus the second, though some make these two distinct men.. He caused Berengarius openly confesse that the true body of Christ was eaten in the Sacra∣ment, which opinion was confirmed by Lanfrancus, who wrote Bookes to this purpose. He was Pope 3 yeares, to whom succeeded Alexander the second, who had been Bishop of Luca: against him was set up Cadulus Bishop of Parma, who comming twice to Rome with a great Army, thought to obtain the Pontificate by force, but could not. Alexander sate 11 years, his successour was Gregory the seventh, who was Pope 12 years. He could shake fire out of his sleeves when hee was angry: he inhibited the marriage of Clergy men, which Henry the fourth com∣manded;  in those dayes marryed Clerks were called Henrician hereticks. Against this Gregory Henry advanced to the chair one Guabert or Gilbert, assuming the name of Clemens the third, who was Pope (but not without opposition) 17 years: after him came Victor the third, who sate one year, and then was poysoned, to whom succeeded Vrban the second, who sate 13 years. He animated the western Princes to undertake the Holy War. CHAP. X. The Eastern affaires under Stratioticus, Ducas, Diogenes, Michael, Botoniates,  and Alexius. 2. The Holy War and Kings of Ierusalem, and new orders of Knighthood. 3. The affaires of Cyprus, Portugall, England, Scotland, and the Popes of this time. IN the Greek Empire to Theodora succeeded Michael Stratioticus, so called, be∣cause a meer souldier, being unskilfull in Government, and all things else; 1056. for which cause he was chosen by the Eunuchs of the Palace; that he bearing the title, they might in effect rule the Empire. But he slighting the souldiers, and Nobility; he being very aged, besides his want of skill, the Army chose Isaacus Comnenus to be Emperour, against whom Stratioticus sends Theodorus, with an Army, but he was defeated by Comnenus, whereupon Stratioticus willing to make his peace, sends to assure Comnenus that he will make in his last Will him heir of the Empire, with which Comnenus seemed to be contented, till he saw that Stra∣tioticus under hand did bribe the people and Nobility, to the end they would not give their consent to his election. Therefore Comnenus
sends the Patriarch to  degrade him, who as he was perswading Stratioticus to pat willingly with the Empire, asked the Patriarch what reward he should have for leaving an earthly kingdome; he answered, that he should receive an heavenly for it: Vpon this, hee resigned the Empire, having reigned one year, and then takes himself to a Monasti∣call 1057. life. Comnenus succeeded, who first deposed the Patriarch that advanced him, then fals upon the Church revenues, to fill up his exhausted tasure. He made warre upon the Hungarians, and Bossini, and forced them to beg for peace. One time as he was hunting, he was so affrighted with the sight of an horrible Boare (which some thinke was an apparition) and with sudden lightning and thunder that he fell from his horse, after hee had reigned 2 yeares, and 3 months, and having resigned the Empire to Constantine Ducas, he betooke himself to a private life. Ducas was so covetous that to spare charges he disbanded a great part of his Ar∣my, and garrisons, giving thereby boldnesse to the neighbouring Nations to invade 1059. that little of the Empire which was left; whereupon the Uzzi a people of Scythia, being 60000 in number past over the Isther, and invaded Macedonia and Greece. Ducas being destitute of souldiers for want of pay, betakes himselfe to prayers and tears, by which armes God was overcome, who sent a plague among the Uzzi, which swept away most of them: the remnant were destroyed by the Bulgarians: 1067. these calamities were forewarned by an earthquake, which overthrew divers houses  and Temples: there shined also a Comet as big as the Moon at the full, but as the Moon increased, this decreased and vanished. Ducas advanced Iohannes Xiphili∣nus of Trapezuntium to the Patriarchate, affirming that he had rather obtain ho∣nor by scholars then by souldiers. Having reigned 7 yeares and 6 months, he dyed of a lingring disease in the 61 year of his reign: he recommended the Empire to his wife Eudocia, whom he caused to sweare that shee would never marry again, nor leave the Empire to any, except to his three sons, Michael, Andronicus, and Constantine. Shee therefore undertook the Government, but finding that the Em∣pire was much weakened, and the enemies thereof increasing dayly, and that there were need of a stronger defender then her self, resolves to break her oath, and so marryeth 7 months after her husbands death with Romanus Diogenes, a good soul∣dier, who became Emperour shortly after. Diogenes against his promise made to Eudocia, excludes her out of the Govern∣ment, and undertakes the Empire alone, that he might without opposition reco∣ver the honour of the Eastern Empire, almost lst, by reason the Turkes had in∣vaded Asia, which they were like to carry cleer away having no Garrisons to re∣sist them. Therefore he marcheth into Asia against the Forces of Aspasales Ca∣liph of Babylon, whose seat was now in Persis, he by his Sultans had sent two Armies, one into Cappadocia which he wasted, the other into Syria: with these Diogenes encounters, defeates them, takes Hierapolis and Alepus, and seiseth on their plunder, which they had laid up in Neocaeseara. His next expedition was  into Cappadocia, where he had divers encounters with the Barbarians, who by the help of the Armenians overthrew the greatest part of them. After this pre∣suming on his good successe, he would needs fight with Azan the Sultan, who of∣fered him honourable conditions of peace, but he rejected them. He fought stout∣ly with the Turkes, then towards the Evening returned into his Camp. Androni∣cus the brother of Constantine Ducas, supposing Diogenes had fled; withdrawes his Forces suddenly, and leaves him for a prey to his enemy: but hee perceiving how he was betrayed, resolves to fight again notwithstanding, which he did cou∣ragiously, and killed many of the Turkes, but at last by the fall of his horse which was wounded, he was taken by the enemy and brought to the Sultan, who first  troad upon his neck, and then commiserating his case, used him with all respect, and having made a league with him, after he had honoured him with divers rich presents, he lets him goe home, where hee found harder usage; for being hated by Eudocia and her children, in his absence, the Empire was conferred on Michael the eldest son of Ducas, who besieged
Diogones in Adena, then  caused him to deliver up the towne, upon assurance that hee should receive no hurt, but Michael against his oath, thrust out his eyes, his head for want of good looking to putrified, and so he dyed, having reigned almost 4 years. 1071. To him Michael succeeded, whose sirname was Parapinacius from pinatium the fourth part of medymnus, which was a measure equall almost to two of our bushels, because in his time was a great famine, in which this measure of corn was sold at a deer rate. A little before this famine was born a monster with Goats feet, and one eye in his forehead, upon which followed a great plague. This Michael gave himselfe more to study then to government, under Psellus the Philosopher whose Arithmetick is yet extant; hence it came to passe that the Eastern Empire was ru∣ined  for want of a good Emperour. For the Turkes subdued all the countryes about Pontus, and erected a Kingdome, called yet Turcomania. Towards the West the Croats or Heneti overrun all the countrey even to Byzantium, and at last seated themselves in that part of Illyris or Pannonia, which of old was cal∣led Liburnia now Croatia. The Crabats or Servians infested Bulgaria. The Em∣pire being thus without a guide, Nicephorus Botoniates, who was descended of Nicephorus Phocas, enters into a league with the Turkes of Asia, and Nicepho∣rus Briennius Duke of Dyrrachium sets up a new Kingdome in Thracia, Botoni∣ates at the same time possesseth Nicaea. Briennius is overthrowne by Ruse∣lius Latinus, wherefore Botoniates growing potent by the Turks power, made Michael give up his Empire which he did willingly, and entred into a Monastery, with his wife Mary, havng reigned almost 7 yeares. In the Patriarchat to learned Xiphilinus succeeded Cosmus a dunce. Botoniates succeeds in the Empire, who first of all suppresseth Briennius and 1078. kills him, then he defeats Constantine Ducas, the sonne of Michael whom the Army had proclaimed Emperor at Chrysopolis: but the brothers Alexii con∣spired against Botoniates, and by the help of the French besiege Constantinople, which having taken, they raged promiscuously upon all ages and sexes. Then they thrust Botoniates into a Monastery, after he had reigned 3 yeares. So the Empire is divided among the brothers. Alexius he had the imperiall title and 1081. power, his brother Isaacius by a new name is called Sebastocrator: the third called Adrian, is named Protosebastos, and the youngest Sebastos. These four divided also the revenues of the Empire amongst▪ them, so that there were not meanes left for the Emperour to resist an enemie. Alexius wanting money fell to exactions and rapine, in stead of gold and sil∣ver coin, hee made use of brasse, yet would have all his taxes and tributes to bee paid in gold. Neer Epidamnum he received a great overthrow by the Normans under Duke Robert. He lost the Islands of Chius, Lesbus, Samus and Rhodes to the Turkes, under their Captain Zacchabus, who also tooke from the Greekes Creet and Cyprus. Alexius also had warres with the Bosini who overthrew 1196. him, and made him buy his peace, by assigning them some lands to dwell in. He was also defeated by Godefrid of Bullion in his expedition into the Holy land: he lived 70 yeares, and reigned 37. a little before his death all his friends forsook him, so finding himself slighted, dyed with grief, having first named his son Ioh 1198. Emperour. His body was buryed without any solemnity: he was Co-Emperour with Henry the fourth. In these Emperours time the Holy war was undertaken by Godefrid Duke of Lorrain with his brothers Eustachius and Baldwin, by Robert of Normandy, Hugh brother to Philip the French King, with divers others. Peter the Eremit had undertaken an expedition before this, but with ill successe, his Army, which con∣sisted  of 40000, came to nothing, for they were utterly destroyed by Solyman the Turk, after they had suffered much by the Bulgarians, in their march to∣wards Asia; there were also before Godefrids two other Armies sent, these were defeated by the Hungarians: but Godefrid had better successe, who having sold his patrimony, the Dukedome of Lorrain to the Bishop of Leodium, spent it all upon this expedition, which he undertooke about the middle of August,
and arrived with his whole Army before the end of that year at Constantinople. He mustered his Army at Chalcedon now called Scutari, and found that it consi∣sted of 600000 Foot, and 100000 horse, their badge was a red Crosse on their shoulder. The Turks had subdued all from Pontus to the Hellespont in the space of 40 yeares; the Greeks and Saracens being driven out thence; and both the Ca∣liphs of Babylon and Egypt much weakened, they had also subdued Palestina, and taken in Jerusalem: but this they did not enjoy above 8 yeares, for it was retaken a∣gain by the Saracens. The first conflict the Christians had was at Nicaea, with Solyman the Turkish Sultan, and first of that name, whose great Army they overthrew, and after 26  dayes siege took the town, and in it the Sultan Solymans wife. In 4 yeares space they subdued Lycaonia, Cilicia, Syria, Mesopotamia, and Comagena, all the Turkes being either destroyed or fled: these victories so affrighted the Saracens, that the Calypha of Egypt, by Embassadours was glad to sue for peace. They besieged Antioch and after 9 months took it. But the Sultan Belchiacor sent an other Army of Persians, who besieged the Christians within the City, so that they were pinched with famine; the Greek Army sent by Alexius to raise the siege, durst not venture upon so numerous an Army of Saracens, wherefore the western Christians within perceiving they were in a desperate condition made a furious sally upon the enemy, whom they routed and put to the flight. The Sa∣racens  lost here above 100000; but the Christians shortly after this victory lost 50000 by the plague; at last they besiege Jerusalem no in the Saracens pos∣sion; and after 38 dayes siege took it, not without much difficulty, for they 1099. were so famished, that they went praying for 8 dayes together bare footed about the walls, and at length were animated to fall on again by a glittering Target which they saw in the air over Mount Sion. The City being take, and so much bloud shed, that it came up to the horses knees; Godefrid who first scaled the walls, was by generall consent made King; but he would neither take the Title nor Crowne in that place, where our Saviour had been crowned with Thornes, where hee had suffered death, and so much dishonour; yet there  he established the foundation of a new Kingdome, which the Saracens possessed a∣bout 360 yeares. Baldwin the Kings brother was now in possession of Cilicia, Comagena, and Mesopotamia, and was honoured with the Title of Earl of Edessa which is a City in Comagena called Rages in Tobias's History, at this day it is named Orpha. Tancredus nephew to Gscardus by his sister, obtained the 1100. Government of Tiberias. Boemundus Prince of Tarentum, who was one of the undertakers of this expedition, got the government of Antioch: But this yeare proved fatall to many Princes, for Godefrid King of Jerusalem dyed, having reigned one year. Boemundus Duke of Antioch was taken by the  Turkes, whom Tancredus Earl of Tiberias succeeded. William Rufus King of England was killed by chance. Henry of Lovan was slain in running a tilt. Briti∣staus King of Bohemia was murthered by a high way robber as he was returning from hunting. To King Godefrid succeeded his brother Baldwin Earle of Edessa. He by the help of the Fleet of Genua took Caesarea of Palestine, Ptolemais, Tripolis, and Berythus, with other townes, the third part of which is assigned to the Ge∣nuans. Apamea also and Laodicea townes of Syria, were taken about that time, and so was Carrae of Mesopotamia by Boemund (who had been ransomed) and Tancredus. But they lost it again, whilest they were striving for the superiority of it. Hereupon Boemund returnes to Italy: but having married with Constantia the daughter of Philip King of France, he returns to Antioch. Robert Earl of Flan∣ders with Eustachius the Kings brother, goe back again to their owne countries. Baldwin having taken the Isle Pharos in Egypt, after he had ralgned 18 yeares dyed. To him succeeded his cousin German Baldunus de Burgo:
in his time was in∣stituted  the order of the Knights of St. Iohn of Jerusalem, afterward of Rhodes: these were to wait upon the King in his expeditions against the common enemy, to defend and enlarge the bounds of Christianity; to cleare all the wayes of Pil∣grims to Jerusalem from theeves and robbers. These did good service whilest they were assisted by Christian Princes, but being forsaken by them, they were for∣ced to give up Rhodes to the Turke, and to containe themselves within the small confines of Malta. After them sprung up two other Orders of sacred Knight∣hood: to wit, the Templars and Teutonics, the Templars had one Hugo De Pa∣ganis, and Gaufred for there Authours: these seated themselves in Jerusalem, and were to guard the pilgrims from the Sea side to Jerusalem, and back againe. But in processe of time they dispersed themselves into all parts of Christendome, aiming at nothing but wealth, greatnesse, and luxury, being quite degenerate from their first institution; so that the Christian Princes having aforehand plotted their destruction did suddenly at once extirpate them, after they had continued about 200 yeares, in the reigne of Henry the seventh Emperour. The chiefe Master of this Order had his seat at Jerusalem. The Teutonics from their profession and 1190. Symbole were called Marians, their beginning was at Ptolemais in the time of Henry the sixth Emperour, where certaine rich Citizens of Lubec and Breme built a large Hospitall for strangers who should be of that Order; from thence plan∣tations were derived into Germany; their first Master was one Henry Walpodius These Colonies growing numerous and wealthy, in the time of Frederic the second, subdued Prussia and Livonia, and kept out the barbarous Nations from these parts: but when these Knights grew loose, effeminate, and carelesse, Prussia and Livonia were torne from the Empire. King Baldwin having defeated the Turkes at Da∣mascus, 1131. and the Saracens of Egypt, and taken in Tyrus, dyed in the 13 yeare of his reign. Baldwin being dead, the Princes fell at variance among themselves, which increased the strength and courage of their enemies. Fulco son in law to Baldwin is made king, in whose time there was nothing but civill jarres about the princi∣pality of Antioch: he having reigned 11 years dyed at Ptolemais, by a fall from his  horse in hunting, leaving two young sons Baldwin and Almericus. Baldwin was assisted by Conradus the Emperour by land, and Lewis the French King by Sea. But Conradus having lost his Army in the siege of Damascus and 1162. Ascalon returnes home. Baldwin having at last taken Ascalon, dyed at Bery∣thus the 24 yeare of his reigne: to whom succeeded his brother Almericus, he invaded Egypt, and fought with Saracon the Sultan, who had driven the Caliph out of Egypt. Hee had warres also with his successour Saladin, but with no successe. Almericus dyed the 12 yeare of his reigne, leaving a young son Bald∣win, who being leprous, and despairing of ever having children, made Baldwin sonne of William Marquisse of Montferrat, his sisters sonne, his successour, whom Guido his Father in law poysoned, that hee with his wife Sibylla might obtaine the Kingdome, whereupon Raimundus the young Kings tutor made warre against Guido, hee to strengthen his cause drawes Saladine out of Egypt, which was the o∣verthrow of that kingdome of Jerusalem, for hee took upon surrender Ptolemais, Asotus, Berythus, and Ascalon: and after one moneths siege Jerusalem, 88 yeares 1187. after it was taken by Godefrid. Sibylla with her foure children were killed in the tumult, her sister Isabella the wife of Humfredus Toronius was carryed away by Conradus Marquisse of Montferrat, hoping in her right to obtaine the kingdome: hee was mur∣thered, and Henry Earle of Campania and Lord of Tyrus, marryed with Isa∣bella, but refused the title of King of Jerusalem, because Guido Lusignanus a French man laid claime to it in the right of Sybillas children, whose Father in law hee was. He helped Richard King of England with money when he was about to recover the Christians losses in Asia, and for this mony Cyprus was pawned or sold to Guido; after Richard had seised on the Island and had taken Alexius Comnenus prisoner. His posterity held Cyprus till the death of Jacobus Lusignanus,
the last King, and then it came into the possession of the Venetians. For his Widow being a Venetian borne, and too weake to buckle with the power of the Turkes, resigned it to the Venetians: who held it almost 100 yeares pay∣ing a yearely tribute of 40000 Crownes to the Egyptian, and after to the Turkish Sultan. But they lost it to Mustapha Generall of the Turkes under Selymus the second: As for the Kingdome of Jerusalem, Iohn De Breen was the last Christian King thereof in Syria or Palestine, whose daughter Yeo∣land marryed to Fredric Emperour and King of Naples, who in her right called himself King of Jerusalem, which title the King of Spain retaines as being King of Naples. In this Holy Warre the Venetians, Genuans, and Pisans did much good service  by Sea, and inriched themselves with the spoils of Syria: the Genuans commanded the Aegean, Bosphorus, Hellespont, Thracian and Euxin Sea; the Venetians were masters of Creete, Peloponnesus, the Cyclades, Thessalonica, and Isles of the Io∣nian Seas; these two States having oppressed the Pisans, contended long about the mastery of the Sea with various successe, till at last at Me∣thon the Genuans were overthrowne, and so the Venetians became absolute Masters. About this time began the Kingdome of Portugal in Alphonsus the sonne of Henry Earl of Lorrain. This Henry marryed with Taresia the daughter of Al∣phonsus the sixth king of Spain, who took Toletum from the Saracens. Henry  obtained Portugall for his wifes portion, whose sonne Alphonsus was con∣tent at first with the Title of Duke: but having subdued the Saracens, hee was saluted King by the souldiers. The Monastery of Clarevall was erected and S. Barnard made the first Abbot thereof, S. Agnes instituted her Order of Nuns at Jerusalem. Otho Bishop of Bamberg converted Pomerania to 1105. the Faith. In England King Harald was assaulted by his younger brother Toustain and Harfager King of Norway, both by Sea and Land; but these both were slaine, and Harald obtained the victory. Shortly after William Duke of Normandy, 1065. 1066. pretending a right to the Crowne of England, by the last Will of King Edward his kinsman, landed in Sussex, where a bloudy battell was fought, in which Ha∣rold was slaine, and with him almost 61 thousand English; and so ended the Sa∣xon line, about 500 years after the first comming in of Hengist. William was re∣ceived into London and crowned on Christmas day at Westminster by Aldred Archbishop of York; the next spring William returnes to Normandy to settle his affaires there, and takes with him the chiefe of the English Nobility: fearing lest they might revolt in his absence. Upon his return there were divers discon∣tents and rebellions at Exeter, Oxford, and chiefly in the North, the Nobility be∣ing discontented with Williams bounty towards the French: but hee subdued them 1074. all, and defeated also afterward another rebellion in the Isle of Ely. Prince Edgar Williams competitor, with many of the English Nobility were fled to Scotland, who were protected by King Malcolin: whereupon VVilliam with a puissant Ar∣my enters Scotland, where both Kings conclude a peace. Edgar submits, and is restored to grace, and a faire maintenance. Roger Fits-Auber with many others 1078. conspire against William; but the fire was discovered before the flame broke out, and so the plot vanished; after this the king in the 13 yeare of his reign subdues Wales. In Normandy his son Robert rebels against him, which drew VVilli∣am over thither with an Army, Robert lying in ambush with 2000 men, fell upon the King, defeated his Forces, unhorsed the King himselfe, and wounded him in the arme, but hee was cured at Rouen, and reconciled to his sonne, who rebells 1080▪  the second time: and upon his fathers arrivall, submits againe to him at Bur∣deaux: but VVilliam brings him into England, and employes him against the Scots: for now the league was broken betweene the two kings. After this 1082▪ his sonne Henry, and Louis the French kings eldest sonne fell out at Chesse, and wounded each other; which occasioned a Warre betweene the two Fathers:
the French with Robert invade Normandy, VVilliam enters France, and at Rouen is reconciled the third time to his sonne Robert: a short peace was made, which was quickly broken: for VVilliam refuseth to doe homage for the king∣dome of England, though hee was content for Normandy. The French king mocking him for his great belly, made VVilliam enter France againe, 1087. where at Mantz he was hurt, and thence conveyed sick to Rouen, and so ended his Warre. VVilliam changed the lawes, and puts them in French, al∣ters the tenures: but the customes of Kent we represerved by the mediation of the Archbishop Stigand. Hee seised on all the Forrests and Chases of the kingdome. Hee dis-peopled for 30 miles space the countrey of Hamshire on the Sea coast, and made it a Forrest. Hee seised upon the Plate, Jewels, and Treasures of the Monasteries, pretending that the rebells had hid their wealth there as in priviledged places: he relyed much upon the advice of Lanfranc an Italin born, and Archbishop of Canterbury, he dyed at Rohan the 74 yeare of his age, and 21 of his reigne: his Corps lay three dayes neglected, till his youngest sonne Henry had it conveyed to the Abbey of Cane, where it could not bee interred, untill the ground wherein hee lay was purchased. To Robert his eldest sonne hee left the Dukedome of Normandy, to VVilliam his third sonne England; to Henry the youngest, his treasure with an yearely pension: his second sonne Richard was slaine by a stagge in the Forrest; where VVilliam  the second also was slaine by an arrow, and Richard the sonne of Robert Duke of Normandy broke his neck. Hee erected seven Abbyes of Monkes, and 6 of Nuns, besides his munificence to 9 Abbies & 1 Nunnery in Normandy. In England he founded one Abbey where he fought his first battell, and two Nunneries, one at Hinching-brooke in Huntingdonshire, and the other at Armthewt in Cumber∣land. William the second succeeded, who was faine to make an agreement with his 1087. elder brother Robert, who challenged the Crowne in right of Primogeniture, by paying to him 3000 Markes per annum. Odo Bishop of Bayeux, with divers of the Nobility, conspire against VVilliam, and invites Robert into England, but  the King by ingratiating the people to him, and by granting them many freedomes, disappointed the plot, takes in divers Forts; which his enemies had possessed against him, and trnasports an Army into Normandy, where hee tooke many places from Robert, though assisted by the French: at last a peace is made betweene them, 1088. that the Surviver of either of them should succeed to the rule both of England and Normandy. After this VVilliam assists Robert, against his brother Henry, who had taken the Fort of Mount Michel, for not repayment of the money which Henry had lent Robert against VVilliam: the King was like to have been 1091. taken prisoner, as hee was alone on the Sea shoare neer the Fort, had not rescue come the sooner, for his horse being lost, hee defends himselfe with the saddle  from the darts shot at him: at last Henry is reconciled with his brothers, and was allowed to hold in morgage the Countrey of Constantine, till the money was payed: but when the day came, for want of payment Robert is imprisoned, and 1092. forced to renounce the Countrey of Constantine. This was after Roberts re∣turne from Scotland, who was imployed there against Malcoline. After this Robert raiseth Forces to recover the Castle of Dampfront in Normandy taken by Henry, and inveighes against VVilliam for underhand dealing, but he passeth over with an Army into Normandy, and fees the French King to forbeare aid to Duke Robert. Hee thereupon made his peace with VVilliam: who upon his return made warre upon Scotland, and Wales; in Wales the Earle of Shrews∣bury 1094.  used much cruelty, but was afterward shot in the eyes, and tumbled into the Sea. Robert of Mouberry raised a sedition against VVilliam which was by his diligence soon ended. Robert being dead in the Holy expedition, King VVil∣liam obtaines Normandy, and so became more insolent, laying heavy taxes on his people, keeping Bishopricks vacant, that hee might receive their revenues, taking money of the Jewes, and selling all
spirituall preferments, which hee profusely spent  on buildings, and on the French to keep them quiet, he makes another expedition in∣to Normandy against Conte de la Fleshe, who had surprised the City of Mains, him he takes prisoner, and after releases him: at last hee was shot by Walter Terell a Norman in the new Forrest, being 43 yeares old, and having reigned 1100. 12 years. In Scotland Milcolin or Milcolumbus sirnamed Canmore, reigned. He brought in the titles of Dukes, Marquisses, Earles, Barons and Knights. The Nobility before were called Thanes. He entertained Prince Edgar with his mother and sisters, and divers of the English Nobility, which fled to him from the tyranny of William the Conquerour. He marryed Margaret eldest sister to Bdgar: then  many English planted themselves in Scotland. In the midst of Stanmore was e∣rected a Crosse of stone called Recrosse or King-crosse, with the King of En∣glands statue and armes on the one side, and the King of Scotlands on the other. This Crosse divided the two kingdomes. He erected the Churches of Durham and Dunfermling. He delivered Edgar to VVilliam, but upon honourable tearms. He was threatned with a civill warre at home by the Moravians, Rossians, Ca∣thanesians and Islanders; but the quarrell was composed by the mediation of the Clergy. The insurrection in Galloway was suppressed by one VValter, whom for his good service the King made chief Steward of Scotland: whence the sir∣name of Stewarts had its originall. He erected two Bishopricks, to wit, of Murry and Cathnesse. He abolished that barbarous law of Eugenius, which authourised the new marryed Brides to prostitute their Virginity to their Lords. As Malcolme was besieging Anwik Castle which VVilliam Rufus had surprised, hee was slaine by one Robert Mowbray, who delivering the Castle keyes to the King on the point of his lance, runne him through the eye; hereupon Mowbray was called Percie, of whom are the Earles of Northumberland. Prince Edward in revenging his Fathers death was also slain; this double losse was the cause of queen Margarets death. He reiged 36 yeares, his body with his sons were translated from the Abbey of Tinmouth, to the Church of Dunfermling. At Rome to Urban the second, succeeds Paschalis the second, who sate 18 years:  he called a Councel at Lateran: in which he anthematiseth Henry the fourth; another Councell he calleth at Florence against Fluentinus Bishop thereof, for holding that Antichrist was then borne. He caused Henry the fifth, in his Fathers life time call a Synod at Northusen in Thuringia against Simony and the marryed Clergy. The Synod called at Trecassina in France, was called by Paschalis for the same end, he cals also another Synod at Lateran, in which he excommunicates Henry the fifth, for medling with investitures of Bishops. In Paschalis his time were 3 schismaticall Popes. CHAP. XI. The Western affairs under Henry the fifth, and Lotharius Duke of Saxony. 2. The Eastern under Calojohannes. 3. The affairs of France, Spain, England, Scotland, Denmark, &c. with the Popes of those times. HEnry the fourth being dead, but not buryed (for his body by the Popes command, lay five yeares without sepulture) Henry the fifth, his sonne succeeded. Hee first punisheth Henry Duke of Lorrain, Robert Earle  of Flanders, with Colen, Norinburg, and some other cities, who were faith∣full 1109. to Henry the fourth: then he assists Almus King of Hungary against Coloman. Shortly after hee made war upon the Polonians, for denying to pay the ac∣customed tribute to the Emperour; but the Bohemians his Auxiliaries fal∣ling off from him, he lost the battell, and was forced to give off the siege of
Glo∣gove,  and to make his peace with the Polonian. In the fifth yeare of his reigne hee entereth Italy with an Army, to regaine his right of investiture of Bishops and Abbots by the crosier staff and ring. A right which the German Emperours have obtained for above 300 yeares, ever since Charles the Great; on the other side Paschalis claimed that right as belonging to the Clergy and people of Rome: and whereupon Henry besiegeth the City, takes it, and in it the Pope and Cardinalls: which hee imprisoned, till his privi∣ledges were confirmed; which being done, and crowned Emperour, hee re∣turns into Germany, where hee bestowes an honourable funerall on his Fa∣ther at Spire, but the Clergy storming at the Popes concessions, and Henry's  power in Ecclesiastick dignities, they cause him to repeale his former grants, and to excommunicate▪ Henry for his Simony, and withall they stir up the Saxons to rebell, by the Bishop of Mints, who travelled through Saxony incouraging the people to joine with Lotharius their Duke. Rodulphus Marquisse of Bran∣deburg, and Sigefrid Palatin of Saxony, (wose lfe the Emperour had late∣ly spared) with divers others side with Lotharius. But Henry in a great battell overthrew all these Forces, and slew Sigefrid: after this victory hee marry∣ed with Mathilais the King of Englands daughter at Mints, where Duke Lotharius in sackcloth submitted himsele to the Emperour, who pardons him. But Lotharius shortly after this, forgetfull of his pardon, with the Bishop of Halberstad, raise new tumults, and with a great Army of Saxons, en∣countered with the Emperour in the County of Mansfield, and defeated him: in this conflict Hugerus Earl of Mansfield Henry's chiefe Generall was slaine, and hee himselfe was forced to flye, and to remove as farre as hee could from the fury of his domestick enemies. Hee goeth into Italy, being sent 1109. for to take possession of the inheritantance of Mathildis widow, who was sister to Ecbert Marquisse of Saxony. This yeare was terrible by reason of strange thunderings, earthquakes, and apparitions in the aire. Pascalis hear∣ing that Henry was marching towards Rome, went into Apulia, where hee raiseth an Army of Normans, with which as soone as hee came to Rome, hee dyed, to whom succeeded Iohan Cajetan, who tooke the name of Gela∣sius the second. Hee refused to absolve Henry from his sentence of excom∣munication, wherefore hee is deposed, and one Berdinus or (as some call him) Mauritius a Spaniard is made Anti-Pope, whom afterward Calixtus who suc∣ceeded, Gelasius tooke prisoner, and banished, having excommunicated the Em∣perour again; wherefore hee is forced to returne into Germany, with a resolution to punish Mints for the perfidiousnesse of their Bishop; but hee durst not, because hee understood that the Saxons were making new preparations against him by the Popes instigation. Gelasius not being suffered to live at Rome, retires him∣selfe  into France, where hee dyed the first year of his Pontificate, and there Guido of Vienna called Calistus the third, is made Pope by the Cardinals at Cluni∣acum; who refused the Pontificall habit, till the Romans had confirmed his ele∣ction. Hee continuing the Papall hatred against Caesar, at Sutrium seiseth on Berdinus the Anti-Pope, who having set him on a Camell, leads him to Rome in triumph, where being disgracefully used, hee is thrust into a Mona∣stery. The Emperour finding himselfe too weake to resist the Popes power, being backt by France, Italy, the Normans, Saxons and others, is perswaded by his Peeres to yeeld, and to resign againe the investiture of Bishops, and electi∣on  of Priests to the Pope, which hee did: and this agreement was publiquely proclaimed at Wormes with great acclamations of the people, who hoped by 1122. this for perpetuall serenity. In the meane while Rogerius Prince of Sicily, slight∣ing the Emperours threats and exhortations, invades Apulia and Calabria, in the absence of Duke VVilliam, by the instigation of Calistus the Pope, the Vene∣tians drive the Babylonian Turkes from the siege of Joppe, and after 4
months  siege take in Tyrus the Metropolis of Phoenicia, having irst covenanted with William. Viceroy of Palestine, that they should enjoy the third part of the Maritime townes they tooke in. Shortly after the Pope dyeth; Henry having composed the troubles in Belgium raised by Lotharius of Saxony, having also aided Henry the king of England, his Father in law against Levis the French king, he makes a journey to Utrich, to settle the disorders of that 1125. place, where he fell sick and dyed the 19 year of his reign. In his time Otho Bi∣shop of Bamberge converted Pomerania to the Christian Faith. Henry dying childlesse, left Franconia to Conradus of Suevia, who after Lotharius was Emper∣our, he repaired the City of Norica, and built a Monastery to S. Aegidius, which he  greatly inriched. Lotharius Duke of Saxony was made Emperour by the instigation of the 1125. Pope, and Saxons, who were willing to assume their ancient dignity and power. Conradus Henry the fifth sisters sonne, who had got Franconia by Henry the fifth, as his Father had obtained Suevia by Henry the fourth, challenged the Empire in right of his mother; yet Lotharius carryed it. Conradus hoping to prevent Lotharius, hastneth for Italy to obtaine the Popes confirma∣tion, having secured Ulma, Norimberg, and Auspurg for him, but he spoiled his cause by invading of Lombardy, and accepting there of a Crowne from the Archbishop of Millan, thnugh it was but of iron; for Pope Honorius excommunicates him; so that he was forced to forsake Italy; but when hee returned to Germany, hee found the Cities which he had fortified, all surrendred to Lotharius, whereupon finding all helpe failed him, by the mediation of S. Bernhard who flourished at that time, he was reconciled to Lo∣tharius. Lotharius being setled, upon the request of Pope Innocent the second, he came 1132. with an Army into Italy, to suppresse the faction at Rome, which had set up Anacletus an Anti-Pope: when he came, the faction fled, and he was crowned Emperour by Innocent, whom he brought back to the City, being driven out by a prevailing party. Lotharius demanded the Emperours rights back again from  Innocent; but being disswaded by the Pope and S. Bernhard whom hee brought with him, to claime that which had caused so much trouble and bloudshed, lets fall his emand. After this, he made a second expedition in∣to Italy against Roger King of Sicily, who had invaded the Churches lands. Wherefore having passed the Apenius without resistance, he takes in Ancona, 1137▪ Spoletum, and other towns, and by the help of the Pisan Fleet pursues Roger by Sea and Land, so that he was forced to abandon Italy: which at last being setled the government of Apulia was committed to Reginaldus, and of Thus∣cia to Henry his son in law, but as he was returning into Germany, through the groves of Trent, hee fell sick in a poore cottage, and dyed the 13 year of his  reign, and was buryed in a Monastery of Saxony, called from him Lotharia Cae∣saria. Before this last expedition into Italy, Lotharius pacified the troubles of Den∣mark, which were occasioned by Magnus King Nicolaus his sonne, who had murthered Canutus his cousin German. Ericus brother to this Canutus im∣plored the Emperours aid against the murtherer, who with his Army quieted the Cimbrians a while; but after hee was gone Ericus with his Forces which consisted most in horse, fell suddenly on Magnus his quarters, kills him with most of the Danish Nobility. Shortly after Nicholaus Father to Magnus was murthered with his guard in his own Palace; by this meanes Ericus obtained the kingdome of Denmark. Lotharius authorised Vernerius to gather together and to teach the Roman Lawes, which had been neglected above 600 years. Rome and Bononia were the places appointed for this read∣ing. About this time also Gratian the Monk compiled together the Popes Decrees, to which many additions have been made by the subsequent Popes. From hence sprung up the
Canonists and Schoolemen; the one maintained  the Popes Hierarchy, the other his Doctrine, which Schoole doctrine was compiled afterward in Frederic the firsts time by Lombard, called the Ma∣ster of the Sentences, on whom Thomas, Scotus, and innumerable Schoole∣men have commented. Lotharius had by his wife Rixa one sonne, who dyed young, and two daughters, the one he marryed to Henry the proud Duke of Ba∣varia, to whom he gave Saxony, the other he bestowed on Lovis the bearded Earl of Turingia. In France to Hugh Capet succeeded his sonne Robert, who built many Churches and Monasteries: he reigned after his Fathers death 36 years: to him 1060. succeeded his sonne Henry the first, who placed William the bastard sonne of Rbert Duke of Normandy in his Fathers inheritance, having slain 30000 Normans, he dyed the 28 yeare of his reign, whose sonne Philip a childe succeeded, Baldwin Earle of Flanders was his Governour. He was excommu∣nicate by Pope Vrban, for repudiating his wife, and marrying another, but two yeares after, he was absolved and reconciled, he reigned 49 yeares; to 1108. him succeeded Lovis the sixth surnamed the Grosse: for some difference be∣tween him and the Archbishop of Rhemes, he would be anointed at Orleans, and crowned by the Bishop of Senon. He saw 5 Popes in France, to wit, Vrban, Paschalis, Gelasius, Calixtus, and Innocent. He reigned 30 years, the Monastery 1137. of Clarevall was erected in his time, the first Abbat whereof was S. Bernhard. Alphonsus the seventh was called Emperour of Spaine, by his death the kingdomes of Legio and Castile were divided in his two sonnes Sanctius and Ferdinandus, in his time the Arabians in Spaine called Almohades, would suffer no Christians to live amongst them under pain of death. The ninth generall Councell, and first among the Latines called the Lateran of 900 Bishops and Priests was held, about the recovering of the Holy Land from the Saracens and Turkes. The Synod of Rhemes was summoned by Gelasius and held by Calixtus against Simony, in this the Emperour was excommunicate. And coun∣cel also was held at Neapoli in Samaria for reforming of Manners. Lovis is excom∣municate by Stephen bishop of Paris, for invading the Churches rights. Af∣ter which hee lived not long, besides he lost his sonne Philip as hee was riding through Paris in his regall ornaments, by a fall from his horse, by which he dyed suddenly. One Tamdemus authour of the Adamites, seduced many people at Antwerp; against whom was set up Norbertus bishop of that place, who was authour of that order which was called Premom stratensis; from the place where hee retired him selfe. In a Synod held in France, it was ordained that the Knights Templars▪ should weare a white cloak, of which order there were not at first above nine; but in the space of 50 yeares they grew to be 300; abounding in wealth, besides innumerable inferiour brethren, which they called servants; their office was to defend the high-wayes and pilgrims to∣wards  or from Jerusalem, as the Knights of Saint Iohn were to provide lodgings and use hospitality. In the East to Alexius Comnenus whilest he was yet alive succeeded his sonne Calojohannes, a better and greater man then his Father; for hee sub∣dued the Turkes in Asia, the Scythians and Tartars in Europe, who had swarmed like Locusts into Thracia and Macedonia in time the of Alexius Comnenus. These Calojohannes drove out, he suppressed also the Huns neer Belgradum: a place famous for the slaughter of the French by the Hun∣garians, . as they were marching towards the Holy Land. He sent Embassa∣dours to congratulate Lotharius his victory against Rogerius, whom he drove out of Apulia. He afterward entred into league with Conradus Suevus. He was a rich Prince in money; therefore bought Antioch for a great summe from Raimund Prince thereof, finding some resistance as he went to take possession, hee wasted Syria: he tooke Sosopolis the strong City of Pamphi∣lia by a stratagem, causing his men to ride as neere as they could to the Workes, and let flie their arrowes at the Garrison, and
then to runne away  towards the Woodes, purposely to toll the Garrison from their strong hold, which was done accordingly, and so the Grecians wheeling about entred the Towne. He tooke Castamon from the Persarmenians, and returned with triumph to Byzantium; but this happinesse lasted not long, or shortly af∣ter Tanismanius the Turk, and then Mahumet recovered what they had lost, and Gangra to boot with the strong City Pontus: at last, as hee was hunt∣ing of the wilde Boare in Cilicia, he hurt his left hand with one of the poysoned arrowes which fell out of his quiver, whereby it gangrened, and his whole body was infected, so he dyed the 25 yeare of his reigne. The Physitians would have had his hand cut off; but hee refused, saying, One handed Caesar was not fit to governe the World. He had four sonnes, two dyed before him; of the other two▪ he chose Manuel the younger, to succeed him, finding Isaacius the elder of too harsh and fierce a na∣ture to governe. About this time dyed Iohn a Stampis, who had lived a∣bove 360 yeares, for he was a souldier under Charles the Great, and dyed under Lovis the Grosse. In England Henry the first sirnamed Beauclerke for his learning, the youngest sonne of William the first, was crowned after his brothers death, 1100. Robert being then in Apulia: hee recalls Anselme Archbishop, furnisheth the vacant Bishopricks with fit men, relieves the Laity of their pressures, and punisheth the Ministers for their exactions. Ralph Bishop of Durrham is imprisoned for his evill counsells to the late King: the Court is reformed, the lights in the night are restored, which were forbidden by William after the coverfeu bell. He marryed Maude daughter to Margaret late Queen of Scots, and Neece to Edward Atheling: but Robert having returned in∣to Normandy, arrives at Portsmouth with a strong Army to recover the Crowne: the Armies being ready to encounter▪ for avoiding bloud a peace was concluded, that Henry should be King during his life, paying to Ra∣bert 3000 markes per annum. 2. That Robert surviving should succeed. 3. That all Robert's friends should bee pardoned. After Roberts departure Henry assumes the investitures of Bishops, which Anselmus opposed; Henry sends to the Pope Pascalis to let him know the collation of church dignities was derived to him from his predecessours. Anselme opposeth the Ambassa∣dours at Rome, wherefore hee is banished: but by the Popes perswasions Anselme is restored, and the King forbeares to meddle with the Church. In the interim Robert de Belesme Earle of Salisbury fortifies his Castles, and combines with the Welch against the King, but in 30 dayes his castles were retaken, and his complices scattered, and the Earle banished into Nor∣mandy, where combining with William Earle of Mortaigue, he commits ma∣ny outrages, Robert conniving at the same, and afterward joining with these Earles, raised Forces against King Henry, who being invited over by the Nor∣mans weary of Roberts oppressions, and incouraged by Pope Pascall, fights against his brother and defeats him, then brings Robert prisoner to England, commits him to the castle of Cardiffe, where hee lived 26 yeares; his eyes were put out for attempting an escape: so Henry after his brothers death 1106. became absolute Duke of Normandy: hee kept good correspondency with Scotland, and France; hee sent into Wales a colony of Flemmings, which much infested this countrey: he had some debate with the Earl of Flanders, about the payment of a pension, which the Earl claimed, but the debate was more verball then reall. But after this Lewis the Grosse, had some quarrels  with him about the Dutchy of Normandy, which was intertained by the quarrell between the Pope, and Henry the fifth Emperor. The King of England having marryed Maude his daughter to him, animates him against the French, who supported the Pope against him; but by the mediation of the French King Lovis, the Emperour submits to the Pope: all differences are taken up betweene them and Lovis; so that the King of England was disappointed;
yet hee continues his quarrell with Lovis, for procuring Fulke Earle of An∣geou to seize upon the countrey of Mayne, and animating Baldwin as is said against him for with holding his Pension which was paid by the conquer∣our onely to Baldwin the fifth Earle of Flanders during his life, and was up∣on courtesie continued by succeeding kings. But Henry beat the French, and at last they were reconciled. After this the Welsh rebelled, and were subdued by him: but hee was much afflicted for the losse of William the young Prince, who was drowned returning to England, with many persons of honour, and their attendants to the number of 140, besides 50 Mariners. After this the Emperour being dead, Henry marryes his daughter Maude to Geffery Plan∣tagenet  the sonne of Foulke, Earle of Aniou, by whom shee had three sonnes, Henry who was King after Stephen, Geffery and William. The first Parliament 1014. Henry established in Salisbury consisting of the three Estates: about 5 yeares after the death of Anselme. Ralph Bishop of Rochester, is made Archbi∣shop by the King, and gives him his investiture, but Thurston the Kings Chaplaine, who was designed for Yorke, refuseth to sweare obedience to Canterbury, appeales to the Pope, who absolves him, invests him, and gives him the Pall: the king is forced to submit in this also to the Pope: at last having reigned 35 yeares, he surfeted on a Lamprey, and dyed, he was buryed in the Abby of Reading, which he had founded. He erected two Bishopricks  of Ely and of Carlyle: and founded the Monasteries of Crcester, Reading and Shyrborne. Hee compounded withPriests for annuall Pensions to keep their wives. He levyed but two taxes on his people, the one was to maintain his wars against France, the other to preferre his daughters marriage with the Emperour: in him ended the issue males of the Conqueror. He built the mannor of Woodstock, and inclosed the Park with a stone wall. In Scotland Malcolme being dead, the Crowne was usurped by Donald, who was assisted for that end by the king of Norreway, which so exasperated the people, that they sent for Duncan Malcolmes sonne out of England, upon whose approach Donald fled, being forsaken by his people, the sixth moneth after hee  had invaded the kingdome. Neither did Duncan continue long, for his govern∣ment was so harsh that hee was hated by his people, upon which Donald got Makpender Earle of Mermes to murther him, and then returning from banish∣ment, invaded the Crowne againe, but in the third yeare of this second invasion hee was taken and imprisoned, where he first lost his eyes, then his life. To this Donald Malcolmes brother succeeds Edgar Malcolmes sonne, who lived peaceably 9 years, he built the Monastery of Coldingam, who dying without issue, his bro∣ther Alexander succeeded. This king in the very beginning of his reign, was assaul∣ted by an Army of the discontented youth of the kingdom, whom he defeated near the river of Spaea. Afterward hee was assaulted in▪ the night as he was asleep, by some assasinates, who were let in by one of the groomes of his bed-cham∣ber; but he suddenly awaked, flew to his sword, killed the groom, and six of the assasi∣nats, and so hotly persued the rest; that few of them escaped, After this delivery he built the Church of St. Michael at Scone. Having also escaped drowning in a storme; he erected a Church to St. Columbus, and inriched the Church of St. Andrews. He dyed without issue; to whom succeeded his brother David; who 1124. gave himself to building and repairing of Churches and Monasteries, he built Holy rood house, with 9 other Abbeys, and two Nunneries, one at Carlile, the other at Berwick, and two Abbeys near New-Castle. To the 6 former Bishopricks, he added four more, to wit, Ross, Breichin, Dunkeld, and Dunblane, allowing them  large revenues out of the Crowne Lands, by which hee impoverished his suc∣cessours. Hee possessed Huntington, besides Northumberland, Cumber and Westmerland. Hee walled Carlile: and had some quarrels with king Stephen of England, which were shortly after composed. Maude the Empresse sent her sonne Henry (who succeeded Stephen afterward) to receive the order of knight∣hood 1139. from king David his
great Uncle, whose eldest sonne Prince Henry of Scotland dyed, to the great griefe of the kingdome, his eldest sonne Mal∣colme David caused to bee declared Prince of Scotland, and made William his second sonne Earl of Northumberland: at last David dyed the 29 yeare of his reign. In Rome to Paschalis who sate 18 yeares; succeeded Gelasius the second one yeare; Berdinus called Gregory the eight was Anti Pope. To Gelasius suc∣ceeded Calixtus the second five yeares: his successour was Honorius the se∣cond five yeares: his Anti-Pope was Celestinus the second. To Honorius suc∣ceeded Innocent the second 14 yeares. When hee came into France, the Parisian Jewes presented to him the Volume of the Law wrapped up in a  rich cover of cloth; to whom hee said: Almighty God, remove the vaile from your hearts: He annoints at Remes Lovis the yoanger King of France. CHAP. XII. 1. A briefe History of Egypt from Augustus, till the Turkish conquest. 2. The western affaires under Frederick Barbarosse. 3. Divers passages  of Italy, Germany, and Denmark, and the other Holy VVarre. 4. Di∣vers occurrences, and the Popes of these times, with some passages of Tartaria. AFter Aegypt had been subdued by Augustus Caesar, it remained subject to the Romans till the Empire was translated to Greece, and then it was under the Greek Emperour till being weary of their oppressions, they called in the Saracens, whose Calipha they chose for their Governour, and so shaked off the Graecian yoke; this Calip was descended from Mahomet the Impostour, and different both in Government and profession from that other Caliph of Babylon. The last Caliph of Aegypt being much troubled by Almericus, who in the king∣dome of Ierusalem succeeded Baldwin, craved aid from the Sultan of Syria, who sent thither Sarraco with an Army which overthrew Almericus, and drove the Christians quite out of Aegypt, this being done he suddenly seised upon the Ca∣liph, whom he imprisoned, and dasht out his brains, and then makes himself king of Aegypt, to whom succeeded Saladin his nephew by his brother. He overthrew the Christians in Syria and Palestine, and brought their kingdom of Ierusalem to nothing. To him succeeded his brother, whose posterity reigned till Melechsala; he finding his best and oldest souldiers almost quite extinct by reason of his continuall wars with the Christians, and not daring to confide in the treacherous and effemi∣nate  Egyptians, buyes of the Tartars, who had lately broke into Asia through the Caspian Straights, and had subdued the Cappadocians, where of old dwelt the Colchi, beri, and Albani along the Euxin Sea (at this day they are named Men∣grellins, Georgians, and Siberians) he bues I say of the Tartars their captive slaves, transports them into Egypt, & trains them up in Military discipline, by their help he overcame Levois the French king at Damitia, in Aegypt, which was the old Heliopolis or Pelusium, takes him prisoner, and destroyes his brother Robert, with his Forces, who was got farther into Aegypt, for this good service Melechsa∣la, chose out of them a guard for his own body, but not long after he was mur∣thered, by this new guard, who seised on the kingdome after it had been possessed  by the posterity of Sarracon about 100 yeares. These slaves having now made themselves kings, chose Alcair of old called Memphis or Babylon, for the seat of their kingdome: the country out of which they came is now called Cercassia, the inhabitants are of the Greek Religion with the Muscovites and Raxolans, their children were wont to be sold, and by Mer∣chants transported by Sea to Alexandria, and thence to Memphis,
where abju∣juring  Christian Religion, they were sent to schoole to be instructed in the Ma∣humets Religion, and then were trained up in Military affaires, and so were im∣ployed in the wars, which custome the Turkes learned, in making of their Jani∣saries: these were called Mamaluchs, which signifieth circumcised. None were admitted either to the regall or equestrall dignity in Egypt, but those that were thus born, and educated, so that neither the Mamaluchs children did inherit their fathers equestrall, nor the Sultans children, the regall honor. The first slave that ob∣tained the kingdome was Turquemenius, he was intituled the Sultan, and so were all the succeeding Kings, as before they were called Caliphs. This new Sul∣tan released King Lewis from his imprisoment, and grew so insolent and imperi∣ous over his fellow slaves; that he was murthered by Cothus, who for this fact was saluted king by the Army of slaves, and was after he had overcome the Tartars, slain by Bendocader, who succeedd. He drove the Christians out of Syria, and recovered Antioch. After he had much wasted Armenia, he was poysoned at Damascus. Melechsait succeeded, whom Elpis thrust out of his throne and murthered. He took from the Christians Tripolis, Sidon, Beritus, and Tyre and razed them, so made them unusefull for the Christians, he was murther∣ed by one of his guard in the camp, his successour Melechseraph, or Vstrephus tooke Ptolemais the last Christian towne, and razed it to the ground. He was murthered by his guard, as he was hunting, to him succeeded Melechnasar, and  after this Melechadel, with divers others, till Caithbeius, whose names are scarse known, much lesse their actions. This Caithbeius was a great scourge to the Turkes under Bajuzet the second, whom he overthrew in two great battels, his sonne Mahomet succeeded contrary to their custome, therefore he was deposed, and upon this arose divers factions in the Court: so that in three yeares were five Sultans, the two last were Campson, Gaurus, who reigned 16 yeares, at last siding with the Persian against the Turk, Selimus the first was overthrown and slain in the battell. The last was Tonombeius, whom Selimus overthrew, tooke prisoner, and hanged him up in the gate of Memphis, so ended the Ma∣maluchs kingdome, having continued 260 years. Egypt since that time remains  a province to the Turks. Conradus the Emperor before his death named Frederic the first, called Barbarossa and Aenobarbus from his read beard, for his successor, though he had a son of his own now at years; at this time Henry of Austria, and Henry of Saxony his sonne in 1155. law did contend for the Dukedome of Bavary. This controversie was so taken up by the Emperor, that Henry of Austria was honoured with the title of Duke, who before was but a Marquisse; and had withall a part of Bavaria assigned to him. He held a Dyet at Mersburg, where he composed the difference between Canutus the son of Magnus, Sueno the son of Ericus, and Wooldemarus the son of Canutus whom Magnus slew, which three contended for the kingdome of Denmark: there it was agreed that Sueno should hold the kingdom of the Emperor, Canutus of Sueno, and VVoldemar should be bound to appear such a day in the high Court: so Frederic having in some sort quieted Germany, he makes an expedition into Italy, being cal∣led upon by the banished Apulians, and some Cities of Lombardy, which were oppressed by the Millanois, who aimed at a Soveraign Dominion. He used great severity against Verona for excluding him the gates, because he was not as yet con∣firmed by the Pope. Millan for a time submitted to him; then having crossed the Appenin, he enters Rome, where he is crowned by Adrian the fourth, not without great tumults and opposition of the people, so that he was forced to fight within the City in his own defence; in this conflict many were taken and slain, and many  drowned in Tiber. After this he returned into Germany, where he composed the difference between Arnold Bishop of Mints, and Herman the Palatin; the Bi∣shop he spared because of his age, and order, being a Church-man, but hee caused Herman for troubling Germany with a needlesse war, to carry a dog upon his shoulders, holding him by the hindmost legs before all the people; which then was accounted a great punishment. Hee caused also Bolislaus King of Poland
to  pay a fine or mulct, for neglecting to bring into the Emperiall Exchequer his yearly tribute. But whilest the Emperour was imployed at home, the Millanois made new work for him abroad, by oppressing their neighbour Cities, and drawing many into their rebellion; with whom Pope Adrian conspired, who also exasperated Frederick by sending him word, that the Empire was at his disposing, to give it, to whom he pleased; wherefore he thought it time now, to look to himself, therefore with an Army he passeth over the Alpes, falls upon Millan which hee took by storm, and was about to destroy it, but upon the submission of the citizens, with naked sword about their necks, and crosses on their breasts, falling downe at his  feet, he spared it, yet he imposed on them a mulct of 9000 markes, and injoined them to build him a Palace in the city, and resign over to the Empire their coin, 1158. harbours, and customes, and withall to repair the towns of Cumae and Lauda, which they had spoiled. But scarce was Frederic gone thence into Burgundy, when the Mil∣lanois enter into a new confederacy with other cities, with William of Sicily, and a great number of Cardinals, animating the Pope to excommunicate him, because he made the Bishops to doe him homage, for their temporalties, which he affirm∣ed were given him by the bounty of his predecessors, hereupon the Millanois stone Frederic's Embassadours, and intend by some assassinates which they had hired ei∣ther to poyson or stab him; wherefore he enters Italy again, overthrows Crema,  a confederate city with Millan, fights with the Millanois army, defeats them, and besiegeth their city. Adrian in the mean while as he was preparing the thunder of excommunication against him, is choaked with a flye in his drink, and so dyed: but before his death he bound 14 Cardinals by an oath, not to choose any man Pope but him who would oppose Caesar and maintain the cause of Millan, and of VVil∣liam the Sicilian. Hence two Popes are chosen, one Roland named Alexander 1160. the third: by the Millan faction, the other Octavian named Victor by the Emper∣ours side, to whom were joined the kings of England, Denmark, Hungary and Bohemia: a Synod is called at Papia, where Alexander is cited to appear; he con∣demnes that Councell, and refuseth to come, affirming himselfe to be above Coun∣cels; he excommunicates also Frederic for holding with Victor, and procures the greater part of Italy and France to side with him: upon this Frederic fals again up∣on Millan furiously, takes it by storm, overthroweth it to the ground, and soweth salt on it; then the chief actours of this last rebellion were condemned and beheaded, 1162. the rest wandering up and down in Italy, and destitute of all help and comfort, set up a new order called Humiliati. Pope Alexander in the mean time was not idle, but drew France, Spaine, and England to his party. Venetians also with Padua, Verona, and others places join with him against Frederic. The Romans call home Alexander; the townes of Lombardy cast out the Emperours garrisons, and all arm against him. In the in∣terim  Victor the Anti-Pope dyed at Luca; in whose place was substituted one Guido of Crema, who takes the name of Pascalis. Frederic is forced to return againe into Italy, where having crossed the Pope, he takes Ancona; encounters with the Roman army at Tusculum, where they lost 15000. He enters the city; Alexan∣der flyes, and Pascalis is placed in the Palace of Lateran; the Romans take the oath of allegiance to Frederic. But he lost divers principall men in this fight, besides there dyed of the plague the Bishops of Colen, Ratisbone, and Spire, with Frederic the sonne of Conradus Caesar, and divers other prime Commanders; this loss with the news of the Greek Emperour, who had promised aid to Alexander conditionally, that he would restore to him the Western Diadem, and the jea∣lousie  he had of the Italian treacheries, made him to returne in hast to Ger∣many. About this time; after VValdemar had killed Sueno, the murtherer of Canutus he obtained the Kingdome of Denmark; and made divers expeditions against the Sclavi, who with their Piracies infested the Danish Islands. He brought Niclotus Duke of the Sclavi into great straights, that he was forced to destroy many of his
owne townes; Henricus Leo. And Albertus Ursus wasted most of his countrey and peopled it with Flemings, Hollanders, and Frislanders, who erected divers Churches there. Rostoch was built by Primislaus sonne of Niclotus. Waldemer o∣vercame the Rugi. Ericus King of the Sueci subdued the Finlanders. The Mer∣chants of Breme and Lubec, by their arms brought the Livonians to Chri∣stianity. Dantsick is built by the Danes in the mouth of the river Vistula. In Italy the rebels by the assistance of Alexander and the Greek Emperour, rebuild Millan, they build also another City, which from the Popes name, they called Alexandria, and peopled it with 150000 men. Frederic to hinder the Popes pro∣ceedings, prepares a fift expedition into Italy, after he had demolished the wals and 1173. fortifications of Mints, which had lately murthered their Bishop Arnoldus, and had banished Christianus his successour: for Conradus the Popes Bishop of Mints, was joined with Alexander, and mainly opposed the Emperour, who sent Christianus the banished Bishop into Italy, He did good service there for Frederic, in recover∣ing Ancona a Sea town, from the Greeks. The third year after he came thither, by the addition of Caesars Forces he besieged Alexandria, which held the Caesa∣rians play a long time to their great losse. Whereore hee was forced to make peace with them: and so disbands imprudently a great part of his Army, where∣upon the Lombards revolt again: Frederic is fain to send back for his disban∣ded men; and because the power of Henricus Leo was great in Germany, as  being Duke of Saxony and Bavaria, having also conquered the country of the Sclavi, and being likewise in league with Waldemar King of Denmark; having besides done good service at Jerusalem: the Emperour earnestly implores his help, which hee favouring the Pontifician party, denyed, pretending that hee was aged and infirme of body. Frederic was vexed at this denyall, yet ven∣tured upon the Ligurians, and was by the treachery of the Brixians overthrown. His Eagle is taken, and he knockt downe from his horse, being missed 5 dayes, it was thought generally, that he was dead, but the fift day he shewed himselfe at Ti∣cinum, where the Bishops all protested to forsake him, if he did not submit to the Pope. In the mean time Alexander mistrusting the Romans, fled to Venice in a Sea mans habit. Otto Frederic's son with a Fleet of 50 ships pursues him. The Venetians in defence of the Pope, encounters with Otto, defeats him, takes 48 of his ships, the other two being sunk, and carryes him prisoner to Venice. The Pope to reward this good service, bestowes on the City a ring of gold, with which they should espouse the Sea to them, which custome is yearly observed upon A∣scension day by casting a ring into the Sea. Frederic having lost both his sons, the one by death, the other by captivity, finding also that his enemies increased both in number and power, and that he was not able to help the afflicted Christians in Asia; in this turbulent condition of the West, resolves by the advice of his friends to agree with the Pope; who would condescend to no agreement, till 1177. Frederic should come, and falling downe at the Popes feet, should petition for absolution: then that hee should quiet Italy, and lead his Army into Asia. Frederic having consented, repaires to Venice; and at the Gates of S. Marks falls down at the Popes Feet, who sets his foot on his neck, saying: thou shalt walk upon the Basilisk and Aspe, and upon the Lion, and the Dragon thou shalt tread. Frederick replyed: not to thee but to Peter. Yes saith the Pope, both to me and to Peter. The Pope having honoured Venice with many priviledges, returnes after 18 years wars into Rome, where he calls a Synod, in which he assumes the power of  canonizing of Saints, to him and his successours alone. The Waldenses there are condemned and decreed, that they should be suppressed by force of Armes. Peter Lombard is unjustly condemned of heresie, concerning the Trinity. It was also decreed that none should be held for Pope, but he who was chosen by the major part of the Cardinals, and that the Roman Magistrates should sweare obedience to 1181. him and his successours, and then dyed.
Frederick returns to Germany, to fit himself for his Asiatick expedition; to that end he calls a Diet at Bamberg, where he accuseth Henricus Leo of Trea∣son, condemns, and proscribes him, commanding the neighbouring Princes to invade his Castles and Dominions; he gave away Saxony to Bernard of Anhalt, and Bavaria to Otto of Wittelsbach, for their good service to him: yet Leo by the means of Henry King of England, his father-in-law, obtained so much of his land again from Frederick as now the Dukes of Brunswich and Luneburg do possesse. The Duke of Bohemia for his good service to Frederick at Millan, obtained the title of King, or at least a confirmation of it. Some think the seven Electors had their original at this time. It is certain, that before this, the  Marquesse of Brandeburg and Palatine of Rhene were of small account, and Bohemia but a Dukedome. After this, Frederick declared his son Henry, Caesar, by 1183. girding his sword to him. In the Diet at Mentz the next year, Pope Lucius the 3. and Frederick quarrelled about the Roman Consuls, whom the Pope would have abolished, and therefore was thrust out of Rome by the Citizens; they quarrelled also about the Principality of Maulds or Mathildis, which Caesar challenged as given to the Empire, the Pope as due to the Church; be∣sides Caesar chose Rodolphus for Bishop of Trevers, but the Pope set up Voloma∣rus being nominated by the greater part of the Canons; therefore Lucius re∣fuseth to confirm Henry in his Regalities, except his father would give over  the Empire. At Millan the marriage was celebrated between Heary Fredericks son, and Constantia the daughter of William King of Sicily, by which means 1186. Apulia and Sicily returned again to the Empire: This Henry escaped a great danger at Erford: for as he was composing a difference between Conradus of Mentz, and the Lantgrave of Thuringia, the floor of the chamber yeelded, where they with many others were; four Earls, and divers Gentlemen fell down into a sinke or privy, where they had an uncleanly death. Pope Lucius died at Verona, to whom succeeded Urbanus, called Turbanus, from disturbing the peace of Italy, in raising his Country-men the Lombards against Frederick, whom he was about to excommunicate, but that death prevented it: Some  think he died for grief at the losse of Ierusalem. To Urban succeeded Gregory the 8. who died at Pisa the 57. day of his Pontificat; his successor was Clement the 3. who by his Edict urgeth the Holy-war against the Sarazens, for Saladin the Sultan of Aegypt had taken five and twenty Cities from the Principality of Antioch, which City also had been lost by the corruption of the Patriarch who was bribed, had not the unexpected arrival of the Sicilian fleet under William hindred it. The Christians having lost all in Syria and Phaenicia, except Tripoli, Tyrus and Antioch, having lost their Army, and the Crosse, the Templers and Hospitalers being slain by Saladine, and Ierusalem surrendred: Frederick, assisted by Richard  of England and Philip of France, prepares an expedition into Syria; therefore advancing the Crosse, he gathered an Army of 30000. Isaacius the Eastern Emperor made some resistance, fearing lest Fredericks intent might be to sub∣due the Grecians; but afterward understanding the truth, he furnisheth him with shipping and provision: he passed over the Propontis into Asia, but the French and English supply could not come soon enough, being hindred by storms. Frederick recovered Cilicia, and killed multitudes of Turks at Iconium which he took, & upon the Sultans submission restored it; then he drove Sala∣dines forces out of Armenia; but unhappily as he went into the river Serra, or as some call it Cyduus, to swim, he was carried away by the stream, and with much difficulty drawn out by the souldiers, he remained speechlesse for three dayes and so died, having reigned 38. years: he was a valiant Prince, but full of troubles; by the father he was of the Gibeline race, and of the Guelphs by the mother; he was buried by his son Frederick in Tyrus, who undertook the re∣mainder 1139. of the war, conducted his Army to Antioch, and there left a strong Garrison; thence he went to Laodicea, ready to revolt to the Sarazen, which he
pacified, and fortified, he took also Berythus and other Towns, then went to relieve Ptolemais, where he died of a pestilent Fever, and most of his Army. By his second wife Beatrix, Frederick had five sons, Henry his successor, Frederick of whom I spake now, Otto Earle of Burgundy, Conradus Duke of Suevia, and Philip Duke of Tuscia, who reigned after his brother Henry. Its written of Barbarossa, he so much honoured Pope Urban, that he lighted from his horse when he rid to meet him, and held the Popes stirrop; but afterward he raised the cruel faction in Italy between the Pontificians which they called Guelps, and the Caesarians called Gibellins, from the two families in Germany, between which of old was deadly feud: shortly after his death the third Holy-war  ended, about which time two Orders of Knighthood were made in Spain, the one of Calatarava, the other of S. Iago or Iames; but I finde that these Or∣ders were more ancient, for Santius King of Toledo instituted the Knighthood of Calatrava, An. 1130. so called from the Province where they were setled; their garment was black, and on it a red-crosse: The Order of S. Iames was much more ancient, being by King Ramiro instituted when he defeated the Moors at Compestella; at which time St. Iames of Compestella was honoured with many priviledges, and great riches, their Ensign was a Red-crosse in form of a sword. About these times Petrus Aboilardus or Alardus, broched many dangerous  errors in Divinity, against whom under Lewis the younger, a Councel is held at Senon. From Petrus de Bruis sprang up the Petrobrusiani called Sacra∣mentarians. Gilbertus Porretanus Bishop of Poictou was deposed for denying the Divine-Essence to be God, but upon his recantation he was restored. The Archbishoprick of Lisbon in Portugal is erected, and the four Archbishopricks in Ireland, to wit, Armagh, Dublin, Cassils, and Touman. By Pope Adrian, William is crowned King of both Sicilies, which he holds in fee, then began Sicily to be called Peters-Patrimony. Livonia or Liand is converted to the Faith by S. Menardus, who by Pope Alexander the 3. is made Bishop there, where now is Riga the Metropolis. Much about this time also, the Tartarians, a mighty and warlike people, but without setled habitation, wandring up and down the vast Northern Coun∣tries of Europe and Asia, being subject at first to that great Lord called Uncam or Presbyter-Iohn, to whom they paid the tenth of their Beasts for tribute; but he fearing their multitudes which daily increased, resolves to disperse them into divers Countries, which so displeased them, that they forsook their for∣mer places, and went further North, refusing to pay any more tribute to Un∣cam; then they chose for their King one Cingis Can, who in a short time grew 1162. so great, that they subdued nine Provinces next them, and at last came upon Uncam with a great Army, and slew him, and so Cingis possessed his state, and daughter too, which Uncam refused to bestow upon him in marriage, when he desired it; the successors of this Cingis waxed so potent, that they over-run the great Country of Cathaia, wasting many times the Dominions of the Turks, Muscovites, Polonians, Hungarians and others, of whose antiquities and actions I dare not speak, because for the most part fabulous and uncertain: They are of different Religions, some Christians, some Mahumetans, and some Pagans. About this time, a certain mad Sardinian lived a long time in 1171. woods and desarts among the Deer, feeding on grasse, and walking upon all four like beasts; one day as the King of that Island was hunting, he was taken and brought to his parents, who would neither speak to them, nor taste either  of bread or wine, but eat grasse; in the night he made an escape to the woods, and was never afterward seen. The Order of Heremites, called Williamites from William Duke of Glascony their author, sprung up at this time, they were to follow the rules of S. Austine▪ The eleventh General Councel, and second of the Latines, was held in the Latheran by Pope Alexander; there the Wal∣denses so called from Waldo of Lions, are condemned, and the Popes
election  by Cardinals alone established. Petra a town beyond Iordan, is made a Bishop∣rick. The Iewes are persecuted in France and Germany, for crucifying a Chri∣stian child. The Carmelites Order began in the Desarts of Syria, which after∣ward 1177. was brought into Europe, by Albert Patriaroh of Constantinople. There was long debate between the Popes and the Romans, about the government of the City, and form of Magistrates: this difference lasted fifty years, from Innocent 2. till Clement 3. who at last prevailed. 1188. In Rome to Pope Innocent 2. succeeded Celestine 2. five moneths: his suc∣cessor was Lucius 2. eleven moneths: to whom succeeded Eugenius 3. S. Bernards disciple, who sate eight years, to him he wrote his Books of Consideration: his successor was Anastasius 4. one year: to him succeeded Adrian 4. an English∣man,  who had before his Popedome converted the Norwegians to the faith, he sate almost five years: Alexander 3. succeeded, who sate one and twenty years, longer then any other Pope except S. Peter, who sate five and twenty years; Silvester 1. and Adrian 1. who reigned three and twenty years; his Antipopes were, Victor 4. Calixtus 3. and Paschalis 3. To Alexander suc∣ceeded Lucius 3. four years; he was the first that was created Pope by the Car∣dinals alone: his successor was Urban 3. one year, whom Gregery 8. succeeded for one moneth and 27 dayes: Clemens 3. succeeded for three years. CHAP. XIII. The Eastern affairs under Manuel Comnenus, Alexius, Andronicus, Isaacius and Alexius Angeli. 2. The affairs of France, Spain, Denmark, Constantinople, Rome, England and Scotland, in these times, with divers other passages. 3. Henry the 6. Emperor. TO Calojohannes in the East, succeeded Manuel Comnenus, a perfidious, turbulent, and unhappy Prince. Conradus the Emperor of the West, and  he, married two sisters: yet by his treacherie and conspiracie with the Saracens, the Armies of Frederick and Lewis the French king were overthrown; for Conradus having crossed the Thracian Bosphorus, entred Asia, where he was 1147. promised to be furnished with all necessaries by the Greeks, who both de∣ceived him, and betrayed all his counsels to the Sultan of Iconium, whereby the German army was spoiled with famine and the sword, and unknown dan∣gerous wayes: wherefore the Emperour was forced to bring away the re∣mainders of his army, and to send Frederick his brothers son post, to acquaint the French army who were going to Iconium, of the Greeks treacherie; for they had suborned some to tell the French, that Iconium was delivered up to  the Germans, purposely to bring them to the same miserie: it was said that the Greeks mingled chalk and lime with their flower, by which they poysoned the Latines. Conradus stayed a while at Ephesus. The French at the river Meander were beaten by the Turks. Roger the Sicilian, to revenge the Latines wrongs, with a Fleet of ships takes Corcyra, and wastes all the Greek coast. At last Con∣radus and the French arrive at Syria; Lewis hasteneth to Iudaea. Conradus be∣ing brought to Ptolomais, and thence to Ierusalem, gave way to besiege Damas∣cus, which cost the Latines much blood; for having taken the suburbs, the City was upon surrender, till the Princes began to quarrel who should be go∣vernour; the old souldiers perceiving that Theodoricus of Flanders was like to carry it, removed their camp to the other side of the City, and so permitted the inhabitants of the suburbs to get within Damascus, which so angred the Em∣peror, that he left the siege, and returned home by Constantinople ingloriously: the French followed the next Spring, and were like to be surpised by the Greeks, had not Roger encountred with Michael Palaeologus, Manuels chief Commander.
At that time, Roger brought from Chalcis Silk-makers into Sicily and Apulia. Another Fleet of Christians at that time took Lisbone, and the Country about from the Saracens; that City was delivered to Alphonsus, made lately Duke of Lusitania by the King of Castile. The Danes and Saxons brought the Sclavi to Christianity. Lewis returning from Sicily into France, put away his wife Elianor, pretending the unlawfulnesse of that marriage, by reason of consanguinity: she presently married to Henry of Anjou, King of England and Duke of Normandy by right of his mother, Earle of Angiers and Turon by the father, but by the right of his wife Earle of Poictou and Duke of Gascoigny, which occasioned great war between England and France. Legats are sent from Armenia to Pope Eugenius, to be instructed in the mysteries of Christia∣nity; who brought news, that Presbyter-Iohn that great Eastern Prince had overrun Media and Persia, purposely to invade Ierusalem; The Turks also up∣on the departure of Conradus and Lewis, chiefly the Sultans of Damascus and Iconium, began again to make excursions upon the Christian territories. Iosce∣linus Earl of Edessa, as he was at stool, was surprised and imprisoned. Noradinus made excursions upon Antioch. Manuel the Greek Emperor obtains Edessa from Baldwin the 3. and within a year lost it to Noradine. Raimundus Prince of Antioch is slain by Noradine, whose widow Reinold of Castle married, and with∣her obtained Antioch: He suppressed the high-way robbers of Cilicia; and for  want of his pay from the Greek Caesar, plunders Cyprus; and afterward to pre∣vent a greater war, submits to Manuel. The Templers and Hospitallers, though much inriched with booties, deny to pay their Tenths any more to the Patri∣arch of Ierusalem, having for mony procured immunity at the Court of Rome. In Manuels time lived Eustathius, Homers Interpreter, and Bishop of Thessalonica, who manfully resisted Manuel, endeavouring to corrupt the Christian doctrine with some points of Mahumetanisme. As this Emperor had many faults, yet some good things he had in him; for he was very bountifull, in forcing all his treasures upon the Sultan of Iconium, when he was in want of money, (but I should rather call this prodigality:) He was also tender-hearted; for not only sent he Greek Chyrurgions to cure his son-in-law, Baldwin 3. king of Ierusalem, who had broke his arm in hunting, but he himself also on his knee did use to soment and bind up the Kings broken arm: He shewed also his piety, before his death, in repenting that he had entertained Astrologers, or hearkned to their predictions, finding them by experience to be false and de∣lusorie, for they had promised that he should live fourteen years longer then he did, therefore by his hand-writing he condemned their impostures; he reigned 38 years, and died the 60. year of his age; a little before his death he 1180. resigned his Empire, and imbraced the Monastical life; he had two wives, one was Conradus Caesars wifes sister, the other was daughter to Raimund Prince of Antioch, of whom he had Alexius his successor. This Alexius was betrothed to Anna daughter of Lewis the French king, which exasperated the Greeks, fearing the Latines would become too great in Byzantium: therefore they send for Andronicus the cousin-german of Ale∣xius, living in exile among the Turks in Chaldaea; he raiseth an Army, which he brings in view of Byzantium, having first overthrown the forces of Proto∣sebastus, who undertook the protection of the young Caesar; afterward Andro∣nicus puts out his eyes, and imprisoned him: So being admitted to the go∣vernment, he thrusts out all the Latines, and many of them he murthers; then undertakes the protection of Alexius, whom he carried on his shoulders to the Church to be crowned; then having removed all that might oppose him out of the way, he accuseth Xene, Alexius his mother, of treason, as if she had plot∣ed with Bela king of Hungary against the State, and so strangles her; shortly after he strangles the young Emperor, being but fifteen years old, and having reigned but three, whose body being wrapped up in lead was let down into the sea.
Andronicus having murthered Alexius, reigns alone, and marries with Anna or Agnes who had been betrothed to Alexius, being as yet but eleven years old, and he an aged man. He took Nicaea and Prusia, exercising all kind of cru∣elty 1183. on his enemies who had fled thither. Alexius, Manuels Nephew, and the Latine souldiers flie to William king of Sicily, who to revenge the wrongs re∣ceived from Andronicus, took Thessalonica & Dyrrachium, using all kind of cru∣elties against the Citizens. In the mean time Andronicus rageth like a savage beast at Byzantium, upon the living and the dead also, causing them to be drag∣ged out of their graves: Understanding that one whose name began with these letters, I. S. was to be his successor, and that it was Isaacius Angelus, he sent one to kill him, who was killed by him; whereupon Angelus fearing the cruelty of Andronicus, fled into the Temple; the people immediately in a great tumult salute him Emperor. Andronicus perceiving that he was hated by the people, forsaken by his souldiers, and pursued after by William of Sicily, he thought to escape by sea, but could not by reason of the storms; therefore he is laid hold on, brought back to the City, set with his face backwards on a lean scabbed Camel, his right hand being cut off, and one of his eyes thrust out, at last is brought upon a theater, where he is hang'd by the feet upon two posts, and there by the enraged multitude is torne in peeces by pincers and flesh∣hooks, he crying out in the mean while, Lord be mercifull! and, Why do you  bruise the broken reed! So he died after two years reign, and in him ended the Comneni. Isaacius Angelus by the popular faction is made Emperor: he at first com∣plied 1185. with the people, and eased them of many burthens; he overthrew the Sicilian fleet sent against him, and took the two chief Commanders Richard and Baldwin; but undeastanding that King William was preparing another Fleet for revenge, he made his peace with him: He was much troubled with two false Alexii, who called themselves the sons of Manuel; but having sup∣pressed them, he gave himself to luxury, wantonnesse, and oppression. He had ill successe against the Mysians or Wallachians, who rebelled against him: He  strove to hinder Barbarossa's march through Thracia, but so doing he procured his anger, to his great losse: He sent a Fleet to regain Cyprus from Isaacius Comnenus the Tyrant, but with no successe: He committed sacriledge in rob∣ing the Churches. At last he was seised upon by his own brother Alexius An∣gelus, (whom he had redeemed from the Turks with much gold, and made him his Consort in the Empire) and was by him deprived both of his eyes and government, the 10. year of his reign, being deluded by the Astrologers, who made him believe that he should reign two and thirty years: His son long after got him out of prison, who upon the change of aire and diet shortly after died. Alexius Angelus, who changed his sir-name, and would be called Comnenus; 1195. having blinded his brother, invades the Empire; but as he was riding in tri∣umph with the Crown on his head, the Imperial horse (having more wit then the people that chose this Tyrant) flung him down, with which fall the Crown broke, an ill presage. He gave himself to rioting and tyrannie: he threatned to kill Alexius the younger, son to Isaacius, who therefore fled to Venice, where he procured the Venetian and French assistance. At that time Boniface Mar∣quisse of Montferrat, Baldwin Earl of Flanders, with divers other Commanders, were met at Venice, to have their assistance in their expedition to Asia, which was promised with a great sum of mony, conditionally that they would assist  the Republike to besiege the Town Iadera, that had revolted from them to the Hungarians, which accordingly was performed. In the mean time Alexius arrives, complaining of his Uncles tyrannie, his Fathers imprisonment, and his own banishment; promising them great matters, if they would aid him to put down the Tyrant.
Upon this a Fleet is prepared of two hundred and fifty ships, in which were thirty thousand Foot, and a thousand Curisers. Alexius the Tyrant, in the interim, suffers his Towns to be taken in the East by the Sultan of Iconium, and his Armies to be beat by the Schythians and Wal∣lachians. The Venetian fleet sets saile from Dalmatia, and arrives into the Bay of Byzantium, having broken the Iron-chain which secured the Bay: Upon this, the Tyrant robbed the Emperours Tombes, and fled with a great treasure of gold, having reigned eight yeares. The City∣gates are opened to the besiegers, and the Citizens adore their old Emperor, whom the Latines had delivered out of prison and re-installed: but the peo∣ple desire that young Alexius might be joyned with his father Isaacius; this  was granted, conditionally that the old man would ratifie his sons promises to them: but the people murmured and fretted, that so much treasure should be given to the Latines as was promised, crying out, that the Empire was pawned by a Child, to a proud and covetous Nation; hereupon the Latines being in∣censed fall to plundring, not sparing the Churches, they set on fire the Saracens Synagogue, by which a great part of the City was burned; there is no end of their exactions: The two Emperors sate still, permitting their deliverers to pay themselves; whereupon the enraged multitude, by the instigation of Alexius Ducas a stout man, met together in the great Church, railing against both the  Caesars, calling them evil Angels, and threatening to choose another Emperor; in the interim old Isaacius dieth, and one Nicolas Canabus is named Emperor: Alexius upon this sends back for Boniface the Marquis, and the Latines, to put down this new Tyrant. Ducas (sirnamed Murzuffus, from his hanging-brows) comes privately to Alexius, counsels him to flie betimes from the fury of the people, and therefore gets him to come out of the palace, pretending that he would protect him; but he presently thrusts him into a dark dungeon, and then strangles him the 7. moneth of his reign, and withall drawes Canabus out of the Temple: for some time he defended the City against the besiegers; at length he goeth out to treat with them, but was beat back with losse; he sustained the siege a while, but finding the City unable to hold out, he gets a∣way,  the 76. day of his government, carrying with him Euphrosine the Empress, and her daughter Eudocia, with whom he was in love. Theodorus Lascaris son∣in-law to Alexius Comnenus fled likewise. At last the Grecians fall to petition for quarter, submitting themselves to the Latines, who used them with all kind of rigor and tyrannie. Thus the chief Grecians departing out of the City, and the rest yielding themselves, Byzantium and its Provinces fall now into the power of the Latines. After this, Murzuffus or Murziphlus is apprehended in Peloponnesus, brought to Byzantium, where his eyes were thrust out, and he flung down from a high tower by the Latines; the people raged on the dead  carkasse, tearing it in peeces. The City being taken, fifteen men are selected who should name the Em∣peror: the Venetians were to name a Patriarch of their own Nation, if so be the Empire should not fall to them: So the Earls of Flanders and S. Paul named five men apeece, Montferrat and the Allobroges as many more, the Venetians name the rest; the suffrages fell to Baldwin Earl of Flanders, to whom was given the half of the Cities, of the Provinces, Tributes, and other things which they had conquested in the war. Thus the City being setled, they march into Thra∣cia, where all places between Byzantium and Adrianopolis are surrendred. Baldwin to gratifie his fellows, declares Boniface the Marquis King of Thessaly,  and bestowes the Isle of Crete (which Boniface had got as a gift from Alexius Angelus, and which he willingly resigned) upon the Venetians; this occasioned the emulation betwixt the Venetians and Genuois. So now the Eastern Empire 1204. is transferred from the Greeks to the French.
In France, to Lewis the Grosse succeeded Lewis the 7. called the Younger: he married with Alienora the daughter of William Duke of Gascoign. He made his expedition into Palestina, where he lost his Army by the Greeks perfidi∣ousnesse 1137. (as we have said) after a years stay he returns, and divorceth Alienora; 1147. then marrieth with Mary, or as some call her Beatrix, daughter to Alphonsus 7 Emperor of Spain, and Alienora (as is already said) married with Henry Duke 1150. of Normandy and King of England. This Lewis died at Paris the 44. year of his reign. To him succeeded Philip, called Augustus, and Adeodatus: he was made 1180. King in his fathers life-time: He banished the Iewes out of France; and with Richard of England went to Palestina, where with the confederate Princes he 1191.  took Acona, and returns the same year into France: He had five years war with Richard of England; he obtained two victories, one over the English at Poictou, another over Otho the Emperor in Flanders; he died the 43. year of his reign after his fathers death. In his time was held a Synod at Paris, in which the Clergy parted with their Tythes, for promoting the war against Saladine the Turk: he much enlarged and beautified Paris. In his time a custome arose in France, that when any Priest was dying, he laid on his breast a paper containing the true faith of the Resurrection, because at that time some made question of it. Then also did some Citizens of Breme and Lubec set up the Order of the Marian souldiers at Ptolomais, after the form of  the Teutonick order, which two are by some confounded: Colonies of them were translated into Germany, to subdue the Sclavi and other Northern infidels. In England, after the death of King Henry, Steven Earle of Boloigne, sonne and heire-apparent of Stephen Earle of Bloys, and of Adela the Conquerors daughter, made himself King, albeit he had solemnly vowed to King Henry to further the succession of Mauld the Empresse, and Henry's daughter. He seised on the treasure of his unkle King Henry, and disperst it among such as he knew would stand him in need. He created divers Noblemen and Knights, and released the Dane-gilt, causing some rigorous lawes to be mitigated: He much advanced the Clergie with priviledges and immuni∣ties,  exempting them from the Temporal Magistrate: he erected many Forts and Castles: he gave all Cumberland to David King of Scots and uncle to Mauld the Empresse, that he should not help her to recover her right; he also made Davids eldest son Earle of Huntington; yet not long after (in her quarrel) he wasted the North with fire and sword, till he was forced with losse to retreat by Thurston Archbishop of York. In the sixth year of his reigne, Mauld, with her base-brother Robert Earle of Gloucester, landed with an Army, which was much increased by the accesse of English and Welsh: the King with his Army encounters the Empresse; a bloody battell was 1142.  fought, in the end the King is taken, being forsaken by his common∣souldiers, and sent to the Castle of Bristol, and after three moneths set at liberty, to free the Earle of Glocester who was taken prisoner. The Empresse is received into London, where she was like to be surprised, for refusing to restore King Edwards lawes; therefore she suddenly flies to Oxford, where she is unexpectedly besieged; but cloathing herself, with her chiefest com∣plices, in white, she escaped by the benefit of the snow, and got away in a ship to Normandy; After this was peace. In the 17. yeare of this Kings reign died Geoffery Plantagenet husband to the Empresse; and Henry Short-mantle her eldest son married Elianor (as was said already) heire to the Earle of Poictou. This Henry was encouraged to invade England, which was his due  in the right of his mother; He therefore arrives with his Army, whom King 1151. Steven encounters, whose only sonne Eustace was unfortunately drowned, which caused a peace; for Steven being childlesse, adopted Henry, and pro∣claimed him heir-apparent to the Crown: the Prince returns to Normandy,
and the next yeare after King Steven died, the nineteenth yeare of his Reigne: he was buried in the Abbey▪ of Feversham in Kent, which he had founded. And so in Henry, the Saxon blood is again restored to the Crown. As Henry was besieging one of his Castles in Normandy, which was sur∣prised 1154. by the French, newes came to him of King Stevens death: He was advised to raise the siege, and hasten for England; but he resolves not to stirre till he had taken the Castle, which upon this was surrendred: then he sailes into England, and is crowned. He reformed the Common-lawes, and divided the Kingdome into sixe Circuits, appointing Judges twice every yeare to ride these Circuits. He banished the strangers, who had  flocked hither in great multitudes, and such of the Nobility as had ad∣hered too much to King Steven: He caused most of the Inland-castles to be demolished: He seised on all Crown-lands which had been aliena∣ted, and resumes into his own hands Cumberland, Northumberland, and Huntington: He married Geoffery one of his youngest sonnes, to Constance daughter of Conaccus Duke of Britany, by whom he had that Dutchy; his youngest sonne married with Adela King Lewis of France his daughter; and he bestowed his daughter Mauld on Henry Duke of Saxony, about which time died the Empresse his mother. He never suffered his Souldiers  to be idle, but did still exercise them at home or abroad. In the 19. year of his Reigne, he sailed into Ireland, and made himselfe by his Victories Lord of that Country. He caused his eldest Son Henry, and his wife Margaret 1174. the French Kings daughter, to be Crowned twice; himself, the second time, serving as a Sewer at his Sons table; who then bragged, That his Father was but the Son of an Empresse, but himselfe the Son both of a King and Queen. His sonnes Henry, Geoffery, and Iohn, with the Earles of Leicester and Chester, and William King of Scots, took part with the French against him; yet Henry prevailed, and pardoned his Sonnes and Lords for this rebellion. Prince Henry died before his Father, and Iohn was poysoned by a Monk.  The rebellions of his Sonnes put him into a Feaver, which killed him in four dayes: He died in Normandy, the five and twentieth yeare of his Reigne, and was buried at Founteverard in France. He was a fortunate, wise, and valiant Prince: but unhappy in his Childrens rebellion; his vain dotage on Rosamond, whom he loved above his chaste wife Elianor; and in his quarrel with Thomas Becket Lord Chancellour, and Archbishop of Canterbury, who would not be invested by the King, but went to Rome, and received his Pall from Innocent the second, and was made a Legate: at his return, he surrenders his Chancellorship and Great-seale to the King, not shewing him any reason why he did so. Upon this discord between Henry and Thomas, the Clergie grew insolent without controll; whereupon the King calls a Parliament, in which King Stevens Law for exempting the Clergie from the Temporal power, is abolished, by the con∣sent of the Bishops, even of Becket himself at last, but with much adoe; who after he had sworne to allow this act, yet relapses, and obtaines the Popes pardon for this sin of his: hereupon the King seiseth upon all Beckets Tem∣poral lands, and demands an account of 30000 marks, which he had in his Chancellorship turned to his own use: This Becket refused to doe, and went privately to Rome; after whom the King sends letters to the Pope, complain∣ing of Becket; but the Pope took his part, and threatned the King with excom∣munication,  unlesse he were restored. In the interim he is recommended to the Abbot of Pontinyack in France, to whom the King sent to have Becket turned out, and withall forbids accesse from the Pope into England, Beckets friends also are banished: The Abbot fearing the Kings displeasure, perswades Thomas to leave his house; then did Lewis the French king
procure him better enter∣ment,  and animated the Pope against King Henry; who sails over into France, and in the French Kings presence proffered to restore Thomas and his friends, if he would take the former oath and subscribe; which he utterly refused to doe, except he might adde this exception, Salvo onore Dei; which highly displeased the King, who returns into England: two Legats with an Inter∣dict against him came from Rome, which made him passe over to Normandy to conferre again with Becket, who was still the same man; so the King was forced to restore him. The young King Henry was also offended with him, for refusing to absolve the four Bishops whom he had suspended for perform∣ing the solemnities to him without his leave, and so was confined to his house in Canterbury; but within foure dayes after, Becket was murthered by foure  assasinates in his own Church, for which the Pope accuseth the King, and en∣joyns him to war three years in person in Palestina, but this he redeemed by erecting three Religious houses; he visited Beckets shrine, walking bare∣footed from London to Canterbury as he was enjoined, and there was whipped by all the Monks; the four murtherers died miserably in exile, within four yeares. Richard sirnamed Cour-de-Lion, king Henry the 2. his eldest son now living, succeeded his father: he first of all enlargeth Queen Eleanor his mother, who 1189. had been restrained by Henry, for disliking his wantonnesse with Rosamond. She governed the kingdom, till her Son cme home from Normandy: she set at liberty prisoners for small offences, and paid many of their small debts: in this her son Richard did imitate her, pardoning ordinary offences, and freeing all his debtors. He made his brother Iohn Earl of Lancaster, and married him to the Earl of Glocesters heire; he gave him also Nottingham, Devonshire, and Cornwal; but he proved unthankfull, in affecting the Crown. This Richard in a short time by his bounty exhausted all his fathers treasures. He was per∣swaded by the Pope, to accompany in person Frederick the Emperor and Philip Augustus of France, into the Holy-land; Sicily is the place appointed for their meeting: And because he would not be burthensome to his people in taxing  them, he sold his Forts of Barwick and Roxburgh to the Scots King for 10000l. he sold also the Earldom of Durham to the Bishop; he made sale also of divers Honours and Manors. Having fitted himself for this expedition, he commits the government of the Kingdome to William Longchamp Bishop of Ely, who shortly after was made the Popes Legate. Then he sailed to Cyprus, being driven thither by tempest; which he won, and sold to the Templars for 30000 marks: Thence he sail'd into Sicily, where he discontented Philip the French king, because he denied him a share in his conquest of Cyprus, being he was ab∣sent when it was taken, and because their covenant of equal-sharing extended only to the Holy-land; yet they agreed for the present, and proceeded to∣gether  in their journey, having good successe against the Turks; they took many Towns and Forts, and among the rest Acon, where Richard pull'd down the Banner of Archduke Leopold set on the walls, saying, that his own Banner should be first set up, seeing he first entred the City; at this Philip was much displeased again with Richard, so that he returned in a rage home, carry∣ing with him the Forces that belonged to the Emperor and to Leopold: King Richard notwithstanding, by the help of some Christian Princes with him, persued his victories against the Turks; and then returned to Cyprus, which he won from the Templars, and exchanged it for Ierusalem, with Guido or Guy of Lesingham, the last Christian king, whence Richard was stiled King of Ierusa∣lem.  In the mean while, the Bishop of Ely (son of a Cow-herd) did so tyrannise over the kingdome in his Protectorship, that he became odious: wherefore 1191. perceiving how he was hated, went disguised in a womans habit to Dover, purposing to leave the kingdome; but he was discovered, and by the people dragged up and down, and after sent to the Tower; but when the King re∣turned, he was restored to his offices: shortly
after, as he was travelling to  Rome, he died. In the Kings absence, his brother Iohn seised upon many Towns and Forts, angry that Ely was preferred to him in the Protectorship: K. Philip also made many incursions into Normandy; which caused king Richard to for∣sake his Conquests in Asia: but in his return he suffered shipwrack, between Aquileia and Venice, and by swimming saved his life; he was shortly after taken prisoner by Leopold in Austria, and sold to the Emperor Henry the 6. for 60000 marks, from whom he ransomed himselfe for 100000 pounds: then he rides post to Normandy, raiseth an army, and revengeth himself upon the French king. In this mean while his brother Iohn repaires to him, with humble submission and acknowledgment of his disloyalty, laying the fault thereof upon Ely's mis∣government; hereupon Iohn is received into the Kings favour. Richard, upon  his return, ransacked the Monasteries, taxed the people, and resumed all the Mannors, Castles, and Offices he had sold, into his hands, to pay his ransome, 80000. l. whereof he paid, the rest was discharged by Leopold, whom the Pope excommunicates for making Richard a prisoner, after his good service in the Holy-war. He caused himself to be again crowned King; then transports an 1193. Army into France, where at the Castle of Chalous neer to Lymois he was shot with an arrow, of which he died within three dayes, the 9. year of his reign; but before he died, he won the Castle, causing all to be put to the sword ex∣cept the malefactor, whom he pardoned. In the beginning of this Kings reign, 1199. Robin-Hood and Little-Iohn robbed and spoiled many rich misers and userers; but Robin being betrayed bled himself to death, so his theevish rout was dis∣persed. King Richard was buried at Fonteverard in France, at his fathers feet: he left three parts of his treasure to his brother Iohn, and the fourth to his servants. In Scotland, to David succeeded his grandchild Malcolm, against whom Sumerled Thane or Earl of Argile rebelled, whose Army was defeated, and he 1153. driven into Ireland by Gilchristius Earl of Angus. King Henry of England, for∣getfull of his oath which he made to king David when he knighted him, that he would never trouble him nor his posteritie for those lands he held in Eng∣land,  took the jurisdiction of Carlisle from the Archbishop of Glasco; then he caused this young King to swear him fealtie at Chester, and carried him against his will over with him into France, thereby to keep the Scots from invading England, and to bring Malcolm in dislike with the French king. At his return into Scotland, he endeavoured to pacifie the offended Nobility, excusing him∣self, that what he did in assenting to king Henry's demands, was by force; and so they were pacified for the present. After this, Malcolm is invited by Henry to the Parliament at York, where he is accused for assisting the French; there∣fore his lands in England were forfeited to the Crown: upon his return home∣ward, the people were so incensed, that they had almost seised on him in his house at Berth: He complained to his Nobility, how he had been circumvent∣ed  by Henry, wherefore a war is proclaimed; the two Armies met at Carlisle; but to avoid blood-shedding, Henry was contented to leave Cumberland and Huntington to Malcolm, and only take Northumberland from him; to which Malcolm against the mind of his Peers assented, and therefore was despised by them: Upon this the country of Galloway rebels, but in three battels they were defeated by Gilchrist Earl of Angus. The Moravian rebellion was worse, in which the Kings forces were beaten first; but a new Army being sent, the Mo∣ravians were quelled, and most of them killed or fled. Sumerled took occasion by these tumults, to invade the sea-coast with an Army, having the assistance  of malecontents; but he was apprehended, and his forces defeated. The Par∣liament 1163. proposeth a marriage for the King, being now 22 years of age; but he refuseth to marry at all, preferring Celibate to the married life, and shewing that he had provided an heire for the Crown. So all being quiet at home and abroad, he gave himself to repairing and building of Religious houses, and died shortly after, the 25 year of his age, having reigned above 12 years. 1165.
To Malcolm succeeded his brother William. He is called upon by king Henry to do homage for Cumberland and Huntington; for that cause he repairs to him, and withall remands Northumberland as his due. Henry promised to satisfie him the next Parliament, at which he was desired to be present: thither when he came, Henry going over to France with his Army, takes William with him against his will: having stayed there some time, with much adoe he got leave to go for Scotland, whither when he arrived, he fals to settle the kingdome, and to build forts: then he sends Embassadors to Henry, to demand Northumberland: Henry being busie in the French war, was content to part with a share of North∣humberland, but not with all; afterward this share caused a new war, for Wil∣liam demanded the rest, and Henry was sorry for giving so much; Armies are  raised, and incursions made on both sides; at last they came to a parley, in which William unexpectedly was surprised by 400 horse in ambush, which he thought to have been Scots, and carried into France. Having staid there some time, he ransoms himself, by delivering unto the English four garrisons, viz. Edinburgh, Sterlin, Rosburgh, and Barwick, with fifteen hostages, till the sum agreed upon was paid; in the mean time he is dismissed, who being returned home, he with his Nobility swear fealty to the King of England, till these gar∣risons were redeemed; then he quiets the tumults at home. King Henry de∣mands, that the Bishops of Scotland should acknowledge the Archbishop of York for their Metropolitan, which they refused to do, for this cause they com∣plained to Pope Alexander 3. who freed the Scotish Bishops from subjection to the English yoke. Shortly after this, Gilchrist kills his wife the Kings sister, for being found in adultery: he is summoned to appeare to answer for this mur∣ther, who refuseth, therefore is proscribed, his houses pull'd down, and his whole estate forfeited: Some years after this, the King returning from Murry, where he overthrew Donald Baan that had rebelled there, meets with Gilchrist in the habit of a begger, whom demanding what he was, fell flat at the Kings feet, confessing his miserable condition; at which the King being moved with pity, considering his former greatnesse and good services, restored him to his ancient honours and estate. King Richard having succeeded Henry, and preparing for his Eastern expe∣dition, 1190. sends home the Scots hostages, and restores to William his three garri∣sons, (for Edinburgh-Castle was redeemed before, upon the payment of the fourth part of the ransome) he frees him also and his successors from all bar∣gains and covenants made with king Henry; in requital of which favour, Wil∣liam sends him towards his charges in the Holy-war 10000 marks, and sent his brother David Earl of Huntington to wait on king Richard, who in his return from Syria was shipwracked, sold by the Egiptians, bought by the Venetians, and sent home the 4. year after his departure from Scotland. King Richard also being returned, was visited by king William and his brother, with a present of 2000 marks: here William fell sick, and it was rumoured through Scotland that he was dead; which gave occasion to Harald Earl of Orkney and Cathnesse, to pick a quarrel with the Bishop of Cathnesse, and then to thrust out his eyes, and cut out his tongue; but VVilliam being returned, he caused Harald to be apprehended and hanged, having first put out his eyes, and emasculated all his 1199. male-children. This same year Alexander king VVilliams son was born. King Iohn of England quarreled with VVilliam, for refusing to aid him a∣gainst Philip the French king; therefore began to erect a garrison over against Barwick, which the Scots threw down again: upon this Armies are raised on both sides; but without any blowes, a peace was concluded, and agreed, that Williams two daughters should marry Iohns two sonnes, and that no garrison should be built neer Barwick. After this, William lost his youngest sonne, with his nurse and fourteen more, by the sudden inundation of Tay, which drown∣ed a great part of Berth in the night-time, so that the king hardly escaped him∣self; therefore he caused the Town to be built in a more safe place upon the
same river, and called it Perth, now S. Iohns-town. After this it was agreed be∣tween the two kings, Iohn and William, that for the time to come, the children of the Scots kings should do homage for their lands in England, but not the kings themselves. Not long after this, William died, the 74 year of his age, and of his reign 49. 1214. In Rome, to Clemens 3. succeeded Celestine 3. who sate 4 years and 7 moneths: he excommunicated all France for king Philips divorce, who had repudiated his wife Gelberga; he confirmed the Teutonick Order, prescribing to them the rule of S. Augustine, with a white-garment and black-crosse, injoyning them to say in 24 houres, the Lords Prayer, Creed, and Ave Maria, 200 times. To Celestine succeeded Innocent 3. who sate 18 years and 7 moneths: He sent  some Religious men to convert the Tartars, who by the Sarazens perswasion preferred Mahumetanisme to Christianisme; some think this was done after∣ward by Innocent 4. He also procured Livonia to imbrace the Christian faith: under him was held the 12. Oecumenical Councel at Lateran, at which were present two Patriarchs, of Constantinople and Ierusalem, seventy Archbishops, four hundred Bishops, twelve Abbots, and eight hundred Priors; in this Synod the word Transubstantiation was confirmed. About this time sprang up the Order of Predicants by Dominicus the Spaniard, of which are recorded to have been 4143 Monasteries: the Minorites Order by Francis the Italian, of these were 90000. in Platina's time: the Carmelites, by Albert Patriarch of Ierusalem; the Eremites Order also of S. Austin, & the Order of the Holy-Trinity. In Germany, Henry 6. succeeded to his father Barbarossa, whose wife Constance 1191. daughter to Roger king of Sicily, was married out of a Monastery; by her Sicily was annexed to the Empire: when she was fifty years old, she was brought to bed at Panormus of Frederick 2. in a publike Chappel which Henry had built to that purpose, that it might be seen the child was not supposititi∣ous. He was resisted in the beginning of his reign, by the Bishops of Colen and Liege, with whom the Burgundians sided, but they were quickly suppressed by Henry, after he had put the Bishop of Liege to death, who was more active a∣gainst him then the other. After many conflicts, he quieted the Sicilians and  Apulians who would have revolted from him, and put divers of their ring∣leaders to exquisite torments, fleaing some of them alive, blinding others, and thrusting sharp pikes through them; some that aimed to be Kings, he crowned with Iron-crowns red-hot: for this cause he was named Henricus Asper, Henry the rough or sharp. In Italy he placed new Governours, to keep them from rebellion: Being well used at Cremona and Bononia, he gave them power to coin their own mony. The death of Saladine, (who caused his shirt to be car∣ried in his funeral, with this acclamation, Here is all that is left of the great Con∣queror of the East!) gave hopes to Henry of some good to be done in Syria;  therefore he prepares an expedition, and to that purpose sends great forces before, under the Bishop of Mentz and divers other Commanders, who took Ioppe from the Saracens, and fortified divers Towns: but as Henry was coming after with his supplies, he fell sick of a feaver at Messana, where he died; some think he was poysoned by his wife, for his adulteries; he was buried at Pa∣normus in a Porphyrie tomb, having reigned somwhat above seven years: his son Frederick was now five years old, whom he committed to the care of his brother Philip; him he had made Governor of Hetruria, and married him to Irene the sister of Alexius the Greek Emperor. Henry's death hindred the Chri∣stians 1199. progresse in Syria. In Spain, the Numidians, Moors, and Africans, being arrived in great fleets, set upon Alphonsus king of Castile, whom they overthrew, and laid waste his country, so that the French were afraid they would passe over the Pyrenean hills thither: this expedition of the Moors into Spain, was occasioned by the Danes, Frislanders, and Hollanders, who in several fleets set upon and wasted the coast of Barbary: in revenge whereof, the Moors fell upon Spain.
THE FIFTH BOOK OF THE SECOND PART: Intreating of the times from Philip Emperour in the West, and the French Empire in the East, till Wenceslaus the German Emperour, containing the History of 200. years. CHAP. I. 1. The Troubles of Europe under Philip, Otto the Fourth, and Frederick the Second, Emperours of the West. 2. The Affairs of the Holy Land. 3. Of the Danish and other Europeian Affairs. THe report of Henry's death being come, Philip hasteth from Hetruria into Germany, sending the Peers of the Empire before, desiring them to fulfill the will of the deceased 1200. Emperour, in confirming his sons Succession, and his own Protectorship; but Pope Innocent by his Legats sent to the Princes to rescind the will of Henry, and to reject Phi∣lip from the Government of the Empire, for he hated Frederick and his race, and so he did Philip, for curbing the Popes power in Italy: therefore he is excommunicated, and the Bishop of Sutrie that absolved him degraded upon the Popes instigation. Many voted for Bertholdus D. of Loringia: but the King of Bohemia, D. of Saxon, Marquess of Mysnia and Bavare, with others in Parliament declared Philip Emperour; which Bertholdus perceiving, and that his power was too weak to resist, yielded to Philip; upon this the Pope instigates the Princes to confer the Empire upon Otto the son of Henricus Leo, and withall excommunicates Philip, which made the Bohemian and other Princes to fall off; hereupon Otto is crowned at Aix by the Bishop of Colen; but Philip being nothing dejected, raiseth an Army, takes in Strausburg, and at Spire encounters with Otto, whom he defeats and puts to flight; upon this the Lantgrave of Thuringia, after his Countrey was wasted by Philip, submitted: then, because the Bohemians sided with Otto, Philip falls upon them with fire and sword; he forced also the Cities upon the Rhine, even Colen it self to yield, so that Adolphus the Bi∣shop was fain to crown him at Aix, notwithstanding K. Richard and K. Iohn of England stood entirely for Otto, being his Uncles: Otto thrusts Adolphus out of his Bishoprick, Philip maintains him; hereupon another Battel is fought by 1207. Colen, in which Otto lost the Field, and was forced to flie into England. Conradus Bishop of Mentz was lately returned from Palestina; he for siding with Philip, is stript of his Bishoprick by the Pope, and so was his successour Ludolphus, and Sigifrid, Philips enemy, is made Bishop: but an end was shortly after put to these Civil wars by the Marriages of Philips Daughters; for the two eldest he bestowed upon the King of Bohemia and Duk of Brabant, the third he married to Richard the Popes Nephew by his brother, and the fourth to his Competitor Otto, who upon this left off prosecuting his right in the Empire: By this last Marriage Philip
bought his peace, but lost his life; for  one Otto Wittelsbachius who had been a suiter to this daughter, and was by Philip encouraged in the suit, but afterward rejected, in a rage gets into the room where Philip was at Bamberg with a private friend, and thrusts his Dagger (which he had under his cloak) into the Emperours throat, of which wound he dyed, having reigned ten years almost; the Paricide escaped by means of Erbert Bishop of Bamberg, but afterward he was apprehended and 1208. slain. Philips body was buried at Bamberg, and from thence translated to Spire by Frederick the Second; his wife Irene dyed shortly after with grief. Otto succeeded to Philip, for so they had covenanted, that Otto should not meddle with the Empire whilest Philip lived; but he did not enjoy it long  quietly, for shortly after he had been crown'd by Pope Innocent the second at Rome, (where his Gold prevailed more then his Sword) there arose a quarrel about the Principality of Maud, sometime the wife of Henry the Fourth; this she had bequeathed on the Church of Rome, but the Emperours still claimed it as their due; therefore Otto resolves to recover by Armes both that Mar∣quisat and the other Territories with-held from Frederick the Second's Tu∣tors. At this resolution of Otto's, Pope Innocent was highly offended, and because he would not leave off his claim, he is excommunicated; therefore Otto sets Guards upon the Pope, suffering none to have access to him, which caused such a tumult in the City, that Otto, not without great slaughter, was fain to flie thence into Lombardy, where he collects his Forces and invades  Romandiola, Tuscia, and the Marquisat of Ancona; thence he marched into Apulia to recover what the Pope had detained from the Empire: in the mean season the Popes curse is published in Germany, and the Princes are desired to thrust the Excommunicate Emperour out of his Government. Hence ariseth a new War, which drew Otto home out of Italy, some do side with him, but more with the Pope; hereupon the chief German Princes, with the Bohe∣mian, send for Frederick the Second out of Sicily, remembring the promise they had made to Henry his father, about setling his son in the Empire. Fre∣derick comes into Alsatia; Otto with his Army prepares to encounter him, but  most of his Souldiers forsook him, so that he returns into Spain; Frederick in the interim takes in all upon the Rhine, then being crowned at Aix, he makes a League with Philip the French King; the King of England assists Otto with men and money; upon this the War is renewed; but it lasted not long, for Otto being defeated by the French, and forsaken by his men, resigned up his 1214. Empire the fourth year after he had undertaken it, and five years after this resignation died of the bloody Flux, and was buried at Bruswige. In these Civil wars of Germany, the Marquess of Brandenburg drew the Sclavi to rebell against Canutus King of Denmark. Peter Bishop of Rosehild arrived 1218. in the Oder with an Army, which he landed in the Marquisat; a bloody Bat∣tel  is fought, and he taken prisoner, but escaped, and with another Army de∣feated the Marquess as he was plundring of Sclavia, and took divers places in Holsatia from Adolphus the Earl who aided the Marquess: At last Lubec being taken by Valdemarus D. of Slesvic who assisted Peter, Hamburg is surprised by him, and in it Adolphus. Canutus being dead, Valdemor the second is saluted at Lubec, King of Denmark and Sclavia, and Lord of Nordalbingia. Adolphus for his ransome delivers up the strong Fort of Lavenburg to the King. About the same time Philip of France recovered all Normandy again, the 270. year after it had been given to Rollo the Dane, from whom till this time were reckoned twelve Dukes, six whereof were Kings of England. Odoacer King of Bohemia, for siding with the Pope, is deposed by Otto the Emperour at the Dyet of Norimberg, and his son set up in his place. The Waldenses, called commonly the poor men of Lions, Albigenses and Beggini, were busie about these times in opposing the corruptions of Rome, against whom the Dominicans and Franciscans were imployed by Argu∣ment, and the Earl of Montsfort with
some other Princes by the Sword, many  of them were slain, and many burned for Hereticks: the Saxons, Westfalians, Frislanders, and Austrians were making an Expedition against them, but changing their mind, they assisted Spain against the Moores or King of Mo∣rocco. Peter King of Arragon lost his life in assisting the Albigenses. Frederick having setled Germany, and annexed again Belgium and Lorain to the Empire, was fain to be crowned the second time at Aix, and to take a solemn Oath to the Pope, that he would raise all the strength he could to recover the Holy-Land; for which purpose also he assembled the Councel of Lateran, and promised to declare Frederick Emperour; but before this could be performed, Innocent died at Perusium, as he was going to compose the War between the  Pisans and Genuois: At last Innocents promise was performed by his Succes∣sor Honorius. After this, Frederick returns to Italy, to take order with the Tuscians and Apulians, who by the assistance of the Bishops, had invaded and spoiled the Emperours Territories; these he subdued, and removed the Bi∣shops out of their places, which fled to the Pope for remedy, who desired Frederick to restore them; which he refusing, and withall inveighing against the Popes pride, covetousness, and frauds, gave occasion of new troubles, by which all Italy banded against the Emperour, and at last the French were called in to the Kingdom of Naples, (these troubles were presaged by Earth-quakes, and blood mingled with dust, out of the clouds, at Rome.) The Emperour is excommunicate; the Sicilians take up Armes against Frederick, having shaken off his Government, therefore Frederick is forced to leave Italy, and to pass over into Sicily, which he quieted, and performed Funeral obsequies to his wife Con∣stantia lately dead: Thence he returned into Germany, where he held a Dyet at Wurceburg, and made his son Henry by Constantia his Colleague in the Empire, but afterward condemned him to perpetual imprisonment in Calabria, with his two sons, by consent of the German Princes (where he died the next year af∣ter) because he aimed to dethrone his Father, against whom by the Popes insti∣gation 1222. he stirred up the Cities of Lombardy: This quarrel was somewhat miti∣gated between the Pope and Emperour by Iohn de Bregna K. of Ierusalem, who acquainted the Pope with the danger of Asia, and that if Damiata had not been surrendred again to the Sultan, the Christian Army had been drowned by opening the sluces of Nilus. He also bestowed his daughter Iole upon Frede∣rick, with the Kingdom of Ierusalem for her dowry, to engage his son-in∣law against the Sarazens in Asia; Frederick having undertaken the Expediti∣on, sends his son Henry into Germany, to have a Dyet called for raising of mony horse and men towards this Expedition. Ludovic Lantgrave of Thuringia is by the Princes made chief Commander of the German Forces. Frederick invites the German Princes into Cremona, to 1225. consult with them about the Empire, for he could not with safety leave Italy. This the Pope suspected, wherefore by raising of Lombardy he hinders the meeting; but Pope Honorius dieth in the interim, to whom succeeds Gregory the ninth, as fierce as the former against the Emperour, accusing him for lingring in Italy, and neglecting the Asian Expedition, whereas he knew that Frederick by his son Henry was promoting the business in Germany; Brundusium was the Rendevouz for the Souldiers, where the Lantgrave of Thuringia, with divers others fell sick & died; Frederick also himself was ill disposed, by reason of the unseasonable weather, and when he put to Sea, was beat back again by contrary winds, so that he was forced to stay at Brundusium; the Pope not∣withstanding rageth against him, accusing him of perjury, adultery, and cru∣elty  to his wife; of treachery also, in suffering Damiata to be lost; therefore he curseth him, and denounceth war against him, to that purpose calleth Bre∣gna or Brennus his father-in-law into Romandiola, giving him the Title of Exarch; he armes also the Tuscians and Lombards against him. Frederick to purge himself from the Popes criminations, calls the Princes together at Ra∣venna, but the tumults of Lombardy hindred that meeting, therefore he clears
himself by writing. So having repaired his Fleet, he sets saile for Asia, having sent before, with the greatest part of the Army, Reinold D. of Bavaria, and Master of the Horse; the charge of Italy was committed to Reinold D. of 1228. Spoletum: but because Frederick took not his leave of the Pope, nor expiated his crimes, contemning as it were the Popes curse, he commanded the Syrian Armies not to follow, or to obey him, and withall layeth hold on the King∣dom of Naples, and fills all Italy with troubles: Frederick notwithstanding for∣tifieth Ioppe, and forceth the Sultan to restore Ierusalem, Bethleem, & Nazareth. This Brennus or Bregna had married Mary the daughter of Almaricus King of Cyprus and Ierusalem, and with her received the Title of King: he did good service in Asia; but being forsaken of Andrew King of Hungary, who having washed himself three times in Iordan, thought he had sufficiently paid his vow, returns home with his Army: being (I say) thus forsaken, and hope∣less to recover Palestina, he intrencheth himself between Caesaria and the hill Caiapha, and grew so strong with the continual aid of Pilgrims, that he much infested the Barbarians; then having got a Fleet of Ships, he sailes to Damiata (of old Heliopolis) in Aegypt, breaks down the Chain which kept off Ships from entring Nilus, and at last, not without much labour and blood took the Barbarians strongest Hold. Here Saphadinas was slain; his son wanting provision, retreats from the place with his Army. Conradin the Sultan of Da∣mascus and Ierusalem, and the son of Saphadin, offers conditions of peace, and promiseth restitution of the Cross, and all that the Christians had lost in Cyria, or Phenicia; this was liked by all the Latines, except by Pelagius the Cardinal, who would yield to no tearms till Egypt were first subdued: At this, Conradin in a rage demolisheth the walls and chief buildings of Ierusalem, Caesaria, and other places, that they might not be serviceable to the Christians, who lost many men by the Plague and Famine; at last, Damiata after a years siege and a half, is taken; Pelagius claims it as the Popes due; King Brennus retires to Ptolemais, who with much intreaty of the Princes returns; Pelagius the Legat urgeth the subduing of Egypt, and first of the regal City Cayre, whom  Brennus resisteth, alledging they came not for Egypt, but for recovering the Holy-Land; but the Legat would have his will; therefore commands Lodo∣vick of Bavaria to go before, and the rest to follow, threatning to curse those that obeyed him not; about 70000. went for fear of his curse; no sooner had they pitched their Tents about ten miles from the City Cayre, when the Nile is let in upon them, many were drowned, and the rest forced to forsake Damiata, and to leave Egypt; the Sultan of Damascus made Truce with them for ten years; upon this Brennus repairs to the Pope for new supplies. About these times, Waldemar the second, King of Denmark, was surprised and carried away with his Son by Henry Earle of Suerinum, whose Wife the  King had abused whilest Henry was absent at the holy War, notwithstand∣ing he had intrusted her with the King, hoping she could not have been any where so safe. This King having recovered by his Armies, and subdued the Sclavian coast of the Baltick Sea, and having regained Hamburgh from Otto the fourth, was in his sleep seized upon by night, carried away in a Ship, and imprisoned in the Castle of Daneberg; so that two years after he was forced to ransome himself with 35. Talents of Silver; so he recovered his Kingdome, but in the interim lost the Town of Vandalia, which revolted from him. Frederick having returned from Asia, shewed that he was not dead, as was 1230. given out, purposely to encourage Brennus to invade Apulia and Calabria, be∣ing the Lands of one dead in Excommunication. Frederick lands in Sicily, and overthrows in a Battle the forces of his Father in law, and reconciles himself to Pope Cregory, who had been driven out of Rome by the People for his exa∣ctions, and was indigent of money; therefore the Emperour by Leopold of Austria sends him a great summe, and upon that he is Absolved and entertain∣ed by the Pope: So
they joyn their forces together against the Rebels and Hereticks, raging on them with Fire and Sword; Frederick on the Messanians in Sicily, Gregory on the Teutons; who being again pursued by the Romans, aiming at their antient liberty, stoutly defended himself: At Reatum a bloody battel is fought, in which 30000. were slaine: After this, he sends his Preachers about for raising of men and money again for the Holy Land. A great Army is raised under Theobald King of Navarre and other Commanders; They march by land, suffering much hardship and losse by the way; but short∣ly after they were come to Ptolemais, the Turks Army overthrew them, so that few escaped, who returned home with dishonour. About this time Ferdinand King of Castile took Hispalis and Corduba from  the Sarazens; and Iames King of Arragon, Valentia and Majorca, driving the 1235. Barbarians into Africa: And about the same time did Henry rebel against his Father Frederick, whom he also would have poysoned as some think, upon suspition that he loved his Son Conradus begot of Iole the Queen of Ierusalem, better then him. The same year, Frederick married Isabel Sister to King Henry the Third of England; then did Pope Gregory set forth his Decretals: Frede∣rick prepareth an Army to chastise the Lombards, chiefly the rebellious Milla∣nois; but the insolencies committed against the Hungarians by Frederick of Austria, who despised the Emperours Summons, caused him to raise his Siege from before Millain and return home, where he stript the Austrian of all his power and bands; then renews his quarrel with the Millanois, whom he subdued, and took in Sardinia subject of old to Sicily: The Pope challengeth Sardinia as a part of the Churches Patrimony; Frederick refuseth, shewing it belonged to the Empire, the Priviledges of which he was bound by Oath to maintain; upon this Frederick is accursed for an Heretick, and an Enemy of the Church: He on the other side, by Letters to the Christian Kings excuseth himself, and accuseth Gregory of high crimes, whom the Romans upon hope of gain by his presence, received again into the City: Then did Gregory strengthen himself by the Venetians and Genuois, who had contended long for the Dominion of the Sea; between them he made a League for Nine years,  that they might be the better able to assist him against Frederick: He also in∣vites Lewis the French King to take upon him the Empire, which he refuseth; yet afterward both Lewis of France and Henry of England fell foule with Frede∣rick, for imploying the Earle of Tolouse his forces against Raimund Earle of Province, who was Father in Law to both Kings: however, Frederick was preva∣lent against the Pope by Land, and against the Venetians at Sea; onely Ferraria was recovered by Gregory. Such confusion was then in Italy, that the Emperour could scarce know who were for him, who were against him; therefore he brought in for distinctions sake the Barbarous names of Guelphs and Gibellins, which two Families had heretofore quarrelled in Germany; the Caesarians are  named Gibellins, the Pontificians Guelphs; these two factions fill all places of Italy with blood, most Towns fell off from the Pope, even Rome was ready to forsake him; but that he in a solemne supplication caused the heads of the two Apostles Peter and Paul to be carried through the City, to move the people to commiseration. Frederick in the mean space takes Beneventum by storm, and overthrows it; he drives the Benedictines out of their Monastery at Cassinum, and gives Nu∣ceria in Apulia to the Sarazens (whom he drove out of Sicily:) He fals sud∣denly upon Ravenna and subdues it. Upon this Gregory cals a Synod at Late∣ran for deposing of Frederick, who by his Letters to the Princes shewed, that both the time, place, and persons, and other circumstances were for Gregories  advantage, but all to his prejudice; therefore he shuts up all passages to Rome both by Sea and Land, and intercepts some Cardinals going thither, whom he imprisoned, with divers Bishops; which so grieved Gregory, that he fell sick and died, the 15. year of his Pontificat, and almost 100. of his life. Then did Faventia after a long siege yield to
Frederick: his two sons, Conradus and Henry drove the Tartars from Danubius; these had plundred Poland, Hungaria, & Silesia; the Church wants a Pope for twenty one moneths, in which vacancie Frederick removes the University of Bononia into Padua; at last the Empe∣rour by the intreaty of Baldwin, who had left Asia, and of Raimund the Tolosan, being both now in Italy, dismisseth the imprisoned Bishops and Cardinals, wishing them to choose a new Pope, which they neglecting to doe, were for∣ced by Fredericks Armes, and Lewis the French Kings threatnings; at length Innocent the Fourth is chosen at Anagnia, now called Campagnia di Roma; he pretending that Frederick meant to kill him, fled to Genua from Rome, and 1245. then by Sea into Lions; in the interim, the Romans overthrew Fredericks Garrisons, and in a Skirmish one like unto the Emperour was killed, where∣upon it was rumoured that Frederick was killed, which caused many to fall off from his Faction. The Pope in this mean while chooseth new Cardinals, whom he honoureth with Scarlet Garments and Hats; then he fals with his Curses upon Frede∣rick, and invites the Germans to choose Henry Lantgrave of Thuringia for their Emperour, which was hindred by Fredericks Armies; this not succeed∣ing, the Pope cals a general Council at Lions, there Petrus de Vineis with others stoutly pleaded for Frederick, yet notwithstanding he is anathemati∣zed: 1245. But to shew how much he slighted this Curse, he fals upon oppressing the Millanois again; but finding divers of the Princes to forsake him as an Ex∣communicate Person, he promiseth the Pope to maintaine the Holy War, if he would absolve him and settle his Son Conradus in the Empire, which by him was refused; of this Frederick complains to the Princes, but Innocent proceeds in solliciting Henry to accept the Empire, which he did at last, whom Conradus Fredericks Son opposeth with an Army; but his Commanders being bribed forsook him, so that he was fain to return with dishonour to his Father: after this, the Lantgrave by the help of the Bishops, playes the Emperour, and as he was going to receive his Inauguration at Ulma, was set upon by Conradus; the Landgrave had the better, but a Reserve of 15000 Conradus had laid in Ambush, breaking out suddenly on the Lantgrave, defeated his Army, in which he received a wound, and of that died shortly after. Innocent being much troubled at this, sends his Oratours abroad to sollicite the Princes to rise unanimously against Frederick, and withall sends a great 1247. Summe of money to William Earle of Holland, to raise an Army and to invade the Empire, but the money was intercepted by Fredericks Friends; yet by the diligence of Conradus Bishop of Cullen, and the other Prelates of Germany, as also by the continuall preaching of the Franciscans and Dominicians, infinite summes were raised for William, with which he raised an Army that drove Conradus King of the Romans quite out of Germany; wherefore Frederick resolves to go into Burgundy, that from thence he might send forces against  Lions where the Pope was; but in his journey he was stayed by Parma, which thrust the gates against him; he resolves not to stir till he had taken it, but the siege lasted a whole year, in which time he builds a new town close by it, which he called Victoria, and caused new Coyn to be stampt in honour of Vi∣ctor the Martyr, to whom he vowed to build a Temple, if he subdued the City: He had there three Sons with him, Henry the younger whom he crea∣ted Vice-Roy of Italy, Frederick the bastard Prince of Antioch and Governour of Tuscia, and Hensius King of Sardinia; he had also received Elephants and some other wilde beasts out of Africa, with these he made publick shews at an unseasonable time, and spent his treasure vainly; so that he was faine  to turn his new stampt Gold into Leather money, promising to repay it again in Gold: The Citizens of Parma proffered to surrender upon Articles, which were denyed them by Frederick; wishing them in scorn to eat sparingly, and make much of their provision, for that should be the last that ever they should eat; this so exasperated them, that desperately they salley
out upon  the Caesarians (Frederick being then retired for healths sake, with some part of his Army) whom they defeat and put to flight, seise upon 15000. Horse, and cut Thaddaeus the General in pieces, and the new City Victoria they overthrow and level with the ground. William of Holland in the mean space, desirous to be consecrated, laid siege to ix, the Dukes of Saxony and Bavaria were against him; but he had the Bishop of Colen, with the rest of the Clergy, for him, whose Armes and purses were at his command; by their help, and by an inundation of water, the City yielded, and received William. About this time Petrus de Vineis, who had pleaded so much for Frederick, was ill rewarded by him, upon suspition that Pope Innocent had hired him to poyson the Emperour by his Physician, who having brought the potion, and willed by Frederick first to take it, poured it on the ground; upon this, Peters eyes were thrust out, who to avoid further punishment, or else mad for being falsly accused, beat out his own brains a∣gainst a pillar. In the mean while Frederick begins to prevail again; he drove William back into Holland; he subjected Parma, being secure, with other Cities in Italy. People began to murmure, that the Popes persecuting of Frederick kept him from Asia, where all was now in danger to be lost, many revolted from Christ to Mahumet: Hereupon Innocent is desired to receive Frederick into favour again, that he might heal these sores of Christendome, or else that  he should be gone from Lions, but he remained inexorable; and therefore sends to the King of England to have Burdeaux for his residence, being he was banished from his own Church. In this mean season Frederick died in Apulia, 1250. of poyson, as some think, of a Feaver, say others; and to hasten his death the sooner, his Bastard-son Manfred stifled him with his pillow; he died the 38. year of his Empire, and the 54. of his age; by his Will he left a great treasure towards the holy Warr; he was buried at Panormus in a Tomb of Porphyrie, on Manfreds charges, to avoid the suspition of murder. He was a Prince eminent both in vertue and vice: he was a good Scholler and Linguist; he caused Aristotle, Galen, Ptolomy, and Avicenna to be transla∣ted  into Latine out of the Greek and Arabick; he erected an University at Naples, corrected many of the Laws, and was a lover of learned men: he had three wives, the first was Constantia Queen of Arragon, of whom he had Henry the elder Duke of Suevia and King of the Romanes; the other was Iole, Bregna's daughter King of Ierusalem, whence the Title of King of Ierusalem was an∣nexed to the Kings of Sicily and Naples, of her he had Conradus, on whom Frederick conferred the titles of his brother Henry, and bequeathed him Sicily and Naples: The third was King Iohns daughter of England, of whom he had Henry the younger: he had also, besides divers daughters, bastard-sons; Man∣fred prince of Tarentum, who stifled him for giving away Naples from him;  Hensius King of Sardinia, whom the Bonanians killed, being shut up in an iron Cage; and Frederick Prince of Antioch. CHAP. II. 1. The true estate of the Eastern Empire. 2. The affaires of France, Tartary, Denmark, Poland, England, Scotland, Spaine, and other places. 3. The Popes of these times. THe Greeks having lost the Eastern Empire, Balduinus Earl of Flanders,  being but 32. years old, is made Emperour of Constantinople; who to in∣large his Empire, passeth into Asia, having sent his brother Henry before, against whom Prusa of Bithinia shut her gates. Baldwin was quickly called back out of Asia, upon the revolt of some Cities in Macedonia and Thracia, among the rest Hadrianopolis, which held out so long, till Iohn Duke of
Mysia  came with his Army to raise the siege; the Latine Army is overthrown, and Baldwin with divers Commanders taken prisoners; he had reigned but one year, when he was laid in irons, at last they cut off his hands and feet, and so left him alive for a prey to the Birds, but he died the second day after. The Latines to be revenged, rob and murther both by sea and land, so that they 1205. and the Scythians destroy one another. Henry, Baldwins brother, succeeds in the Empire; and Boniface the Marquis having lost most of his Townes, shuts himself up in Thessalonica. Miserable was the condition of Greece at this time, men devouring one another, as Wolves do sheep. 1206. In the East, Prusa, Nicha, Smyrna, Ephesus, and divers other places, with the  Lydians, submitted themselves to Theodorus Lascaris, who having got toge∣ther a Fleet of Ships, subdued divers Islands. David and Alexus, brothers, the Nephews of Andronicus sometimes Tyrant, Aldobrandinus the Italian, and the Genuois who took Crete, tore away divers limbs from the Greek Empire. Henry made peace with the Bulgarians, and married with the prince of Bulgaria's daughter; so returning with his Army to Byzantium, he fortified the City, where having lest a Garrison, went to Thessalonica, where the Marquis of Montsferrat was, whom he made King there; and then returned to Constan∣tinople; where he died the 11. year of his Reign, having betrothed his daugh∣ter Iolanta to Petrus Antisiodorensis, who in her right claimed the Empire, and  then he went to Rome to be crowned by the Pope. In the mean time Theodo∣rus Lascaris, who had overthrown the Turks in a great battel, and killed the 1216. Sultan with his own hand, made himself Emperour at Nicha, and seised upon Epirus and Dyrrachium, that he might shut up the Emperours passage in his return to the City; he besieged the Tower, but to no purpose; so he promi∣sed to raise the siege, if Theodorus would give him the publike Faith for his safe departure, which he did accordingly; but as the Emperour was passing through the Woods of Thessaly, he was treacherously apprehended by some Forces in ambush, which brought him to Theodorus, by whom he was condem∣ned, imprisoned in a loathsome Dungeon, and two years after beheaded; his widow ruled the Empire in the mean space, till her son Robert was returned from France; because he could not come by Sea to the City, the Enemy having shut up all passages, he makes a long journey through Panonia and Mysia. When he had got the Empire, he admits Martinus Michael, the Venetian Pretor, out of his love to the people, to be his Colleague in the Empire; but he lived not long, sor he died in Achaia, as he was returning after his inaugu∣ration, from Rome; his son Baldwin was as yet too young for Government, and the Lascarins with the Comnins were busie in using all means possible to reco∣ver the City; which danger the Venetians perceiving, entred into a League with the one to destroy the other; therefore they advised the young Empe∣rour  to marry with the daughter of Alexius Comnenus; but the French Peers fearing a change of Government in a Grecian affinity, rejected this wholsome advice, and by the suggestion of Pope Gregory, they made a match between the young Emperour to Martha the daughter of Brennus King of Ierusalem, whose sister, or (as others say) daughter Iole, Frederick married. So long as Brennus lived, Baldwin was strong enough for his enemies; but after his death the enemies increasing, and his treasures being spent, which should have main∣tained the Venetian Fleet, he was forced to repair into Italy, hoping for aide from Frederick (then before Parma) and the Pope, but both failed him; yet when he heard of the death of Theodorus Lascaris, he took courage, and re∣turned  to Constantinople, hoping to quell his enemies; but Michael Palaeologus forced him into the City, which he besieged, and at last by treachery took; Baldwin escaped narrowly in the night, and got into Italy by Euripus & Eubola, then in the Venetian possession. Thus was Constantinople lost by Baldwin the second, the 60. year after it had been possessed by Baldwin the first. Theodorus Lascaris Emperour of Nicha, having
defeated the Turkish Sultan,  (whose head he carried upon a long pole about his Army, to the teriour of the Turks, who fainted at the sight thereof, and submitted to him) reigned 18. years, and then died, leaving for his successor Iohannes Ducas his son-in-law, 1222. who in 33. years of his Reign recovered almost all the Empire from the La∣tines, and then dyed; whose son Theodorus Lascaris succeeded, who died the 1255. fourth year of his Empire, being 36. years old, and left a son, Iohn by name, of 6. years old, to succeed him; but Michael Palaeologus usurping the Empire, 1259. thrust out the eyes of this young Emperor, whose tuition he had undertaken; and so being now ten years of age, lost both his eyes and Empire at once. In France, Philip raised an Army against the Albigenses, who were defended  by the King of Arragon, and Raimond Earl of Tholouse. In this war, Simon Mont∣fortius, General of the Catholike Forces, gave divers defeats to the Albigenses, and at last was killed at the siege of Tholouse, which was given him by the La∣teran 1218. Councel as a reward. This war was renewed by K. Lewis the 8. and deter∣mined by his son St. Lewis, who caused Earl Raimond at Paris to abjure their 1226. opinions; and then he bestowed his daughter, with the Earldome of Tholouse upon Alphonso the brother of St. Lewis. The English were beat out of Rochel, 1229. and a great part of Gascony, by Lewis the 8. who returning from his Albigen∣sian 1244. Expedition, died the fourth year of his reign, whose son Lewis the 9. was crowned at Rhemes the same year, the 12. year of his age; he for his good life was canonized by Boniface the 8. and called Lewis the Saint: he subdued in the begining of his reign Theobald Earl of Campaina, and Hugh Earl of Marchia; then having made peace, and being recovered of a dangerous sickness; he raiseth an Army, and under the sign of the Cross saileth into Egypt, obtains a Victory, and withall Damiata; thence he marcheth to Cayre, and was in a fair possibi∣lity to have taken it, the Calyph Forces being much weakned: but by reason of the unwholsome vapours of those Marish places, the Pestilence grew so violent in the French Army, that multitudes died; so that the King being de∣feated, and taken prisoner, was forced to yield to such conditions as pleased the enemy, to wit, that Domita should be restored, with the captives on both sides, a great sum of money be paid, to wit, 8000. Marks of gold, and truce made for 10. yea, 10 the King and Army were dismissed: The Kings intention was to have recovered Ierusalem from the Parthians, who be∣ing beat out of their own Countrey by the Tartars, entred Syria, took Ierusa∣lem, and destroyed it, abusing and polluting the Temple of the Holy Sepul∣chre. This King was very devout and religious, causing publike fasting and prayers through all his Dominions, when France was visited with the Plague: he redeemed the Holy Reliques of Christs Passion, among which was the Crown of Thorns, from the Venetians, to whom Baldwin had pawned them for a great sum of money, to be imployed against the Greeks, which incensed  them exceedingly against the Latines, storming that those Reliques should be possessed, bought and sold by them, whereas they had been so carefully kept by the Graecian Princes so many years. Lewis had also a religious Mother Blanca, who in his minority and absence governed the Kingdome with great prudence; by her meanes peace was made between France and England. This same Lewis took many Towns in Brittany, and caused the D. do him homage; he advanced the University of Paris, after many Schollers had left it upon some jarrs between them and the Citizens: he would not be perswaded to forsake the Army, when the Plague was hot among them in Egypt, but stayed all the while, and was at last infected himself; the fame of his sanctity caused  a great Prince of the Tartars, and many of the Scythians to become Christi∣ans; he stayed 5. years in the East, converting the Barbarians by his good life; he sent home his two brothers Charles and Alphonsus, to comfort their disconsolate Mother, after they were set free, being taken prisoners with him: as he was returning homeward, his Ship was cast upon a rock by a storm,
during which time he prayed kneeling, and so the Ships got off without hurt. About these times the Tartars, under the conduct of their King Hoccottas, did in great swarmes enter Asia and Europe; they subdued Persis, and all the Countries between that and Tanais; at length they over-ran Poland and Hun∣gary, even to Austria: upon this, Pope Innocent sends some choise Franciscans and Dominicans, to try if they could bring these Barbarians to the know∣ledge of Christ, which they did accordingly, so that their new King Mago, or Meto, was baptized: Halon, King Meto's brother, having defeated the Turks, recovers Syria, and was in possibility to have setled the Christians again in Ierusalem, had not their own discords hindred, and his departure thence; for at that time his brother Meto died, and he was called away to inherit the Kingdome. In Denmark to Waldemar the 3. succeeded Ericus, whose brother Abel was made Duke of Iutia; this Ericus, as he was preparing to chastise Lubeck and Hamburg, who had entred into confederacie against him, was treacherously murthered by his brother Abel, who having leigned two years, was in Gods just judgement slain by the Frisones in a tumult, as he was raising an Army against them, for refusing to submit to his unjust exactions. To him succeeded Christopher, the third brother; against him his subjects rebelled, and threw  down his Castles and Houses; he imprisoned his Archbishop, for which his Kingdome was under the Popes curse nine years. Poland at this time was afflicted with Civil Warrs: for Conradus and Henry the two Tutors of young Boleslaus the King, strove for the Principality; divers battels were fought, till at length Conradus the Kings Uncle prevailed; but the Queen and her son were more inclined to Henry; wherefore Conradus seiseth on the King, and shuts him up in a Monastery, where he made an escape, having intoxicated his Keepers with wine, and so betakes himself to Henry, who with much trouble setled him again in his Kingdome, both the Tutors submitting. In the interim, the Tartars break in upon Poland, destroy∣ing  all with fire and sword; so that the King with his wife fled into Hungary 1240. to his Father-in-law; but he also by the same storm was driven out of his Countrey; which fell likewise upon Silesia and Moravia. Boleslaus was glad to hide himself in a Castle; in the mean while, the son of Henry the Kings Tu∣tor, upon the death of his Father, who was slain in the war, takes possession of Poland, whom Conradus, Boleslaus his Uncle, drove out; but he did not en∣joy the kingdome long, for he grew odious to the people, for laying heavy taxes on them, that a way was made for Boleslaus to return, who upon the death of Conradus, which fell out shortly after, possessed the Kingdome quietly. In England, Iohn Plantagenet, youngest son of King Henry the 2. succeeded to Richard, albeit Arthur Plantagenet his Nephew, and son to Geosfrey his elder 1247. brother was then living, whom Philip the second King of France animated and assisted with men and money against King Iohn, so that in a short time Arthur levied a puisant Army, and invaded Normandy, where he took divers strong places; at length King Iohn came over with a strong Army, and fought divers battels with his Nephew; after which they came to an agreement, and a place was concluded, but shortly after interrupted by the French King, who with a more numerous Army enters Normandy, and depopulates it: king Iohn for want of money and courage gave way to the French Victories, till the people cryed out on him, and furnished him with a large tax, every lusty man  proffering his service; upon this an Army is raised and transported into Nor∣mandy, where cruel battels were fought, and the French defeated; Arthur the kings Nephew, and rightful heir, was taken prisoner, and sent to the Castle of Roan; where upon hope to escape, he leaped from the Walls, and was
drowned in the Ditch. The next year following the French king pretending title to that Dutchy, invaded it with such a power and fury, that the whole Countrey, to avoid desolation, subjected it self to him. Shortly after this, Pope Innocent the third quarrelled with king Iohn, about the election of the Arch∣bishop of Canterbury; for upon the death of Hubert, St. Austins Monks there without the kings consent elected Raynold a brother of their own, of whom they took an Oath to repair to Rome for his investure and pall: the King be∣ing displeased at this, they elect Iohn Gray Bishop of Norwich, in whose behalf the King sent to the Pope, intreating him to ratifie this last choyce; but the Pope slighted the Kings Letters, and confirmed the first election; yet under∣standing  that divers of the Monks disliked the first election, because it was done in the night, advised the Monks to elect Steven Langton the Cardinal of Chrysogone, which was done accordingly, albeit the K. prohibited the choice, who storming that he was thus slighted, writes to the Pope, that he would not from thenceforth suffer him or his Kingdom to be thus enslaved to Rome: The Pope answers, that the election should stand, requiring the King to give him quiet possession, and to recall the banished Monks, and authorised 4. Bishops to inter∣dict the King and Kingdom, if he did not obey; the King upon this seised on these Bishops lands and goods, promising to do the like to all that should have any recourse to Rome; wherefore the Pope sends his two Legats, Pandulphus and Durant, wishing the King to submit himself to the Pope, and to be reconciled to the four Bishops, and the Monks of St. Austin, which he was willing to do, conditionally that he might not allow the Cardinals election; upon this the Legats pronounce the Popes Curse against the king, absolving his Subjects from their allegiance, and withall gave his Crown to Philip the French king: 1213. this fulmination the King slighted; and to confront the Pope, he enters Scot∣land with a great Army, because King Alexander the second had sided with the Pope, and entertained divers of his rebellious Clergy; the Scottish King to avoid further trouble, reconciled himself to King Iohn. King Philip of France having now some pretence to war upon England, provides a great  Army, but 300. of his Ships laden with Victuals were surprised by King Iohn, so his hopes failed him: but the Pope pursued the King so eagerly with his Thunder-bolts, that he was fain at last on his knees, before Pandulphus, to confess his disobedience to the Pope; and craving pardon, by a publike In∣strument under his hand and seale resigned his Crown to the Pope, which Pan∣dulphus kept four dayes for the Popes use, and then gave the Crown to King Iohn and his heirs, reserving a tenure thereof to the Church of Rome, with an annual Tribute of 1000. Marks, 7000. for England, and 3000. for Ireland. Many of the Nobility upon this revolt from the King, and flie over to France, to assist Philip against him, who was making preparations for his son Lewis to  invade England; which he did, and was like to have carried it, had not the Pope required Philip and his son Lewis to desist from all hostility against that Crown which was holden of the See of Rome: this injunction the French King refused to obey; wherefore the Pope sends Guallo the Cardinal of Saint Martins hither, who accursed Philip, Lewis, and the English that sided with them: Hereupon the common Souldiers forsook their Leaders, and went home, and divers of the Countrey people fell to robbing and plundring the houses of the Nobility and Gentry that were accursed; which caused them, being destitute of means, and forsaken of their friends, to submit to King Iohn, who pardoned them, and restored them to their Honours and Lands; and so  after this followed peace. The Pope shortly after, in the Councel of Lateran, published, that the tenure of England was to be of the Church of Rome. At the same time Otho the Emperour, Peter King of Arragon, and Raymund Earl of Tholouse, with some other Princes, were excommunicated for heresie, as was pretended, but indeed to subject their temporalties to the Pope; and there∣fore it was decreed, that no man should be made Emperour, untill he had
sworn his homage to the Pope. But the Clergy was never heartily reconci∣led to King Iohn, against whom they still bore a private grudge; therefore in the Abbey of Swinsted neer Lincoln he was poysoned by a Monk of Saint Bernards Order, who to make sure work, drank first to the King, and poy∣soned himself for company; some think he died of a surfeit of Peaches and new Ale. King Iohn reigned 17. years, and was buried at Winchester. In the 7. year of his reign he went into Ireland, and reduced that revolted people to his obedience. In the 9. year he renews the Londoners Charter for the annual electing of a Maior and two Sheriffs. The next year London-Bridge was built. 1209. He had two sons, Henry, who succeeded him, and Richard Earl of Cornwal and King of the Romans. His three daughters were, Ioan the eldest, married to A∣lexander the second, King of Scots; Elianor, wife to Simon Earl of Leicester; and Isabel the youngest, who was married to the Emperour. Henry, King Iohns son, was crowned at the age of 9. years, whose Protector 1216. was the Earl of Gloucester. In this Kings minority, the French invade this Kingdome, with whom the Welch take part; but the Protector stoutly op∣posed them: The Pope in the mean time thunders out his curses and Ex∣communications against the French, and their adherents: At this, Prince Lewis desisted from Armes, but his father Philip shipped new Forces to aide his Son. Hugh de Burgh Master of the Cinque-Ports rigs out a Fleet, and beats the French; wherefore Prince Lewis makes peace with the English, and for a sum of money received, he surrenders all the Forts and Towns he had taken, and returns to France. Upon his departure, a Parliament is called, in which King Edwards Laws were established, and the grand Charter, or Magna Charta, the Wardships and Marriages of Wards granted of old to King Edgar and Ed∣ward the Confessor, were revived, and a voluntary Tax given to the King for raising of Forces to be conducted by Richard Earl of Cornwal, the Kings bro∣ther, for recovering of Poyteers and Gascoign again from the French; which Provinces were shortly after recovered by the same Richard, but invaded again, and taken by the French, and re-taken afterward by the said Richard the second time; at last a peace is made between the two Kings. After this  the Barons of England were discontent with King Henry, for applying himself meerly to strangers, and neglecting them; which error the King perceiving, he reconciled himself to his Nobles, and resumed the Earldom of Chester into his own hands, Iohn Scot the Earl thereof being dead without issue male; the four daughters of this Earl were, by way of exchange, enriched with other Territories and Honours. Prince Edward, the Kings son, is married to Elianor the King of Spains sister, on whom he bestowed Guian, Ireland, Chester and Wales; these two last dignities he annexed to the eldest sons of the English Kings. Not long after a Scholler in Oxford intended to murther the King,  but missed him, for that night he lodged not in his usual bed-chamber; so the Traitor was apprehended and put to death. In the 24. year of Henry's reign, Lewis the 9. invadeth Guian, against whom King Henry carried over an Army; divers skirmishes there were, with diverse success: After King Henries return into England, the French King married his brother to the daughter of the Earl of Tholouse, to whom he gave Poytiers and the English Territories in Al∣berne; he invades also the Earldome of March; king Henry upon this tran∣sporteth an Army unto Burdeaux, and neer to that place fought the French, but lost the Field; whereupon the Earl of March submitted himself to the French king. Henry upon his return, married his sister to Alexander king of  Scots. The Popes exactions were so great upon this Land, and his demands so unreasonable, in sending his Mandate to have 300. Romans preferred to the Benefices which should be first vacant in England, that the Clergy gene∣rally murmured; the Archbishop of Canterbury, Edmund, in discontent gives over all, and retires to the Abbey of Pontiniac in France; and the king was fain to complain in the Lateran Councel against the
Pope, who had no other  satisfaction from him but this, Let us first kill the great Dragon, (that is, Frede∣rick the Emperour) and then we shall quickly trend down these petty snakes, that is, the inferiour Kings and Princes. In Scotland, to king William succeeded his son Alexander 16. years old; he being invited into England by the oppressed Clergy under king Iohn, falls up∣on the Royalists and their Lands with fire and sword. King Iohn in requital enters Scotland, wasting all before him in Lothian. Alexander was deterred by the Popes curse, from assisting Prince Lewis of France against King Iohn, who had now resigned his Kingdome to the See of Rome; therefore he re∣turns to Scotland, but with great difficulty, king Iohn having caused the Brid∣ges over Trent to be broken down; but his death (by poyson,) did facili∣tate Alexanders return, who being absolved by the Popes Legat from his curse, makes peace with King Henry of England, whom the Pope had now establi∣shed in his Kingdome. The Scots restore Carlile which they had taken in the former war, and the English surrender Berwick. The Legat by his excommu∣nication raiseth a great sum of money from the Scotish Clergy, who joyning with the Clergy of England, send Messengers to Rome with complaints against the Legates sordid and unjust carriage, on whom the Pope set a great fine. Agidius the Cardinal after him was sent to raise more money in both King∣domes, which when he had lavishly spent, returns empty to Rome, pretending 1220.  he was robbed by the way: After him, another Legat comes, but he was commanded to depart, without giving him any thing. After this, a great Re∣bellion was in Rosse under one Gillespie, who had taken Innerness, and done great hurt thereabout: Cumin the Earl of Buchan is sent against him, whom he defeated and took, with his two sons, their heads he cut off, and sent them to the king. The people of Cathness burned the Bishop, with some others, in his house, having before complained of his exactions: the chief actors were cru∣elly put to death; and the Earl of Cathness being suspected to have had a hand in this murther, though absent, was brought to the king, who upon his sub∣mission was pardoned. After this, another Rebellion of 10000. discontented  persons, under Thomas the Bastard-son of Alan Earl of Galloway, was suppressed, with the loss of 5000. Rebels, and their Captain. After this, he lost his Queen, who returning with the English Queen from visiting the Reliques of Canter∣bury, fell sick and died, being childless; he married again, and had by this wife, Alexander the third, who succeeded him. Two years after this, whilst the king was at Haddington, the Earl of Athol was burned, with some others, in his house. Patrick, the chief of the Bisots, was suspected; he to clear himself offered a Duel with any of his accusers, which being denied him, he fled with divers of his Family, into Ireland. Another tumult was suppressed in Arguile; and not long after this the king died, the 51. year of his life, and of his reign  the 35. In Rome to Clemens the third succeeded Celestine the third, who sate four years: his successor was Innocent the third, who was Pope 18. years; In his time the Greek Church, by means of Baldwin Emperour of the East, was re∣conciled to the Latine, and Thomas the first of the Latine Church, was made Patriarch of Constantinople, against whom the Greeks chose Michael the fourth who sate without the City. The Venetians take Crete or Candy from the Greeks, but permit them to retain their Greek Ceremonies. This Island was the cause of 70. years war between the Venetians and Genuois, which by Gre∣gory the 10. was at last composed, so that the Island remained in the power of the Venetians. Peter the second, king of Arragon, was crowned by this Innocent  at Rome, who authorised the Arch-bishop of Tarracon to crown his Successors at Caesarangusta. His Successour Iames took from the Moors the kingdome of Valentia, and Murtia, with the Baleares. Alexius Comnenus, father-in-law to Theodorus Lascaris, erected a new Empire at Traperuntinum, containing Cappa∣docia and Colchis. St. Clara, a Disciple of
St. Francis, sets up a new Order of  Nuns. To Celestine succeeded Gregory the 9. who sate 14. years: He Canoni∣zed St. Dominick and St. Francis, and forbad the Civil Law to be read at Paris: He digested the 5. Books of Decretals into that method they now have; he forbad Lay-men to preach. Power is given to the Archbishop of Mentz to consecrate the kings of Bohemia, which continued long, till one of them sold that priviledge to the Church of Prague. To Gregory succeeded Celestine the 4. who sate but 18. dayes; then followed the vacancy of one year nine moneths, in which time S. Ferdinand drives the Moors almost quite out of Spain; having obtained both the kingdome of Castile and Legion, with Corduba and Hispalis, he erects the University of Salmatica. Innocent the 4. is chosen Pope; he sate 11. years. About this time the Bible was distinguished into Chapters, as now we have them, the distinction before was uncertain. Robert Sorbona, a Divine, founded and enriched the Colledge of Sorbon at Paris. To Innocent succeeded Alexander the 4. who sate 6. years; he reconciled again the Greeks and La∣tines in the Councel of Lions. CHAP. III. 1. Fredericks posterity. 2. The Affairs of the Western Empire under Rodul∣phus,  and others. 3. Of France, England, Scotland, and other places. 4. Of the Popes of these times, and other memorable things. FRederick the second, before his death, had made his Son Conradus king of of the Romans and of Sicily; to his Son Henry, whom he had by his English Lady, he bequeathed the kingdome of Ierusalem, and to Manfred the go∣vernment of Italy. Conradus fell furiously upon those Towns, which after his Fathers death revolted to Pope Innocent: He overthrew Naples after eight moneths siege, driving from thence all the Nobility; he plundred Capua and unwalled it, and burned Aquinum. But Manfred aiming at the Empire of 1251. Italy and Sicily, poysoned Conradus, four years after his Fathers death; a just  reward for him, who had caused his younger brother Henry, and his son Fre∣derick to be murthered: Manfred also commanded Conradinus, the son of Conradus, to be poysoned, having undertaken his tuition; and then fals upon the Towns of Apulia, and of the kingdome of Naples, which he took from the Pope, and so made himself King, giving out that Conradinus was dead, but was not: After this he seiseth upon Sicily, and to make himselfe the stronger against the Popes power, he makes a match between Peter the son of Iames K. of Arragon, and his daughter Constantia. Upon this, Urban the 4. Alexanders successor, curseth Manfred, and armeth Charls of Anjou, brother to Lewis the French king, who encountring with Manfred, defeats and kills him, and so obtains both kingdomes, paying to the Pope fourty thousand Crownes yearly. Conradinus being now of years, and having raised an Army of Germans, with whom divers Italian Townes joyned: Conradus also, his brother, Prince of Antioch, helped him to recover Sicily; the Sarazens likewise assisted him; all Sicily yielded, except Panormus, Messina, and Syracusa. Conradinus after this, fighting with Charles, is defeated and taken, and so was Frederick Duke of Austria, both whom upon the Popes perswasion he caused to be beheaded; 1268. as for Conradus Prince of Antioch, he first pulls out his eyes, and then caused him to be hanged. Thus the French obtained Sicily; whose tyranny, pride, and luxury was such, that Iohn Duke of Proclyta, whose wife the French had abused, and himself by them was plundred, having advised with Pope Nicolas, (Charles his enemy) as also with Iohn Palaeologus Emperour of Constantinople, (who had lately taken Byzantium from the French) and with Peter king of Arragon, Manfreds son-in-law, they all agree to cut off the
French, and to  confer Sicily on the Arragonians; a Fleet for this purpose is prepared by both kings, and the business kept close for two years together, till the very hour that all the French throughout the whole Island were destroyed, as it were, in a moment, except a few who were in the strong Castle of Spirlinga; it is thought, that in the space of two hours, above 8000. were slain by the Sicili∣ans, who spared not women great with child, but ript up their bellies, and 1282. dasht the infants against the stones, that none of the French blood might there remain; (this was done on Easter day at evening Service, March 30. Hence the proverb, Vesperae Siculae.) The slaughter being finished, Peter of Arragon, who stayed at Hippo in Africk with his Fleet, waiting for the event of the Si∣cilian conspiracy, was sent for, and by the Nobility hath the Island surrendred to him. Thus Charles lost Sicily quite, who though he raised a war against the Arragonians, yet they kept the Island till his Race was wholly extinguished, and then they obtained also the kingdome of Naples, being invited thither by Ioan the widow: And thence also the French were quite excluded. After∣ward Ferdinand king of Arragon dying without issue Male, left these king∣domes to Charles the 5. his Grandchild by his Daughter. William the Emperour being slain, ashe was preparing an Army against the 1257▪ Frislanders, Germany was divided into Factions about a new Emperour; some were for Richard Earl of Cornwal, k. Iohn of Englands son, others for Alphonsus  king of Castile, both had made parties by giving large bribes, and both are no∣minated; Richard, by the Bishops of Mentz, Colen, and the Palatine; but he being too eager and violent against those that were for Alphonsus, and having run himself out of all his monies by his too much bounty,. is forsaken of his own party, and so forced to return to England. Alphonsus being sent for into Germany by his own party, to wit, by the Bishop of Trevers, the Duke of Saxony, Marquess of Brandenburg, and king of Bohemia; but delighting more in Mathematicks then in Dominions, and being fearful to meddle with the distracted estate of Germany, staid so long in France, that he lost both the Em∣pire and his own kingdome, which his son Sanciu seised on; therefore he re∣turns  discontented to Sivil, where with grief he died, having advanced the knowledge of Physick and Astronomy, to his great charges, and the benefit of posterity; for he spent above 40000. Crowns in compiling of his Tables, and interpreting of Arabick, and other books into Latine. Germany being exposed to every great mans violence, for want of a Head, and both Fredericks faction and the Popes were so strong there, that no man durst venture to meddle with the Imperial Government: Pope Gregory is at last moved with the afflictions and complaints of that Countrey, so that he gives order to the Electors to choose them a king of the Romans, otherwise he would provide one for them: When they met at Franckfort, they unani∣mously  pitched upon Rodulphus of Habspurg, who was then besieging of Basil; upon the news of his Election, which at first he did hardly believe, he makes peace with the Basilians, repairs to Aix, where he is crowned with his wife Anna. As soon as he was setled, he applyes himself to compose the differen∣ces of Germany; complaint was made against Ottocar king of Bohemia, for in∣vading and seising upon Austria. The Hungarians had invaded the lower, and the Bavarians upper Austria; their oppressions were such, that the people resolved to invite thither, either Henry Marquess of Mysnia, the husband of Constarea, who was sister to Frederick the last, or else one of his two sons. Wenceslaus king of Bohemia perceiving this, married his son Ottocar to Marga∣ret  the Widow, who had born two sons to Henry, Frederick the Emperours son: Upon this Match, Ottocar pretending a Title, invades Austria, which he did not long enjoy, for Rodolphus the Emperour overthrew him, brought him on his knees, and took Austria from him, which he bestowed on his son 1282. Albertus, whose posterity hath possessed it till this time. But not long after, Ottocar scorning that he should be thus used by Rodolphus,
who had heretofore  been his servant, being also instigated by his wife Cuniganda, (for he had un∣justly repudiated Margaret) secretly raiseth 10000 men, and with monies tries to corrupt the Peers to forsake Caesar; but the business could not be so closely carried as he supposed; for Rodolphus with an Army of Germans and Hunga∣rians beat Ottocar, whom a common Souldier killed after he was taken, be∣cause he had killed a brother of this Souldiers. In this Battel the Emperor was beaten down from his horse, yet recovered, and 14000. were slain; presently after this Moravia is subdued. A new League is made between Caesar and the Queen of Bohemia, that Caesars daughter should marry with Wenceslaus the son of Ottocar, and so he should hold Bohemia in fee of the Emperour. After this, Ralph forceth the Bernens, Helvetians, and Burgundians to submit  to him, and having in fourteen several Battels got the better still, he is honoured with the Title of VICTORIOUS; In Thuringia and the neigh∣bouring places he pulled down 66. Castles of the Rebels; He reigned 18. years, in all that time he never saw Italy, affirming that the former Emperours went thither rejoycing, but returned sorrowing: He bestowed Romandiola upon the Pope; He sold to the Bononians, Florentines, Genuois, and Lucans their liberty for gold; He destroyed all the High-way Robbers in Germany, 29. he put to death at one time. There was one who resembled somewhat Frederick Duke of Suevia, who was beheaded with Conradinus; this fellow began to draw people into Rebellion, so that the Emperour being afraid, left  off the siege of Columbaria, and made shew as if he would submit to this new Caesar, whose knavery when he found out, he caused him to be burnt alive. But the Pope fearing his greatness, renewes the Decree for recovering the Holy-Land, which was almost gone, for in three years after it was all swal∣lowed up by the Egyptians. He also set out an Edict for the defence of Italy, the Sea-coast of which, for want of Garrisons, was exposed to Piracies. Ano∣ther order he publisheth for expelling the French and Spaniards out of Sicily and Naples; and if the Emperour made not haste to reform these disorders, he threatens to invade Hetruria and the Exarchal or Romandiola in Picenum, Fla∣minia, and Aemilia; he allowed also for the holy Knights, the fourth part of  the yearly Revenues; but Ralph not being willing to quarrel with the Pope, parted with the Exarchal, as we said. Ralph the Emperour being aged and sickly, calls a Diet of the Princes, wherein he moved that his son Albert might be his Successor; but not pre∣vailing, and finding himself ill-disposed, removes from Frankfort towards Spire, saying, Let us go to the other Emperours, and so died by the way, the 19. year of his Reign, and was buried at Spire, neer Philip of Suevia. He had by 1291. his wife Anna, Albert Duke of Austria, Ralph Duke of Suevia, with divers other sons and daughters: In his time Ptolemais was onely left to the Christians, a∣bout  which, whilst the Patriarch of Ierusalem, the kings of Cyprus and Sicily, the Hospitallers, Templars, and Teutonick Knights strived for superiority, Sultan Melech Sapherates (that is to say, the illustrious King) besieged it two moneths, the Christians within not being able to hold out longer, got away privately by Sea, and so the Town was utterly destroyed, 196. years after the Conquest by Godfrey of Bulloign; so that in Asia, onely Cilicia, now called Ar∣menia minor, retained the Christian Profession. A main cause of our losses in Phaenicia, and the Levant, was the quarrel between the Venetians and Genuois, upon suspition that Philip of Montferrat Governour of Acre or Ptolemais was more favourable to the Venetians then the Genuois: There was also in the Town a Church of Saint Saba, for which they strove; the Pope understand∣ing this difference, decreed that the Church should be common to them both; whereupon the Genuois got into it first, filled it with Souldiers, and turned it into a Garrison: The Venetians hearing of this, in a rage parted from Tyre 1259. with three Gallies, enter forcibly the Port of Acre, break down the Chain; and burns 23. Ships with two Gallies of the Genuois; afterward they over∣throw
the Church, affirming that the Genuois had profaned it: Of these small beginnings, sprung that war, which held so long, in which many cruel Battels were fought; the Venetians at first being superiors, by the assistance of the Pisans, and of their own Forces. In France S. Lewis reforms the Laws and the Judges; ordaines that all blas∣phemers and profane swearers by Gods Name, should be burnt in the forehead with a hot iron, wishing he might be so burnt himself, conditionally he might purge his kingdome of that hainous sin: He built and finished divers Reli∣gious Houses, as that of the Iacobins at Paris, of the Cordaliers, of the Carthu∣sians, and others: he married his son Philip to the Infanta Elizabeth, daughter  to Iames king of Arragon; he reconciled the difference that was between the children of Margaret Countess of Flanders. Having setled his kingdome and house, he goeth on Ship-board at Marsiles, with his three sons, Philip, Iohn and 1270. Peter, and sets saile for Carthage, where he takes divers Ships in the Port, and sinks the rest, and then laid siege to the City; a furious battel was fought be∣tween the French and Moors, which continued doubtful a great while, at last a party of the French Army getting between the City and the Moors, seised on the Castle, and took it; the Moors having lost their Fort, and being assaul∣ted on both sides, submitted, and were received to mercy by Lewis, and so the Town was surrendred. After this, the French Army marcheth towards Tunis,  the Royal City at that time, with an intent to take it: The king of Tunis en∣counters them with his Army in the way; a Battel is fought, in which 10000. Moors are killed, and the whole Army defeated, and so he marcheth to the City, which he besieged 6. moneths so close, that no provision could come thither; the Citizens begin to think of a surrender, and were beginning to Article, when the Plague seiseth upon the French Camp, so that many died every day, among the rest, Prince Iohn, who from this sad unfortunate acci∣dent was named Tristan, he was born whilst his Father was a prisoner in Egypt; and Saint Lewis himself, to the great grief of his Army, and of all good men, died in the Camp of a Flux, the 25. of August; after whose death the king of Sicily arrived before. Tunis with a great Army, to the comfort of the French, much dejected for the loss of their good king. Henry also Earl of Cornwal shortly after arrived with a great Fleet, hoping to finde Saint Lewis alive, that they two might joyn their Forces with Prince Edward of England, for reco∣vering of Syria. Tunis being now besieged by Italians, French, and English both by Sea and Land, the Moors within, who used to make daily sallies be∣fore, do now begin to faint and yield; the Christians being weary and sickly, yielded to a peace, that the Barbarous king should permit the Gospel to be freely taught through all his Dominions, and that he should pay yearly to the king of Sicily 40000. Ducats, which was the sum due from Sicily to the  Pope: After this, the Christians resolve to go for Sicily, there to refresh them∣selves with the change of aire, but they were surprised by the way with such a storm, that all their Ships were scattered sundry wayes, and many of them sunk and torn; besides, the Plague was so hot amongst them, that they re∣solved every man to his own home, and to give off their voyage intended for the Holy-Land. To Saint Lewis succeeded his son Philip the third, sirnamed the Bold: the next year after his return from Africk he was crowned at Rhemes; he made 1271. Guy Earl of Flanders in place of his brother, who died in Sicily. The Queen-Mother following the steps of her Husband Saint Lewis, gave her self wholly  to devotion, and founded in the Suburbs of Paris a Covent of the Order of St. Francis. The King made himself Lord of Tholouse, the Heirs thereof being dead. His eldest son Lewis was poisoned by his Chamberlain Peter de la Broche, who accused the Queen, Philips second wife, of the murther, as if she had done it, that her children might succeed to the Crown: The King sends to an old Wizard in Brabant, famous for divination, who excused the Queen, and
laid the blame on La Broche, whom upon this he caused to be hanged. He re∣duced the Gascoigns: He raised a great Army against Arragon, whose King Peter had seised upon Sicily, and was excommunicate by the Pope, and his 1284. kingdome bestowed on Philip Valois, king Philips son. At the siege of Gerunda, which Philip took, Peter was killed; but Roger Admiral of the Arragonian Fleet falls unexpectedly on the French, as they were removing thence, because of the Plague, and sets both the Town and Fleet on fire, and so they make their way through the Pyrenaean Straits with their swords. Philip at this news fell sick and died at Perpinianum, or Parpignan, and was buried at S. Denis. This year was famous for the death of three Kings, namely, of Charles King of Si∣cily, 1285. Peter King of Arragon, and Philip King of France. He reigned above 15. years; he left two sons behind him by his first wife Isabel the daughter of Ar∣ragon, to wit, Philip the Fair, his Successour, and Charles Valois; of his second wife Mary the Brabantine, he left Lewis alive. Philip the Fair had almost continual wars with England and Flanders, that were Confederates: by his brother Charles Valois, he defeated the Forces of Ed∣ward the Second, and recovered Gascoign. Guy Earl of Flanders, who took part with Edward, was overthrown with him at Turnae by the same Valois, and 1293. caried prisoner to Paris with his two sons. After this the Flemings rebel against the K. and defeat his Army at Courtray; but two years after, they fought again 1295. at Andomaropolis, and were beaten by the King: Then there was a peace con∣cluded between them. This Philip for refusing to undertake the Holy War, was accursed by Boniface the 8. but his Successour Pope Benedict absolved him. 1304. Clemens the 5. who translated his seat to Avinion, where it continued 70. years, conspired with this Philip against the Templars, whom they destroyed, and bestowed their wealth on the Hospitallers, except what they put up in their Exchequers. He fixed the Parliament, which before was ambulatory, at Paris, 1307. and built the great Hall of his Palace, with other convenient rooms for that 1314. purpose; and at the request of the Normans, he granted them a Parliament at Rouen their capital City, which sits twice yearly, in the Spring and Autumn, for six weeks at a time. About this time Queen Iane founded the Colledge of Navarre. King Philip, after he had been royally entertained in Flanders, with all the cost and magnificence that could be devised; left such Governours be∣hind him, who did so tax and oppress the people, that they resolve to shake off the French yoak; to that purpose a cruel massacre was committed on them at Bruges in their beds at night; and all the Gentry of Flanders, with the peo∣ple, arm themselves against the king, who was raising an Army of 24000. to ruine Flanders, and was on his march as far as Doway; but being disswaded by his sister, king Edwards wife, upon his instigation, who was loath that Flanders should be swallowed up by the French, Philip returns back with a part of his  Army, leaving the rest to Garrison the frontier Towns: but he could not be at quiet with himself, till he had revenged this murther of his Subjects upon the Flemings; therfore under the cōmand of the E. of Artois he sends a great Army against them who furiously and foolishly set upon their Trenches, where the Flemings held them play so long, til a great part of their Army wheeled about a private way, and fell upon the Rear of the French, whom they so disordered, that 12000. Horse and Foot were slain, besides many prisoners; Count Artois with many of the Nobility, were killed, over whose dead bodies, chiefly of the Earls, the enemy barbarously insulted. Upon this defeat, the king sends old Guy their Count, to see if he could perswade them to submit upon hope  and promise of pardon; but they would not yield; and withall, being puft up with their Victory, they invade the Countrey of Henault; but they were beat back from thence. The French king sends for 6. Gallies from Genua, re∣solving to beat the Flemings both by Sea and Land; but they being nothing daunted, make excursions as far as Arras, setting fire on the Suburbs thereof; but the French recovered somo part of their honour lost at
Curtray, by defeat∣ting  the Flemings neer Saint Omer, where they killed 15000 of them, and short∣ly after 800. of Bruges, and 500. before Tournay; but these losses did not dis∣courage them; therefore they resolve with fresh Forces to assault the French again; which they did with such fury, that Valois took his heels, but the king with his Army fought stoutly, and got the Victory, with the loss of 6000. Fle∣mings on the place; among which was found the body of William, son to Guy Count of Flanders. This defeat made the Flemings submit to peace, which was concluded upon this condition, that 200000. Crowns should be paid to the French king, and Flanders restored to Robert, Guy's eldest son, for the Father was dead in France. About this time, Cassan the Tartarian Prince, who was become Christian, having defeated the Persians, and chased the Sultan out of Syria, writes to the Pope and French king for their aide, and alliance with the Latine Princes, for recovering of Ierusalem: Upon this, Pope Boniface the 8. sends menacing Letters to Philip, to promote with all speed this Expedition: which Letters the king slighted, and withall imprisoned the Bishop of Palmiers (which place he had lately erected into a Bishoprick for the Province of Narbon) for hold∣ing correspondency with the Pope against him; and forbids any of his Clergy to repair to the Councel which the Pope had call'd: Hereupon he is excommunicated, and his Subjects absolved from their Allegiance; so that  the king was forced to set the Bishop at liberty. But Boniface not yet contented stirs up Albert Duke of Austria, elected Emperour, to invade France; but he stirred not: He solliciteth also the king of England, but he could not, being imployed in his Scottish wars. Philip sends an Embassador to the Pope to be reconciled; the French Clergy send also three Deputies in their names to ex∣cuse their not waiting on his Holiness at the Councel; In the mean while the Pope was seised on at Anagnis, a City of Abruzzo, by Sciarra Coloness, a Ban∣dito of Rome, by the French Kings aide, and carried to Rome, where he died 1303, shortly after. This Philip afterward being present with the Kings of England and Arragon at the Popes Coronation in Lions, was like to be smothered by the  fall of a wall, which killed and hurt many, among the rest Iohn Duke of Brit∣tain was slain. The Templars were accused by this King and the Pope, of hainous crimes, and of keeping correspondency with the Turks and Sarazens; therefore were condemned to be burnt alive: The great Master, with his brethren, protested before God at their death, that they were free from the crimes objected against them. The Templars of Germany were more favour∣ably dealt with, for though their estates were taken away, yet none were con∣demned, but such as were found guilty. The Hospitallers being enriched with the Templars Estates, raised a great Army, with which they took the Isle of Rhodes from the Turks. The war of Flanders was beginning again, be∣cause  the money agreed upon, was not as yet payed; therefore the French Army enters the borders; but upon promise of submission and payment, the peace is renewed. A little before Philips death, a great tu∣mult arose at Lions between the Episcopal party and the Royal, about their Rights, which with much ado was appeased by Lewis King of Navarre, and the Count of Savoy. The King died at Fontain-bleau where he was born, and buried at S. Dennis, having reigned 24. years. In England, king Henry the third hearing of St. Lewis his captivity, and that he was willing to resign Normandy, if Henry would come to his rescue; Upon this, he presently undertakes the Cross, and demands the Tenth of his Clergy and Laity, for defraying of the charges, exhorting the people to attend him; but he found the Londoners backward; a Parliament is called, in which the demanded Tenth is denied by the Bishops and Lords; but such were the kings wants, and Gascoign was upon revolt, that another Parliament is cal∣led, and a Tenth is granted by the Clergy for three years, and Scutage three Marks of every knights fee by the Laity for that
year. The king resumes  Gascoign from his brother Richard, who had possessed it now 27. years, and gave it to his eldest Son Edward. Richard was unwilling to part with his pos∣session, and so were the Gascoigns to part with him: Whereupon Simon Mon∣fort Earl of Chester, a stern man, is sent with a Charter for 6. years, to curb them. Three years after the Gascoigns accuse him of Tyranny; the king sends for him, but he being supported by the Nobility, contests with the king, who is fain to send him back again to his charge, with promise to the Gascoigns, that Prince Edward should come shortly after; but Monfort tyrannizeth more then ever; wherefore Henry goes over into Gascoign with 300. Ships, and deposeth Monfort; and because the Gascoigns had put themselves under the  protection of the king of Spain, who claimed Title to Aquitane, Henry propo∣seth a Match between his son Edward, and Elinor the Spaniards sister; The Marriage is agreed upon and solemnised at Burgos, where the king of Spain knights the Prince, and quits his claim to Aquitane. Henry invests the Prince and his wife therein, and gives besides to him Ireland, Wales, Bristol, Stamford, and Grantham. After this, king Henry returns homeward by Paris, with one thousand Horse, and is feasted by Saint Lewis lately returned from captivity. Upon king Henry's arrival into England, he fines the Londoners, though they had presented him with a hundred pound in mony, and two hundred pound in plate. After this, Elinor the Princes wife arrives with a great Train. There comes also from the Pope Alexander the Fourth, the Bishop of Bononia, with a proffer of Sicily to Edmond the kings second son. Then comes Rustandus with power to collect the tenth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, which is denied him; he comes also with power to absolve the king from his Oath for the Holy War, if he would destroy Manfred son to Frederick the Emperor, now king of Sicily and Apulia; but the Apulians angry that the Pope should give away their Land to a stranger; help Manfred to defeat the Popes forces. In the mean while, Richard Earl of Cornwal is elected King of the Romans, and crowned at Aix. King Henry demands a Tax for attaining the kingdome of Sicily for his son Edmund; two and fifty thousand Marks are granted; but  this contents him not, he demands a greater summe, which is denied him. Hereupon Prince Edward is fain to mortgage Stamford, and other Towns, to William de Valence, to supply the Kings wants. After this a Parliament is called at Oxford, called the Mad Parliament, where many wrongs are complained of, and many things established tending to the weakning of the Kings Preroga∣tive: Twelve Peers are chosen, whereof the Earls of Leicester and Gloucester were chief, to whom power was given to maintain the Laws made lately, which were ratified by the King unwillingly; but he being displeased that the twelve Peers should remove from him most of his chief Servants, calls a∣nother Parliament, where he complains of this wrong; but they so little re∣garded  the kings displeasure, that they ratified the Laws formerly concluded on: This made the King comply with France and Scotland for aide. He re∣signs Normandy, with the Lordships of Anjou, Poytiers, and Mayn, to Lewis; in 1261. lieu of this, Henry is made Duke of Guyan, for which he was to do his homage: He also procures two Bulls from Rome, by which he and all others that had sworn to maintain the late Laws, were absolved; notwithstanding the twelve Peers went on in reforming abuses, and removing from their charge such Of∣ficers as the King had placed. The king publisheth the Popes Bulls, counter∣mandeth the Authority of the twelve Peers, and makes the Londoners swear to assist him. The Barons upon this raise an Army, and write to the king, be∣seeching  him not to suppress the Oxford Laws, and withall they march toward London, spoiling by the way the houses of all those who held for the Popes Bulls; they write to the Londoners, who sent the Letter to the king, and their resolutions to hold with the Twelve Peers in maintaining the late Lawes, and so they receive the Barons into the City with joy: from thence they march with the Army to Windsor Castle, where they plunder and displace all the
Aliens, who had Offices there. The Lords of the Kings Councel gave order for restitution of the Aliens goods; but the Barons refused to obey: At last these differences were referred to the judgement of Saint Lewis, whose sen∣tence was, that the twelve Peers should lose their authority, and none should rule but the King. This sentence, as partiall, is rejected by the Barons, who repair again to the Marches of Wales, and levy a new Army; in their march toward London, they plunder and burn the houses of Sir Roger Mortimer, who counselled the King to withstand them. The Prince levieth another Army, which is beat by the Barons, who remain Masters of the Field. After this Vi∣ctory, they are joyfully received at London; and two Constables elected by  some Citizens gathered a multitude together, who spoiled the houses of Ri∣chard King of the Romans, lately returned from Germany, whom the Barons forced to swear to maintain their cause: But now he becomes their enemy, who before was mediating a peace. The King in the interim surpriseth Nor∣thampton, and in it Sir Peter Montfort, and Simon, Leicesters eldest son, who had raised an Army thereabout for the Barons. Another Battel after this was fought neer Lewis in Sussex, where the King with his brother Richard, Prince Edward, with many Knights and Gentlemen are taken prisoners, and more then 20000. slain. After this, a peace is made, and agreed that the King should confirm the twelve Peers authority; which being granted, the two  Kings are set at liberty, and their two sons left for Hostages with the Barons, who send them to Dover Castle. Then did the King call a Parliament, in which he swore to maintain the Barons rights, untill they should be reformed, if any thing were amiss. Hereupon the Princes were enlarged. Shortly after the two heads of the Faction, Leicester and Gloucester, did jarre about these Ordi∣nances. Prince Edward, upon this, with Gloucester, Warrein, and Sir Roger Mor∣timer 1265. raised a new Army; Leicester did the like; a cruel Battel is fought at Eversham in Worcestershire, in which the Barons are discomfited: Here Simon Earl of Leicester, with his eldest son, and Sir Hugh Spencer, with many other prime men were slain; the Earls carkass was inhumanely mangled by the  Souldiers, who cut off his head, hands, feet, and privy members. Upon this Victory, the King calls a Parliament, in which he recovers his former power, and the Barons utterly lost theirs: The King also instigated by his brother Richard, resolved to consume London with fire; but the Citizens came humb∣ly submitting their lands, goods, and lives to his mercy; but he was so im∣placable, that he would not hearken to them, nor to any for them, till at last the Prince mediated in their behalf, and so the King was content with a fine of one thousand Marks; he pardoned also the Cinque-ports, for their rob∣bing at Sea, during the troubles. But the Earl of Glouoester, who by his revolt from the Barons, had furthered the kings good success, being slighted for all his good service, grew desperate, goeth to London, and there the rascality flock to him, and having committed divers outrages, falls upon the Kings house at Westminster, which they ransack and plunder; but the Prince again inter∣ceded both for the Earl, and the other offenders: The Earle desirous to be imployed, requests that he might be sent with an Army to the Holy-Land, which was granted, because the K. was willing to be rid of him; but he using too long delayes, lost this opportunity, which was laid hold upon by Prince Edward, who conducted the Army into the Holy-Land, where he did brave service, and raised the siege of Acon; he was traiterously wounded with a poisoned knife by a Sarazen, but recovered. His Cousin Henry, son to the king  of the Romans, was slain in the Church of Viterbo in time of divine Service, by his own cousin-german Guy de Montfort son to Simon Earl of Leicester, in re∣venge of his fathers death: king Richard died shortly after; and the next year following k. Henry the 3. departed this life, the 65. year of his age, and the 57. 1274. of his reign; he had by his wife Elinor 6. sons, whereof two survived him, Ed∣ward and Edmund; and two daughters, Margaret, wife to the king of Scots, and Beatrice, who married Iohn the first D. of Brittain.
To Henry succeeds his Son Edward, being now in Syria, who three years after his departure from England, begins his voyage homewards; he lands in Sicily, where he is royally feasted by Charles King thereof; he is also in Italy honourably used by the Pope and Princes; and in France entertained by Philip the third, to whom he did homage for his lands held of that Crown; at last arrives in England after six years from his setting out: Alexander King of Scots, and Iohn Duke of Brittain were present at his Coronation: He began betimes to clip the Clergies wings, by causing the Statute of Mortmain to be enacted, against which afterward the Clergy petitioned the King, when they had raised him a great sum of money, but they were not heard: he abridged also divers Monasteries of their Liberties, and took from the Abbot of West∣minster the Return of Writs granted him by King Henry the 3. He resolves to subdue Wales which had alwayes been a receptacle for the English Rebels: he summons Leolin their Prince to be present at the Parliament who refused, therefore he enters Wales with fire and sword, and forceth Leolin to sue for peace, which he had, paying a Fine of 50000 lib. and 1000 lib. per ann. but withall delivers him Elinor, Simon Monforts daughter Earle of Leicester, with whom he was in love, she comming from France was taken at Sea; yet for all this, within three years he rebels again with his brother David, on whom the King had bestowed divers graces; an Army is raised against him, Leolin is slain in the battell, and his head is sent to King Edward, who caused it to be crowned with Ivie, and set upon the Tower of London: thus ends the last of the Welch Princes; his brother David is apprehended, drawn at a horses tail about the City of Shrewsbury, then beheaded, his heart and bowels burnt, his head sent to the Tower, and his four quarters to Bristol, Northampton, York, and Winchester. In this interim Alphonsus the Kings eldest Son twelve years old dyeth, so Edward born at Carnarvan is heir of the Crown, and first of the English who was stiled Prince of Wales. After this, King Edward at the death of Philip the Bold, passes over into France, there to do homage to the new King Philip the fourth for Aquitain; then he reconciles the King of Arragon 1286. and Sicily in Spain, and redeems Chales Prince of Achaia (Son to King Charles of Sicily) prisoner in Arragon for 30000 lib. After three years and six months being abroad, he returns into England, calls a Parliament, reforms divers abuses, and enricheth himself with Fines laid upon corrupt Officers and Judges; he banisheth the Jews, seiseth upon their estates, for which the King∣dome gave him a fifteenth, and the Clergy a tenth; many other supplies of money he had in his time, he new coyned all the old money which had been defaced by the Iews, for which two hundred ninety seven suffered at one time in London. He was chosen Arbitrator by the Scots, who were divided about the true successor of king Alexander; and as he was going Northward  his vertuous Queen Elinor dyed, who had sucked (as some write) the poyson 1290. out of his wound given him by the Sarazen. Whereupon he returns with the Corps to Westminster, he caused Crosses to be erected at Stamford, Waltham, West-cheap, Charing, and elsewhere in memory of her, with her statue thereon. After this, he returns to the North, and by his means Baliol is made king of Scots, who afterward upon an affront offered him in the Court of England, defies king Edward, so a long War begins; king Edward enters into a League with Guy Earle of Flanders, with Adolph the Emperour, to whom he 1297. sends 15000 lib. to recover his lands in France, and with other Princes; so he sends an Army into France, where all his Territories are forfeited and seised upon for refusing to come and do his homage. He then enters Scotland with  4000 Horse, and 30000 Foot, beside 1000 Foot, and 500 Horse of the Bishop of Durese; many places in Scotland are subdued, and Baliol sues for peace, and doth homage: after this he raiseth heavy Taxes on the Clergy and Laity; the Clergy refuse to pay, whereupon they are put out of the kings protection: But wen they saw how they were exposed to all
wrongs for want of Justice,  they submitted, and redeemed themselves and Monasteries, which the king had seised on. His brother Edmond in the mean while dyed at Byon, having besieged Burdeaux a long time to no purpose: upon this news the king calls a Parliament, in which he desires his Lords to go to Gascoign, which they re∣fused, except he went in person, which he could not do, because he was tyed to assist Guy Earle of Flanders, whose Daughter the French king kept as a prisoner in Paris, for that Guy was to marry her to king Edwards Son: Besides the French king falls upon Flanders with an Army of 60000 and wins many Towns: king Edward upon this passeth over into Flanders with 500 Sail, and and 18000 men, but was disappointed of the Emperours assistance, and so could do little good for Guy: He staid that Winter in Gaunt, where he lost many of his men whom the Gantois killed in a mutiny, and Edward himself hardly escaped; therefore he is forced to make peace with the French king for two years, and to leave Guy to himself, who shortly after was carried pri∣soner to Paris, where he dyed (as some think) and his Daughter of grief. king Edward upon his return, understanding that the Scots by the courage of Wil∣liam Wallas▪ had almost regained that Kingdome, makes a new invasion, and defeats the Scots in a great battel at Tonkirk; during this time, the Exchequer 1300. and Courts of Justice were kept at York about six years. At the Parliament held in S. Andrews, the Scots (except Wallas and his party) swear fealty to the  King of England. In Scotland, Robert Abbot of Dumferling. was removed by King Alexander the third from his Chancellorship, for legitimating the bastard daughter of King 1253. Alexander the second, intending she should succeed if the King died without issue; the Seal was delivered to Gamelinus Archbishop of St. Andrews. Some of the Lords being summoned to answer for their oppressions, refused to ap∣pear; wherupon they are by the young King declared Rebels; they watching an opportunity when the King was thinly accompanied, seised on him, and carried him to Sterling, pretending they removed him from his English Coun∣sel by which he was much ruled, being lately returned from England, with his  Lady King Henries sister, and a great English train: but the arrival of Acho King of Norway, with 120 ships caused the king to be set at liberty, and the Lords to be pardoned; for then was no time to quarrel, when the common Enemy was so near. This Acho pretending right to some of the Scottish Western Islands, came with 20000 Danes, and suddenly seised upon two of the greatest Isles; then he landed his men on the shore of Cunigame, against whom Alexander Stewart grandfather to him who was first of that name King of Scotland, was sent with an Army; he after a long skirmish defeats the Danes, kills sixteen thousand on the place, and drives the rest on ship-board, all the ships were cast away on the Isles of Orkney by storms, except four which  came safe home to Norway; shortly after this king Acho died of grief; his Son Magnus was glad to make peace with the Scots, and resign all his right in the Western Islands, for which he was to receive 4000 marks presently and a hun∣dred marks yearly, besides a match is made between Margaret king Alexanders daughter, and Hangonan king Magnus his Son: about this time king Alexander took the Isle of Man, it was there agreed that it should be under the pro∣tection of Scotland, and that the king of Man should furnish the Scots with ten ships when he should be required: After this, Alexander sends five thou∣sand Scots to aid king Henry against his Barons in England, where most were killed, the rest taken prisoners. At that time there was great emulation in Scotland between the Nobility and Clergy, whose wealth and power was much  envied; complaints of wrongs done by some young Lords to the Clergy were brought to Alexander, which he slighted; but the Clergy threatning to com∣plain to the Pope, king Alexander was forced to comply with them, for avoiding further trouble, and caused satisfaction to be made them; in the interim a Legate from the Pope comes to collect money for the Holy War,
but he was not suffered to enter the kingdome, and answer was made him, that the king would himself raise money, and send Souldiers to Syria; there∣fore an Army is sent under the Earles of Carrie and Athol to the French king Lewis, & to the Pope a thousand marks. Not long after, the king lost his wife, and both his sons; first David, and then Alexander, who had married the Earl of Flanders daughter: Margaret also his daughter the Queen of Norway died, who left one daughter, called the Maid of Norway, By his second wife the Earl of Drux his daughter in France, he had no issue; for the same year of his second marriage, he fell from his Horse neer Kingorne, and dyed the five and 1285. fortieth yeer of his Age, and the seven and thirtieth of his Reigne; his death was much lamented both for his good Laws, and his just government. After Alexanders death, Six Governours are set over the kingdome, three for the South-side, and three for the North-side of Forth. In the mean time, King Edward finding an opportunity to unite the two kingdomes, sends Am∣bassadours into Scotland, with Propositions of a match between his Son and the Maid of Norway, Inheritrix of Scotland; the match is agreed on, and Am∣bassadours sent to Norway to bring away the young Queen; but she was dead before they came, to the great trouble of England, and almost the ruine of Scotland, which was torn into many factions by divers Competitor; the two chief of which were Iohn Balliol and Robert Bruce; Iohn had the better right,  but Robert the most affections, and both strong parties to side with them; Bruce had lands in England, Balliol in France, and both had great possessions in Scotland: To avoid civil wars, the controversie by generall consent is referred to king Edward of England, both, because of his fathers affection and alliance to Scotland, and of his own desire to have renewed this affinity with a new match: King Edward upon this comes to Barwick, cals the Nobility thither, not as Subjects, but as Friends; they sent their Deputies; He first swears the Competitors to stand to their award, then he swears the Peers to obey him that should be named king; this oath he caused to be ratified by their Hands and Seals; then he chooseth out twelve prime men of Scotland, as many of Eng∣land, whom he swears to give their Verdict justly and sincerely; the chief Lawyers of France are sent to, for their opinion in this difficulty, but their answer was not satisfactory: the twenty four were enclosed in a Church alone, to determine the controversie; in the mean while Edward deals with Bruce a∣part, whose title was weakest, and proffers him the Kingdome, if he would be∣come his Vassal, which he refused; then he deals with Balliol, who accepts the proffer; so Balliol six years and nine moneths after Alexanders death is decla∣red king of Scotland, and crowned at Score; but Bruce and divers others re∣fused to swear Allegiance to him, who repairs to King Edward at New-Castle, to whom as he promised, swears Fealty, to the great grief of the Lords, who could not now tell how to help it: But not long after, the Earle of Fifes bro∣ther having his lands wrongfully given away by Balliol, and his brother mur∣thered by the Abernethies without justice, appears to king Edward sitting then in Parliament: Balliol was called upon to answer to his accusation, and to come down to the Bar, (for he sate next the king) at which indignity he so stormed, that he went home, cals a Parliament, at which were present Ambas∣sadors from France, desiring a renovation of the old League; and also from England, demanding assistance against the French according to their allegiance. The French League was preferred and renewed, being at that time of five hun∣dred years continuance; and the English allegiance rejected, as being extorted from a king without consent of his Parliament. Upon this, a defiance is sent  to king Edward, who having a Fleet ready, intended for France, sends it to Scot∣land, which the Scots overthrew in the mouth of the river toward Barwick: this so exasperated king Edward, that he invites Bruce to accept of the king∣dome, and withall besiegeth Barwick, which after a long siege by a slight was taken; for king Edward making shew of a
retreat, the Town-gates were open∣opened,  the souldiers went out to refresh themselves; in the interim, the English Horse return suddenly, enter the town and put all to the sword: then he be∣siegeth Dunbar and takes it, and defeats the Scots army that came to relieve it: Upon this Edinburgh and Sterlin are surrendered; at last, Balliol submits him∣self and kingdome to Edward: who sends him by sea into England, and causeth the Scots Lords to swear Fealty again to him: Balliol is imprisoned, the fourth year after he was crowned, but upon the Popes intreaty is sent into France, whither king Edward also went with a great army. In this mean space Iohn Cumin Earle of Buchan is sent by the Scots with forces into England, who with Fire and Sword fall upon Cumberland and Northumberland; Wallas also, a  private man, but well descended, of a high spirit, and strong body, pittying his countries sad condition, gathers an army together, and assaults the English Garrisons beyond Forth, which he took in; then fights Crassingham (whom king Edward had left to be Treasurer of Scotland) defeats his forces by Sterlin, and with his army enters England, where he stayed without opposition three moneths, and returns home with much bootie. Upon the report of these pro∣ceedings, king Edward hasteneth out of France, raiseth a great army, and marcheth to Stammor or Stainsmoore; the English seeing the carriage of Wallas and his Captains, with the order of his army, which consisted of 30000. re∣treated without fighting; Wallas fearing some treachery did not pursue; Hereupon, the Scots Lords who held for King Edward, envying Wallas his va∣lour and successe, gave out that he aimed to be King himself, and that it were better for the Scots to be subject to king Edward, then to a new upstart; be∣sides, the Scots army began to mutiny among themselves, which was the cause of their overthrow six miles from Sterling; in which conflict ten thousand Scots were slaine: Wallas upon this dismisseth his forces, and king Edward re∣turns into England. The Scots that stood upon their liberty, send to king Philip of France to mediate for a peace with King Edward, which was granted for seven moneths; during which time, the Ambassadors that were sent to Pope Boniface the eighth were intercepted by the English and imprisoned;  this with some other wrongs incensed the Scots again, who drove all the En∣glish, and Scots that were for King Edward, out of their Garrisons: another army is sent into Scotland, which being divided into three bodies, were all three defeated in one day by an army of eight thousand Scots; which so en∣raged 1302. King Edward, that he raised the greatest army that ever was raised by him; he rigs out also a great Fleet, and so invades Scotland by Sea and Land: so great was his army, that it went through the most part of Scotland without opposition; onely Wallas would sally out of his Ambushes now and then upon the Rear: King Edward with fair promises would have drawn him to his side, but could not prevaile; all the Castles and Forts which had held out against the English hitherto, now yeelded; Sterling which held out three months, was faine to surrender for want of provision. The Scots again (except Wallas and his party) swear Fealty to king Edward, who returning into England carried with him the antient Records, Monuments, Libraries, Learned men, and the Fatall Chaire of Scotland. Wallas keeps himself in safe places, till he was betrayed by his friend Montieth to king Edward, who caused him to be put to death in London, and his quarters to be dispersed to divers parts of both Kingdomes. King Edward now thought all sure; but he found afterward that he had to to doe with a slippery Kingdome, which he could not long hold: For Robert Bruce the son of Balliols competitor, and Iohn Cumin Balliols Cousin-german, taking the oath of secresie from each other, combine to revolt; they agree  that Bruce should be King, and Cumin next in dignity; and should also enjoy all Bruces possessions, which were very great; yet Cumin repenting of his bar∣gain reveals the Plot to king Edward, who resolves when opportunity served, to have him questioned for high treason: Earle Gomer or Glocester, Bruces old friend, advertiseth him of his danger, not by word or writing, for he durst
not,  but by sending him a pair of gilt Spurs with some money by his servant, pre∣tending he had borrowed these of him: Bruce understanding the meaning, causeth three Horses presently to be shod backward, that in the Snow the tracks might not be known, and with his two servants rides post into Scotland, where by the way he intercepts Cumins Letters going to King Ed∣ward, in which he found, that Cumin did instigate the King to dispatch Bruce, with what speed he could, for he was a dangerous and active man, popular and potent in Scotland: Upon this Bruce goeth to finde out Cumin, who was then in the Gray-Friers Church at Dumfrise, and sheweth him his own Letters, which 1305. he disclaimed; with that Bruce in a rage runs him through with his sword, and leaves him dead in the place. In Rome, Alexander the Fourth was Pope six years; in whose time Daniel Duke of Russia made the Popes Legate in Polonia believe, that he and his Countrey would be of the Romish communion, and would maintain the Chri∣stian Religion against the Tartars, whose power was grown formidable to the Christian Princes; but as soon as he obtained what he sought for, to wit, the Crown and Title of King, he continued in the Greek communion. To Alex∣ander succeeded Urban the fourth, a Coblers son; he sate three years; he or∣dained Corpus Christi day: In his time Byzantium was taken with eight hun∣dred men, by Palaeologus, from the Latines, in whose Family it continued al∣most  two hundred years, till it was taken by Mahumet the Turk. To Urban succeeded Clemens the fourth; he was Pope three years, and had two daugh∣ters by his wife, who was now dead. After two years and nine moneths va∣cancy Gregory the tenth was elected, who sate four years; he ordained the use of the Conclave in the Election of the Pope, to prevent future vacancies; for the Cardinals must not go out of the Conclave, till they have chosen a Pope: He ordained in the Councel of Lions, that none should undertake the 1274. charge of a Parochial Church, till he was five and twenty years old. About this time died Thomas Aquinas, being fifty years of age; and the Whipping Hereticks arose, who preferred their Whipping to Martyrdome. Pope Inno∣cent the fifth succeeded, he sate six moneths; he was the first Pope of the Prae∣dicants Order. Adrian the fifth succeeded, who sate but one moneth and nine dayes; he died before his Consecration, and revoked the Decree of the Con∣clave, which revocation was confirmed by his Successor Iohn the one and twentieth; and so without the Conclave were elected Nicholaus the third, Mar∣tin the fourth, Honorius the fourth, Nicholaus the fourth, Celestine the fifth, who renewed the Conclave, and Boniface the eighth confirms it. Iohn the twenty one, or as some say, twenty two, sate eight moneths: To him succeeded Ni∣cholaus the third, who sate three years, eight moneths: In his time the Turks, after they had been suppressed by the Tartars, gather new strength, and invade  the remainders of the Greek Empire. Pope Martin the fourth succeeded four years. Honorius the fourth followed two years; he confirmed the Carmelites 1280. Order, and turned their party-coloured coats into white; and confirmed al∣so the Order of S. Austins Eremites. Honorius the fourth succeeded, and sate two years: In his time Rodulphus the Emperour subdued the Helvetians, who before were subjects to the Earl of Savoy. Nicholaus the fourth succeeded four years; he was the first Pope of the Franciscans. To him Celestine the fifth succeeded five moneths, who was deluded by a voice through a Cane, as if it had been from Heaven, willing him to resign his Pontificat to Boniface: he de∣creed, that the Popes and Cardinals should ride on Asses, as Christ did, and not on Mules and Horses; he openly in the Consistory laid down his Mitre, Rings and Sandals, and so resigned his Pontificat to Boniface the eight, who came in as a Fox, reigned like a Lion, and died like a Dog in prison; he Canonized S. Lewis; and ordained the Jubilee to be every hundreth year: In his time the streets of Paris were overflowed with the Sein, so that there was no passage through them
without boats: He put on both the Pontifical and Princely  habit, causing two swords to be carried before him. The Tartars imbrace Ma∣humetanism, and so lost both Christianity, and Asia together. Hence the Ot∣tomans began to flourish. Selymus the Turk married with the daughter of the Prince of the Precopit Tartars, who seated themselves in Taurica Chersone∣sus. This Match produced Solyman. And much about the rising of the Otto∣man Family, arose the House of Austria. CHAP. IV. 1. The Eastern Affairs under Michael Palaeologus, Andronicus the elder, and younger. 2. The Turkish and Tartarian Affairs. 3. The Affairs of Hungary, Poland, Denmark, the Low-Countries, chiefly Holland, and the Switzers. IN the East, Michael Palaeologus having blinded Iohannes Lascarus, invaded the Empire, and drove the French out of Byzantium; he gave Pera or Ga∣lata, over-against Byzantium, to the Genuois for their good service. Aza∣tines Sultan of Iconium being driven out of his Kingdome by the Tartars, fled to this Michael. Twenty thousand Bulgarians invade Thracia, and plunder it. The Sultan of Iconium, whom Michael had kept in strait custody, escaped by help of the Scythians. The Sultan of Egypt and Arabia having the Hellespont open, carries away many of the Scythian slaves, about Tanais and Meotis, into Egypt, by whose help he drove the remaining Latines out of the East. Michael to strengthen himself by the Pope and Italian Princes, against his enemies, re∣pairs to the Councel of Lions (leaving his son Andronicus to rule the Empire) and there acknowledgeth the Popes Supremacy, and reconciles the Greek and Latine Churches: but upon his return home, he was hated for yielding to the Pope; and being dead, was denied the honour of burial by his own son. He lived eight and fifty years, and reigned five and thirty. He had two sons, An∣dronicus his successor, and Constantine, a good Souldier, who had fought suc∣cessfully against the Turks; but Andronicus, upon suspition that he affected the Empire, put him in prison. Andronicus hired the Alani that dwelt along the coast of the Euxine Sea, a∣gainst the Turks: These Alani being impatient of the slavery they were in under the Scythian Tartars, repair in great multitudes to Andronicus, for some new habitations within his Dominions; These he armed against the Turks in Asia, by whom they were defeated; and so many as escaped the Turks fury, saved themselves over-against Lesbos on the coast of Greece. Rogerius Laurea, Admiral of the Arragonian or Spanish Fleet, against the French in Sicily, was invited by Andronicus with his Fleet against the Turks. He gets leave of the Arragonian, having made peace with the French, to go with his Colleague Piringerius Terza. Andronicus, to make them both the more cordial to him, creates Rogerius, Caesar; and Piringerius, the great Duke: These did beat the Turks in divers battels, but for want of pay they became enemies, and fell to plunder the Greek Territories. Rogerius is killed in the tumult, and his Col∣league was taken afterward by the Genuois, who stript him both of his Admi∣ralty and life. The Catalani, descended of the ancient Catti and Alani, much infested Andronicus, against whom he raiseth an Army of Thracians and Mace∣donians; but he was put to the worse, and forced to flie. These Catalans, by the help of the Turks, wasted Macedon, and without them over-run Thessaly; thence passing into Boeotio and Attica, surprised Athens and Thebes, where they seat themselves, having killed the Prince of Athens.
At this time Iohn Prince of Thessaly dyed without issue, having lived three years with his wife Irene, the bastard of Andronicus the Emperour; and so the dominion of the Angeli ceased in Thessaly, Epirus, and Aetolia, a part of which returned to the Emperour, and the rest the Princes and the Catalans tore away. Some of the Turks who turned Christians, went to the Prince of Servia: the rest made a league with Andronicus, for a safe convoy to the Hellespont, and from thence to Chersonesus with their booties; but the Emperor kept not promise with them, and so they were cut off by the Genuan and Bulgarian forces; for which perfidiousnesse the Turks were enraged against the Chri∣stians in Asia. In the mean while Maria Domicilla, who by right of blood claim∣ed  title to Ierusalem, resigns her right to Charles King of Sicily, though Hugh King of Cyprus claimed it. The Armenian Christians being deserted by the 1287. Tartars, were miserably butchered and destroyed by the Turks: The falling off of the Tartars from the Christians and Christianity, and their civil wars among themselves, gave opportunity to the Egyptians under Melech-Messor to besiege and take Tripoli, which they burned, and in it killed seven thousand 1288. Christians. His sonne Seriphas, about three years after, took Ptolemais with 60000. horse, and 140000. foot: there were slain of the Christians 30000. the rest that escaped were drowned with storms, except a few which recovered Cyprus. Tyr▪ Sidon, Beritus, and whatsoever the Christians had in Syria was destroyed. This Seriphus afterward, as he was preparing a Fleet to invade Cyprus, was murthered by his own Captains, who fell at variance among them∣selves. Cazanus the son of Argon Prince of Tartary, was invited by the Sarazens to embrace Mahumetanisme; which he did for a while to obtain his ends, therefore permitted the Christian churches to be destroyed: but when he had increased his wealth and power, he sell upon the Mahumetans and killed them: upon this Melech Nasor the Tyrant of Egypt sights him; but he, though al∣most defeated, so carried himself, that he left 20000 Sarazens dead on the place, and drove the Sultan into Baldac or Babylon of Egypt. This victory gave a short breathing to the Christian affairs. The Greek Church was now divided into three Factions; some holding with Becus the Patriarch of the Latine profession, some with Ioseph the other Patriarch who was put out, and some with Arsenius who was dead. Where∣upon to quiet all, Andronious makes Gregory of Cyprus Patriarch; Becus and the Pontifician party are banished; Gregory also shortly after is deposed, and Athanasius the Eremite is substituted, who because he sent every Bishop home to look to his own flock, foure years after he also is deposed, and driven into the desarts. Andronicus by evil counsel destroyed the Grecian fleet as uselesse, being now affianced by marriage to Spain, which had the kingdome of Sicily; but the want of a fleet gave occasion for all pirats to plunder the Greek coasts  The Venetians of Byzantium pretending some losses they received by Andro∣nicus, plundred both by land and sea; which gave occasion to Othoman a petty Prince in Carmania, (but of an active spirit, and strong body) to mise an army against the Christians; so that he with other Turkish Commanders divided a great part of the Greek Empire amongst them. In the battel that was fought in Chersonesus between the Greeks and Turks, for the booties which the Turks carried from Greece under the safe conduct of Andronicus, his son Michael lost the day, and withall the Imperial ornaments, which the Turks disgracefully used. They brake into Thracia with such multitudes, that they plundred it all, so that in two years the Byzantines durst not go out of their gates: The most  of the Cities of Bythinia are taken by Ottoman, who makes Prusia the capital city of his new-erected Monarchy; so the Christian Empire in the East is but a meer Sceliton. The calamities that fell on this Empire by the Turks, were presaged by frequent earthquakes, comets and ecclipses in the sun and moon. Andronious lived till he was seventy years of age, and saw not only these pub∣like calamities, but also the private miseries of his own family; for his sonnes
and grand-children proved both flagitious, and factious against each other, and most ungracious to himself; for Andronicus the younger, sonne to Michael, and grandchild to this Andronicus the elder, thrust his grandfather, being al∣most blind with age and sorrow, into a Monastery, where he dyed; Michael the father of this younger Andronicus, was dead before; Manuel the other sonne of this Michael, was killed by the City-guard, whilst in the night he went to find out this dissolute brother Andronicus the younger. Cazanus the Tartar (as we said) having beaten the Egyptian Sultan, was master of Asia. He was by profession a Christian, and therefore married the King of Armenia's daughter. Finding that his Kinsman Caydon was raising a Faction in Persia, sends Ambassadors to the Pope and French king, for a union with the Latine Princes, towards the regaining of the Holy-Land. But he committed a great error, when he intrusted Caycaphus a Saracen fugitive with the government of Damascus, having been governour before in that place under the Egyptian: for this Saracen revolted from him, and brought all Syria into the obedience of the Egyptian Sultan. And so now the thousand yeares are ended, in which the Church did reign with Christ; for Mahumets religion prevailed so fast, that it drove Christianity out of the East. The Armenians and Cyprians endeavoured to recover Syria, but could do nothing, because Cazanus fell sick. The Egyptian Sultan carried away all provisions from the Christian  quarters, and poisoned the grasse and fodder. After the death of Cazanus, his brother Campanda turned Mahumetan; and so the Turks over-ran all, even to the gates of Byzantium. Michael Palaeologus father to Andronicus the younger, being in Thessaly, and understanding how his younger son Manuel was killed, died for griefe. Old 1321. Andronicus, receiving continual complaints against the oppressions of his grandchild the younger Andronicus, was resolved to imprison him: which he understanding by the Patriarch, fled to Adrianopolis; and by the help of Iohn Cantacuzenus, and Syrgiannes the bastard son of Constantine, and grandchild of old Andronicus, who was now hated for the continual taxes which he was  forced to lay on the people against the Turks, raised an Army against his Grandfather: therefore young Andronicus, promising exemption from all taxes, drew almost all Thracia and Macedon to side with him; so that the old man was glad to content himselfe with Byzantium, and a part of Macedon, leaving the rest to his grandchild. Upon this rent, the Turks build ships, with which they infest the coasts of Thrace and Macedon. Wherefore old Andronicus, to furnish himself with mony against them, was forced to sell the ornaments of the antient Emperors. But Syrgiannes, angry that he was not Colleague with young Andronicus in the Empire, flies to the old man, and puts him in hope to recover all again. Young Andronicus at this raiseth an Army, and  brings it to the gates of Byzantium, pretending his grandfather was dead; and to deliver his mother Xene, whom Constantine the Despot or Lord had carried away by ship from Thessalonica to Byzantium, and there imprisoned her: But her delivery caused a new peace; and the rather, because Philadelphia was now besieged by the Turks. Young Andronicus is now crowned and made Consort of the Empire with the old man; but Syrgiannes is imprisoned and plundred. In the interim, Ottoman subdues almost all Bythinia; who having reigned 8 years, died, and was buried in a Silver-tomb by his son Orcanes, after he 1326. had taken Prusae by famine. After this, young Andronicus desirous to reign alone, makes a league with Michael Despot or Lord of Bulgaria, with whom he marrieth his sister, purposely to defeat the old man, which they did by the help of their Captains, who worshipped the rising Sun: Constantinople is betrayed, the old Emperor seised upon, and by the advice of Niphon the Patriarch is deposed, who with grief lost his eye-sight. Young Andronicus makes an expe∣dition into Asia against Orcanes, where he was wounded in the foot, and shame∣fully lost his army to the Turks: After this he fell desperately sick, upon
a cold  he took after bathing. The report of his death thrust the old Emperor into a Monastery in Byzantium; where Theodorus Synadenus made him abjure his Em∣pire, and change his name from Andronicus to Antonius. But young Andronicus recovers, and was invited by the Bulgarian against the Triballi, but refused to go, being content to sleep in a whole skin. This Bulgarian Lord had married An∣dronicus his sister (as was said) and therefore put away his other wife, sister to the King of Servia; whereupon this King made war upon the Bulgarian, thrust him out of his principality, and put Alexander his kinsman in his place. About this time, Orcanes the Turk took Nicaea of Bythinia, after a long siege. 1332. In the midst of these miseries, old Andronicus dyed in his Covent, the 50. year  of his reign. Young Andronicus makes war upon Alexander the Bulgarian, who defeats him, and having cooped him up with the remainder of his forces, takes pitty on so many Christians, and proffers peace upon promise of future mo∣deration. After this, Syrgiannes is accused of treason, but escapes, and with the Triballi invades Macedonia. Andronicus not able to suppress him by force, mur∣thers him by an assasinate: the Triballian Prince being bribed by the Emperor makes peace with him, and so Macedon returns again to the obedience of Caesar. The Genuois in Peru were grown so strong, that they slighted Andronicus. Ca∣tanes a Genuan seiseth upon Mytilene, but not long after Andronicus recovers it, having brought the Phocaeans into subjection. The Scythians beyond Isther  overrun Thracia, and carried away for slaves 30000. Greeks and Turks. Orcanes did lie in wait to surprise Byzantium; but Cantacuzenus with 70 Greek horsinen overthrew a great number of the Turkish infantry. Andronicus calls in the Turks upon the Illyrians, who had offended him: And whilst he is subdoing Aetolia and Epirus (which shortly after he lost) Orcanes takes Nicomedia of By∣thinia, and so the next year, the Turks without resistance overrun Thracia; a while after they passe over the Hellespont, and by the help of Soliman, Orcanes his eldest son, took it. Shortly after, Andronicus died of the Spleen, being 45 1341. years old, and having reigned 20. He left two sons by his wife Anne the Almain, Iohn & Manuel, over whom he appointed governor Iohn Cantacuzenus, whom  he made swear to be faithful in preserving the Empire to his young pupil Iohn; but he shortly after forgot his oath, slighted the young Caesar, and to make him∣self great, humoured the Greek Princes, and married his daughter to Orcan the Turkish Sultan. Orcanes having reigned 30 years, died. In Hungary, K. Ladislaus with Boleslaus had scarce driven out the Tartars, who had overrun Hungary and Poland; when the people, who hated the tyrannical deportment of Ladislaus, choose for their King Andrew, called Venetus, from his mother and education, being Venetian: he was grandchild of K. Andrew by his son Steven. After the death of this Andrew Venetus, Charls Nephew to Claudus of Sicily, Robert Uncle to Charls, and Wenceslaus the Bohemian, became Compe∣titors  for the kingdom: but the Peeres chose Otto the Bavarian, who being taken by the Transilvanian, escaped by the help of his wife, and returned home: Albert establisheth Charls in the kingdome, who banished many of the Nobi∣lity, and so he prevailed over his Competitors. In Poland was the like contestation: For to K. Boleslaus succeeded Lescus Niger, who had subdued the Iazyges and Russians, and his Competitor Conra∣dus Masovius, whom divers of the Nobility had chosen for their King. This Lescus died without issue; wherefore Boleslaus Masovius, Henry Vretislave, and Ladislaus Locticus brother to Lescus, strove for the succession. n the mean while, Wenceslaus the Bohemian invaded the Territories of Cracovia and Sen∣domiria,  in right of the Queen, who had bequeathed them to him; the Tartars fall upon some other places of that distracted kingdom: in these tumults, Henry Vretislave dieth, and Primislaus is chosen King by the Polanders, who lived not above seven moneths after. Then was Ladislaus chosen: but he who with so much toile and trouble got the kingdome, with too much ease and luxury lost it; for the Peers deposed him, and conferred the kingdome upon Wenceslaus the Bohemian.
In Denmark, Ericus the sixth, Grandchild to Waldemar by his son Christo∣pher, was treacherously murthered, to whom succeeded his son Ericus the se∣venth, being a child; in his minority, the Kingdome was well governed by Agnes of Brandenburg and the Nobility. The Kings murtherers were all bani∣shed; Pyrats severely punished; the Holsatians and Vandals reconciled; the Territories of Rostoch, and other places over-gainst Denmark, reduced into the Kings obedience. This Ericus afterward became tyrannical and sacrilegi∣ous, who for his wicked life, and the whoredomes he committed upon divers Noble Matrons, was murthered in a Barn, where he was found sleeping, by seven assasinats, who gave him seventy wounds. He married his Daughter  Sophia to Waldemar King of Swethland, who for incest with his sister was driven out of his kingdome; to whom succeeded his brother Ladislaus. To Ericus the seventh in Denmark succeeded Ericus the eighth, who obtained some Vi∣ctories 1319. against the Teutones; He died without issue, having reigned three and and thirty years. To him succeeded his brother Christopher, an unfortunate and careless Prince, a hater of his Nobility, and an oppressor of the people; for which he was driven twice out of his kingdome. He pawned to the Hol∣satians all Scania, who upon this aimed at the whole kingdome, which the Danes perceiving, called home again king Christopher, whom they had bani∣shed, and let loose his son Ericus, whom for his bad government with his fa∣ther they had imprisoned; but shortly after both the father and son died. Magnus the king of Swethland redeemed Scania from the Holsatians for se∣venty thousand Marks of silver. Waldemar, king Christophers other son, was declared king; but he was not as yet returned from the Emperours Court; 1333. during which time, the Holsatians seised upon Iutia, but their chief Comman∣ders were in one night surprised in their Garrison, and murthered by the Danes: Upon this the new king Waldemar returned home. In the Low-Countries, Iohn Duke of Brabant buyeth the Earldome of Ne∣mours and Dutchy of Limburg. The Earl of Geldre next heir opposeth. A war followeth, in which neer Colen, the Earl is defeated, and taken prisoner, with the Bishop of Colen, Adolph of Nassovia, and Henry of Lucelburg. The Earl of Gel∣dre, upon renouncing of the Dukedome, is released. Henry's son married the Duke of Brabants daughter, and with her had the Earldome. Not long after, Iohn was slain in Tornament. Holland, called by the Romans, Batavia, in the time of Charles the Great, was 1294. over-run by the Danes; but about this time Florentius the fifth was Earl of that Province, who was treacherously murthered by some male-contents, as he was Hawking, because he had made a league with France, to the prejudice of Guy Earl of Flanders, and the King of England; the murtherers cut off his hands, and gave him two and twenty wounds. Before him were sixteen Earls,  the first was Didericus a good man, who stoutly repressed the Norman invasion; to him succeeded Didericus the second, of whom no memorable act is extant. Arnolphus followed, who had long wars with the Frislanders, in which he, with the most of his Nobility were slain. His son Didericus or Thedoricus the third succeeded, who had wars with the Frislanders, whom the Bishop of Utricht assisted against the Earl, whom at last he defeated. His son Thedoricus 1039. the fourth succeeded; he unwittingly killed the Bishop of Colens brother; in revenge of which, the Earl being fled, two of the chief Nobility of Holland were murthered by those of Colen: To requite this murther, the Earl burned all the Ships of Colen and Leege which were then in Dort, and imprisoned the  Merchants: Upon this, the Enemy seise upon Dort; the Earl gets into the Town in the dark; a doubtful skirmish was fought, in which the Earl at last had the better; but in the morning he was wounded by one of the enemies in the thigh, and died within two dayes after. His brother Florentius the first succeeded, against whom the Bishop of Colen and Leege, with some neighbour∣ing Princes, raised a great Army, seven and twenty thousand of which were
drowned in the Ditches neer Dort, and the rest slain by the Earls Forces: After four years peace, his former enemies renew their Forces, and in∣vade Holland again, and were overthrown again: But whilst the Earl with some Troops were securely refreshing themselves neer the Mose, Alrad brother to the Duke of Lorain with fresh Forces falls upon the Earl, whom they killed with two thousand and six hundred of his men. This murther was afterward repaid by the Citizens of Dort, who killed all the murtherers. The Earls widow, Gertrudis, during his sons minority, for two years ruled the State. She married Robert the Frislander, so called, because he with his wife ruled Holland, which was then called Frisia; this Robert was son to Baldwin Earl of Flanders, against whom William Bishop of Utricht raised a war, which ruined Holland. Henry the fourth Emperour bestowed this Province upon William, who to ob∣tain it the easier, procured Godfrey (from his low stature and crookedness, cal∣led Gibber) Duke of Lorain, to assist him, who with a great Army overthrew the Hollanders, and drove Robert with his wife and children into Flanders; so by the Bishop of Utricht, Godfrey was made Protector of Holland. After this, he falls upon the West-Frislanders with fire and sword, and in a Battel kills eight thousand of them; but afterward, as he was on the close-stoole at Antwerp, he was murthered; his death was shortly after accompanied with the Bishops, who was a great Favourite of Henry the 4. and an enemy to Heildebrand. Didericus  the fifth, son to Florentius, being now of age, is assisted by Robert Frislander, and the Flandrians, to recover his Fathers Province: Him the Bishop of Utricht op∣posed with an Army, assisted by Conradus the Sueve, whom the Emperour had made Earl of Holland; but they were both defeated by Didericus, and forced to 1092. resign their claim to him the right owner. His son Florentius the second succeeded, a peaceable and just Prince, who died in the prime of his years; to whom succeeded Didericus the sixth, who was forced by Henry the fifth to hold Holland in Fee of the Empire: He aimed to be Earl of Flanders, but missed of it. He twice subdued the West-Frislanders; then his brother Florentius ta∣king part with Frisia, was the occasion of much blood-shed. At last Lotharius  the Emperour reconciled the two brothers. Florentius afterward was mur∣thered. Didericus had some controversie with the Flandrians, about the Islands of Zeland, but he died before the controversie was ended. To him succeeded 1151. Florentius the third, who married the daughter of Henry Prince of Scotland; he had some contestation with the Bishop of Utricht, but the Emperour Bar∣barossa reconciled them: He had wars also with the Frisians, and did good service under Barbarossa, who by the Holland ships brake in upon Damiata or Pelusium. Having ruled Holland three and thirty years, he died in the Holy-War, and was buried neer Barbarossa in Antioch, whose son Theodoricus the 1190. seventh succeeded; He had wars with his brother William about Frisland; the quarrel at last was composed, by assigning East-Frisland to William: He had wars also with Flanders, and a controversie with the Duke of Geldre about the election of the Bishop of Utricht; the matter was referred to the Pope, who made the Earl Protector of the Bishoprick, till a new Bishop was chosen. He had also wars with the Duke of Lorain, whose woods he cut down and bur∣ned, and carried the Dukes brothers away prisoners: but Lorain, by the help of Colen, Limburg, and Flanders, set upon the Earl of Holland, and took him prisoner. In the mean while, the Bishop of Utricht fell upon Geldre and Holland with fire and sword; but shortly after, the Duke, the Earl, and the Bishop were made friends. Then the Earl died, having ruled Holland thirteen years; 1203. to whom succeeded his brother William, who was opposed by the Earl of Lossen, whom he defeated. Then understanding that Malcolm King of Scotland his Uncle was dead, and that he thought himself next Heir, repairs into Scot∣land with a great Fleet, where he found a party to joyn with him; but per∣ceiving what great opposition he was like to have, and that the Earl of Lossen had invaded Holland in his absence, returns home, and
drives out his enemy,  having ruled nineteen years, he died, to whom succeeded his son Floren∣tius the fourth; he was father to William King of the Romans, and to Mar∣garet, who had at one birth 365. children; he was imployed with the 1223. Dukes of Brabant and Cleve, by the Pope and Emperour, to suppress the Hea∣then Idolatrie that was begun to spread in those parts; He was killed in a Torneament by Claremontanus. To whom succeeded VVilliam the second his son, being six years old. His Protector was Otho his Uncle Bishop of U∣tricht. 1235. The Earl on his wedding-day was like to be burned with his wife, for the house took fire suddenly, so that it was burnt down, with divers in it, and much Plate and Jewels. About twenty years of age, Frederick the second be∣ing excommunicate, he accepts the Imperial Crown; he removed his Court from Harlem to the Hague, and built the Palace there: He had Wars with the Flandrians about the Isle Walacria of Zeland, which they claimed as their Island; A battel is fought, in which the Flemings were overthrown, drowned and slain. After this, Charles of Anjou, brother to King Lewis of France, renews the quarrel in behalf of the Flemings, having received Hanonia as a reward for his assistance; but William drove him out thence; and then a peace is made with Flanders. After this, being at Utricht, he is wounded in the head with a stone which was flung at him, for the Frisians, and those of Utricht ha∣ted him; and as he was making an Expedition against the Frislanders, who  had rebelled, he and his horse were both drowned, the ice breaking under them; and being found, was cut in pieces by the Frislanders: He had been King of the Romans seven years. To him succeeded Florentius the fifth; in his 1256. minority were great troubles between Holland and Utricht; as soon as he was of age, he made an Expedition against the Frislanders in revenge of his fathers death; those he subdued; about which time many Towns of Frisland were drowned by an inundation: Then also was Zeland united to Holland by mar∣riage 1287. of Guy the Earl of Flanders daughter with Florentius: He was one of those Competitors with Balliol for the Crown of Scotland, being descended from Ada wife to Florentius the third, and daughter of Henry Prince of Scot∣land;  but by the advice of King Edward, he sold his Title for a summe of money: he had wars with the Flemings, and for making peace with France he was murthered (as was said.) To him succeeded Iohn the first his son, whose protection the Earl of Cleve undertook; but he was put out of this Office; by Iohn Earl of Hannonia. About this time great troubles fell out between Hol∣land and Utricht. Middleburg also in Zeland was besieged by the Flandrians. The young Earl of Holland having married King Edwards daughter of Eng∣land, was much carried away by his Favourite Wolfardus, who caused him to in∣fringe the Liberties of Dort, upon which arose a Civil War: Dort will not lose her priviledges; therefore the Earl besiegeth it, but is beat off with loss.  Wolfardus is so hated by the people, that they hanged him by a long rope out of a high window, where he was imprisoned, disgracefully abusing and wounding his body. The West-frislanders being wearied with a continual 1298. war, submitted to Holland, which overthrew their Castles, and seised upon half their goods. After this, the Earl died, not without suspition of poyson, to whom (because he wanted issue) succeeded Iohn of Hannonia, son of King Williams sister. About this time the Switzers or Helvetians began to Cantonize themselves; they for their good service in Italy against the Sarazens, were permitted by the Pope and the Emperour Ludovic, son to Charles the Great, to live after their own Lawes; which liberty they enjoyed till Italy and the neighbouring Countries were distracted by the Guelphs and Gibellines; then Barbarossa took them into the protection of the Empire; but when the House of Austria be∣gan to oppress them, and infringe their Laws, they revolted, and vindicated 1307. their ancient Liberties, which they maintain to this day. The three Cantons that first revolted, were Switz (whence all the rest are called Switzers) Ury,
and Underval, which with Lucerne, Zugh, and Soleerre retain the Catholike Re∣ligion; but Friburg, Basil, Bernu, Zurich, and Schaffouz are Calvinists; the o∣ther two, Glaris and Appentzel profess both Religions. CHAP. V. 1. The affairs of Germany under Adolphus, Albertus, Henry the seventh,  and Ludovic of Bavaria. 2. The affairs of Sicily; Naples, Florence, Rome, and Millain, and other parts of Italy, with the adjacent Countries, from the year 1298. till 1347. ADolphus of Nassovia, Kinsman to Gerhard Bishop of Mentz, is by his means declared Emperour: Count Palatine stood for Albertus of Austria, but could not prevail, and was hated for this ever after by the Bishops Facti∣on, whose creature Adolphus was; he to strengthen himself in the Empire, de∣sires to marry his son to Albertus the Austrian, which motion is rejected; whereupon a war is raised between Adolphus and Albertus, both for this re∣pulse,  and because the Emperour had bought the Principality of Thuringia with the money which he received of King Edward of England, upon hope that he would assist him and Guy of Flanders against the French; but he failed both; wherefore both (having made peace with the French) became his enemies. The German Princes scorned that their Emperor should become a mercenary Souldier to the English Kingdome; and the Thuringians stormed that they should be bought and sold. Albertus of Austria shewed that he had reason to serve the French, if the Emperour would abase himself to serve the English: Hereupon forces are raised against Adolphus, whom the same Bishop of Mentz that made him Emperour, deposeth, and setteth up against him Albert of Austria, with whom the Princes joyn; onely the Duke of Bavaria, and Rodolphus Count Palatine, who was son-in-law to Adolphus, adhered to him. Neer Spira the battel is fought; Adolphus too hastily with his Horse, 1298. before the Foot came up, fell upon the Austrians, who had the advantage of the ground and Sun; The Adolphians are defeated, and Adolphus himself wounded in the eye, and beat down from his horse; whom as he was rising again from the ground, Albertus runs into the neck, and kills him, the eighth year of his Empire; he was buried at Spire. Pope Boniface the eighth, who speaking through a long Cane in the wall, had made Celestine lay down his Pontificat, endeavoured to make peace be∣tween  the French and Arragonians, perswading Iames to restore Sicily to Charls the Lame; but Frederick, brother to Iames, came in the interim with a Fleet from Spain into Sicily, and is saluted King by the people. When Iames was dead, Robert, son to Charles the Lame, came over into Sicily, and took Catana; but the Sicilians, who favoured the Spaniards more then the French, in a Sea∣fight defeat Philip, the brother of Robert, whom they took and imprisoned. Frederick recovers in a short time both Sicily and Calabria in Hetruria. The Genuois were so incensed against the Pisans, that they sunk great ships in the mouth of the River, to hinder their Navigation: About which time, there were such fearful Earth-quakes, that the Pope being at Mass, was forced to give off, and run out of the Church into a small Cottage, fearing the earth would open; then also appeared a Comet. The Gibellines and Guelphs now raged in Italy, but under new names, of White and Black; the Gibellines were named White, whom the Florentines drove out of their City, with Dantes the Poet. The Pope, to be out of
danger, removed his Seat to Avenion  in France, which Clement the sixth bought; the Italian affairs he committed to the care of three Cardinals; the Popes abode in France was seventy years, in which time divers Schismes were in the Church, the Italians choosing a Pope of their Nation, and the French of theirs. This time the Italians called the seven∣ty years Captivity of Babel. Albertus having slain Adolphus, is made Emperour; such was the concourse of people to see him, that the Duke of Saxony was squeezed to death with the press. He reconciled himself with Otto Duke of Bavaria, whose Unkle he had killed: But this friendship lasted not long, for Otto being called to be King of Hungary fell upon Syria; but shortly after, Otto is by the Hungarians  banished. Albertus desires to be confirmed by the Pope in his Empire, which Boniface refused to do, shewing by the Crown on his head; and the sword by his side, that he was both Pope and Emperour himself; yet shortly after in ha∣tred of Philip the Fair, he declared him Emperor, and withall conferred on him the title of France: but Philip to elude the Popes fury, bestowed in marriage his daughter Blanca upon Ralph Alberts Son; this Albert made his Son Ralph King of Bohemia, Wenceslaus the seventh being in a tumult slain in Moravia; but Ralph in the very beginning of his Reign, was murthered in his chamber; Henry Duke of Carinthia, and Son in law to Wenceslaus the sixth, having seized on the King∣dome, notwithstanding that Frederick Alberts other Son was elected King by  the Peers. Albert had wars with Otto of Bavaria, whom Conradus Bishop of Saltsburg assisted, and withall so endangered the Emperors life with a poysoned cup, that had he not vomited presently, he had dyed; yet he never throughly recovered. Afterward the same Emperor was slain, and cut in peeces by means of the Duke of Carinthia, whilst Albert was making war against Frederick of Mysia, which Country he aimed at, as being a convenient inlet to Bohemia. This Frederick was Son to Albert Earle of Thuringia, a wicked man, who would have murthered his wife, daughter to Frederick the second, Emperor, being animated thereto by a harlot whom he doted on: Alberts Lady fled to save her life, and as she kissed her Son Frederick in her flight; whom she  bore to this Albert, in her passion she bit his cheek, the mark whereof he still retained. Dietricas Marquess of Mysia, Alberts brother, commiserating this disconsolate Lady, gave her entertainment, and made her Son Frederick his heir to Mysia, at which Albert the Father stormed, and caused this his Son to be imprisoned a whole year, till by the favour of his Keepers who pitied his case, he was let go. After this his Father Albert dyed miserably. Frederick subdued all his enemies at last, and among the rest Albert the Emperor, and so obtained both the Earldome of Thuringia, and the Marquisat of Mysia. The Emperor was set upon first by Iohn his brothers Son, whom he had removed for his loose life from the government of Suevia. This Iohn gave the first blow,  thrusting his Dagger in the Emperors throat; after him came others who clave his head in the middle, and others gave him divers wounds in the breast; he dyed the tenth year of his Empire. 1308. Albertus being dead, Philip the Fair of France was now in hope to be Em∣peror, having the Pope within his Dominions; wherefore by his brother Charles Valoise, he raiseth an Army: but the Pope considering how dangerous the translation of the Empire might prove to the Italian Princes; sends se∣cretly to the seven Electors to hasten the election of a German Emperor; which was done accordingly; and Henry Earl of Lucelburg was chosen upon the com∣mendations of his brother Baldwin Archbishop of Trevers; the Pope by his  Legats declares him Emperor, conditionally that within two years he would repair to Italy, and there compose the long differences with which it was al∣most ruined: he to that purpose sets himself, but first resolves to settle Germany; therefore he confirms Frederick the Sonne of Albert in his possession of Austria, conditionally that he would resign his right in Bohemia, which when he had assented to, the Emperor by consent of the
Electors, deposed Henry the Carinthian, and made his own son Iohn King, by marrying him to Elizabeth the daughter of Wenceslaus the eldest, and neece to Ralph the Emperor. Henry after this, composed the wars of Mysia or Mysina, so that Frederick should content himself with Thuringia and Mysia, and should leave the lower Lusatia to the Bohemians: so Germany being quieted, he raiseth an Army for Italy; but first he performs the Funeral ceremonies to Albert and Adolph, whose bodies he translated to Spire, and declared all those to be Traitors who had a hand in the murther of Albert, all which dyed mi∣serably. In Italy most of the Cisalpin Cities had changed their Governours; the Sca∣ligers  had seised on Verrona, the Passerins on Mantua, the Carrarians on Padua, the Venetians on Ferrara, and the Florentines on Pistoriue; in Millain the Turri∣ans chief of the Guelphs under Guido had suppressed the Gibellins, and driven out thence Matthew the Viscount, who complains to the Emperor, being on his march towards Millain, he restores them both to their ancient patrimony and sets the City at liberty; but because Henry placed Matthew on his right hand, and Guido on his left, as he was going to receive his iron Crown, Guido raiseth a tumult in the City which had indangered the Emperor, but that Matthew suddenly raised all his friends, and by the help of the German forces fell upon the Turrians, and drove them out of the City; the charge of which  was solely committed to Matthew. Cremona, Phacenza, Parma, Papia, and Brixium, who favoured the Guelphs, were reduced by Caesar, to whom the Cre∣monians with ropes about their necks acknowledged their fault, and paid their Fine. Brixium also was punished with a mulct, and demolition of their walls; and one Theobald who had caused them to rebel, was torn in peeces by horses. Lombardy and other places being setled, Henry goeth for Genua, and from thence by Sea to Pisae, the Army he sent by land towards Rome, where the two families of the Ursini and Columni for three months together skirmished daily, that the streets ran with blood; Robert King of Apulia son to Charles the lame,  aided the Ursins against the Gibellins who stood for Caesar, and strove to keep him out of the City, but the Columni prevailed and brought him in, where he was crowned the third time with much difficulty and reluctancy of the Car∣dinal Legats. Caesar after his Coronation made haste out of that turbulent 1312. City, and fatal to the German Emperors: he made a League with Frederick of Sicily, who then had war with Robert of Apulia: the Florentines with the Bo∣nonians, Ferrarian, and other Cities held out against the Emperor, who burned their fields and provision, that they might for want be forced to yeeld the sooner: He summoneth Robert to appear and answer to his accusations, but he refused to come, and so is condemned of Treason and Rebellion, his Arms are  torn, and his right and name of King taken away. This sentence Pope Clement shortly after repealed, as may be seen in his Constitutions called Clementines, set forth by his successor Iohn the 23. Henry having laid siege to Florence, and preparing to go against Robert upon the invitation of the Neapolitans, is poy∣soned by one Bernard a predicant Friar, being hired thereto by the Floren∣tines; the murtherer, who poysoned the cup, or as some say the Sacramental bread, was flia'd alive. Henries body two years after his death was translated to 1313. Pisae: the Florentines in thee battels were defeated by the Pisans, who stood for Caesar and the Gibellins; wherefore the Legats and King Robert, offended at this success, give their assistance to the Cuelphs, whose Army Matthew Viscount  of Millain defeated: Hereupon he is excommunicated by Vasco the Cardinal, and Legate to the Pope; yet his sons had good success against the Guelphs, not∣withstanding the aid they had of the Neapolitans under Robert, of the French under Philip Valoise, and of the Germans under Henry Duke of Austria. Iohn after his fathers death raised an Army, and
confirmed the Caesarian  forces in Italy: He enlarged also Bohemia by the addition of Lusatia, and a great part of Silesia; which Country lying between Poland and Bohemia, fell off from both, and made themselves free; but having abused their freedome with intestine broils, the Bohemians subdued them: This Iohn was afterward killed in the battel of Cressy, in which were slain also Charles Valoise, and thirty thousand French. After the death of Henry the seventh, the Empire wanted an head fourteen months, because of the rent among the Electors; for the Bishop of Mentz and of Trevers, with the Marquess of Brandenburg stood for Ludovic of Bavaria; but 1316. the Bishop of Colen, the Palsgrave, and Duke of Saxony, were for Frederick of Austria: both were crowned; Ludovic at Aix the ordinary place, by the Bishop of Mentz and Trevers, whose office was not to consecrate; Frederick at Bonnoa which was not the ordinary place of Coronation, by the Bishop of Colen, whose charge it was to consecrate the elected Emperor: the King of Bohemia with his casting voice, conferred the right title on Ludovic; yet to avoid jars, the Electors, by the Popes advice, were content that both should be called Emperors, and both equally rule together, as of old, M. Antonius and L. Verus, Valentinian and Valens, Gratian and Theodosius, with many others, reigned to∣gether as Colleagues. Ludovic thrust his brother Ralph the Palsgrave out of his inheritance, because he preferred Frederick to him; This Ralph afterwards dyed in England. But these two Emperors could not agree; Germany is divided into two factions, which last eight years; these troubles were presaged by a Comet, and accompanied with famine and mortality: five several battels were fought; the two greatest were, that at Esling in Suevia, which was besieged by Frederick for adhering to Ludovic; in this conflict many of the Nobility were slain and taken on both sides, for the victory inclined to neither, however the siege was raised. The other great battel was fought near Muldorffe in Bavaria, which Frederick had invaded with ten thousand Hungarians, and twenty 1323. thousand Austrians: Ludovic meets him with the strength of Bohemia, and the neighbouring parts; great flaughter is committed on both sides; at last the Hungarians are forced to give ground, and though the Austrian horse held out  a while longer, yet they yeeld at length; Frederick with his brother Henry are taken prisoners; three years was this Emperor detained a prisoner, then was set at liberty, conditionally that he would be content with the bare title of Emperor whilst he lived, but should not not meddle with the Government, nor enter into Italy: Seven years after he dyed, his brother was released by restoring of some Towns and Forts in Moravia, which in this War the Au∣strians had taken from the Bohemians. After this victory of Ludovic, Pope Iohn the 22. or 23. accuseth him for aiding Galeacius of Millain against the Guelphs, and for exercising his Emperial  right without the Popes confirmation; his answer was, that as soon as he was elected, he was to administer justice, and to defend Galeacius, who had a just cause; upon this Ludovic is condemned by the Pope as an heretick, and the sentence declared against him at Avenion, for maintaining that the Pope was not to meddle with secular affairs. Leopoldus brother to Frederick, who came not in time to aid him, doth much hurt in Alsatia and Helvetia, afterward he became mad and dyed. Iohn King of Bohemia, and Charles King of Hungary, with Otto Fredericks other brother over-run Austria; shortly after Otto dyed, and so did Frederick, being consumed by a Love-potion. Four years after the 1330. victory, Ludovic marcheth into Italy to establish the Gibellin faction, the chief  of which were Galeacius and his four brothers, Iohn, Mark, Luchin, and Steven, Viscounts of Millain, the sons of Matthew. Galeacius had taken Placenza from Albertus Sootus: upon this; King Robert, the Pope, and the Florentines, who had been molested by Castrucius, a great friend of the Galeacii, entred into a League, with whom the French King joyned, in hatred to the Emperor, to re-establish the Guelphs in Italy; the Gibelins
understanding that Philip Valois  and his Confederates were raising Forces against them, they beseech the Em∣peror to hasten into Italy, who did so; he was met at Verona by Mark, who complained of his brother Galeacius, that he did assume the sole command over Milain, infringing their liberties. This accusation Ludovic put off, till a more convenient time: in the interim he goeth to Milain, where he is pom∣pously received by Galeacius, and in the Church of S. Ambrose receives his Iron∣crown from the Bishop of Aretin a great Gibelline. Here was present at that time Caius Scaliger, with a thousand Horse and some Foot-companies, to wait on the Emperor; who having heard his accusation and Marks against Gale∣acius, understanding also that the Millanois would pay his Army, if their Re∣publike might be free, and having intercepted some Letters of Galeacius enter∣taining correspondency with the Pope, he puts him with Luchin and Iohn his brothers, his son Actius, and some others in close prison; Then were chosen four and twenty men out of every Tribe or Ward to rule the Common wealth. And so having left Montfortius with some German forces to guard the City, Ludovic passeth into Hetruria, and so to Rome, where he complains to the Cardinals and Senate of the wrongs done him by Pope Iohn 22. withall he makes one Peter Corbarius a Franciscan, Antipope, by whom he and his wife Margaret Lady of Holland and Frisland, are crowned in the Vatican. But no 1328. sooner had Ludovic left the City, when this poor Antipope (called now Nico∣laus 5.) is by Boniface Earl of Pisa apprehended, laid in irons, and sent to the  Pope at Avenion, where he ended his dayes in misery. About this time the Emperor takes Castrutius Duke of Luca out of prison, and bestows honours on him; at whose request the Vicounts are restored. But all this could not secure the Emperor in Italy; for he found them, upon the Popes displeasure, to fall from him; besides, Rome had received King Robert of Naples, his forces in Germany were defeated, the Catti and Saxons had revolted; And fearing an Italian fig or pill, makes haste away into Ger∣many; where having assembled the Peers, he makes confession of his faith, as he had done at Rome before the Cardinals, and complains of the Popes inju∣stice  and tyrannie, desiring the continuance of their allegiance to him: withall he useth the best means he could to be reconciled to Pope Benedict the ninth, Iohns successor; who sent him word, that he could not absolve him, being hindered by the Kings of France and Naples. Ludovic, to be revenged on the French king, who sollicited the Pope to make him Lieutenant of Italy, joins himself in league to King Edward of England, to the great prejudice of France, which was wasted by their forces. Wherefore the French King cun∣ningly got the Emperors wife to take him off from the English, assuring him by oath and promise that he would reconcile him to the Pope, which he did not: He procured also Iohn King of Bohentia to forsake him, who with a great Army enters Italy, pretending that he went to settle the troubles of Lombandy, where the Lieutenants or Vicounts of those cities which Ludovic had left to their government, strove for the dominion of them. King Iohn suddenly sei∣seth upon Brixia, Cremona, Papia, and divers other cities; whereupon the Guelphs and Gibellines (being affrighted at this successe, and fearing lest Philip Valois and the Pope had conspired with King Iohn to subdue all the Italian cities, and to divide the dominion amongst them) of long enemies became now friends, and enter into league against Iohn, whom they defeated at Ferrara and drove him out of Italy; yet he retained Parma, Regium, and Mutina, which he committed to his Son Charles. Ludovic having conferred the Dukedome of Corinthia upon the Austrian, which King Iohn hoped should have been given to his son in right of his wife, the daughter of Henry of Carinthia; he declares himself an open enemy to Ludovic, and joyns with France, where he lost his life. Pope Clement the sixth who succeeded Benedict, renews the sentence of Excommunication, delivered by Pope Iohn against Ludovic,
and urges the Electors to choose another Em∣perour;  and because the Bishop of Mentz would not call the Princes toge∣ther for a new Election, he is first excommunicated, and then deposed, and another Bishop put in his place; but the Elector of Trevers, who had been Lu∣dovicks chief Counsellor and supporter, fell off from him, and encouraged Charles Prince of Bohemiae to undertake the Empire: The like did the Duke of Saxon. The new Bishop of Mentz assembleth the Princes. Charles Marquess of Moravia (whose Font-name was Wenceslaus, but afterward called Charles by Charles the French King, who had married this Bohemians Aunt) King Iohns son is elected, and is conveyed to Aix to be crowned; but the City denied him entrance; wherefore he is, by the Bishop of Colen, crowned at Bonna, a  Town upon the Rhine neer Colen: Notwithstanding that Ludovic, by con∣fession of his faith, had refelled the Heresies objected against him, and had straightly charged, upon pain of proscription, that none should obey the Popes Orders, nor leave off performing of Divine Service, because of his Ex∣communications. The French King did labour to reconcile the Pope and Emperour, but in vain; for the Pope would not absolve him, except he would openly confess his Heresies, resign his Imperial Crown, and hold it of him; which Ludovic refused, affirming, that though he had his Consecration from the Pope, yet the right of the Empire was not in him, but in the Electors; but Ludovic died the next year after this new Election, by a fall from his horse  as he was hunting, or rather by poison, which he could not vomit up, therefore he thought by riding and agitation of his body to dispel it; but the poison was so strong, that it put him into a Convulsion fit, in which he fell from his 1347. horse. He reigned 30. some say 33. years; his wife Margaret, daughter to William the third of Holland, went to take possession of that Province fallen to her by the death of her brother William the fourth, killed by the Fris∣landers. About this time the Florentines being oppressed by Castrutius and their own civil discords, yielded themselves to Charles Duke of Calabria, son to Ro∣bert King of Naples. Ludovic Gonzaga invaded the Dominion of Mantua, ha∣ving  killed Passerinus Lord thereof. Caius Scaliger, Lord of Verona, having ta∣ken in Padua, and Tarvisium, from the Carrarii, died, whose son Mastinus suc∣ceeded. Galeacius also died with grief, having lost his fathers Principality by Castrutius Duke of Luca, and Lord of Pisae and Pistorium; whom the Pope ex∣communicated, as he was riding in triumph into Luca for his Victory over Pi∣storium, upon which he died with grief, and his children stript of their inheri∣tance by the Emperour, who had for Castrutius sake incurred the Popes dis∣pleasure. Mastinus Scaliger to his fathers inheritance added Vicetia, Brixia, Bergomus, Parma, and Luca, and aimed also at Venice, which was his undoing; for the Venetians took from him Padua and Tarvisium. Luchinus the Vicount  stript him of Brixia and Bergomus. Benedict the eleventh sends his Legat to pa∣cifie the tumults in Rome, where by his command Francis Petrarch the Poet is carried in pomp to the Capitol, and there crowned with Bayes. He confirmes Scaliger with the other Princes in their late purchased Dominions: but a dan∣gerous war arose between the Florentines and Pisans, in which Florence was like to be surprised by Valter Duke of Athens, who was sent by Robert King of Naples to assist them; for he undertaking to settle things, was made Protector by the Republike, but he made himself absolute Lord; whereupon the Bi∣shop of Florence raiseth the people against him, who both drove him out of the City, and the Nobility with him. The Kingdome of Naples at this time was in great trouble; for King Robert 1344. the son of Charles the Lame, dying without issue male, marrieth his Neece Ioan by his son Charles, who was dead, to Andrew King Charles of Hungaries youngest son, and makes him his Successor; but he not being able to satisfie her unsatiable lust, was by her means strangled, and then marrieth with Ludo∣vic the Prince of Tarentums son, and her
Cousin-german, who had more right  to the Kingdome then the other. Hereupon Ludovic K. of Hungary, to revenge his brother Andrews death, marcheth into Apulia with a great Army, at whose approach Ludovic with his incestuous wife and parricide fled; and so he sei∣sed on the Kingdome. Shortly after, the Hungarian having setled Naples, re∣turns home. The Tarentine with his wife, being in Marsiles, repair to the Pope at Avinion, who buyes this City of them, and re-establish them in the king∣dome. Not long after the Tarentine dieth, and his wife marrieth with Iames the Arragonian, Duke of Calabria, whom she within a while casts off, and marrieth with Otto of Brunswic, and adopts Lewis of Anjou, brother to Charles the fifth of France, son of king Iohn. Pope Urban the sixth being offended at the levity of this woman, invites Ludovic of Hungary to repossess Naples, which he refused, because of his age; but sends Charles the son of Lewis of Dyrrachi∣um, and husband to Margaret, Ioans sister, who suddenly enters Italy before Anjou was ready, defeats Otto of Brunswick, and imprisons him; and Ioan, who had yielded her self, by his command is stifled with a pillow held on her face. Three years after Otto escaped out of prison, and recovers Naples; but shortly after died. Lewis of Anjou, by the help of Clement the seventh, raised 30000. men, with which he makes war against Charles two years together, takes in Tarentum, with some other places, and was like to carry the whole kingdome; but being poisoned by a draught of infected water, died; and so the Army, and withall the kingdome fell to Charles without blood-shed, who shortly af∣ter  is called back into Hungary against Sigismund, where he is treacherously killed by the Queen widow. His son Ladislaus took Rome twice, being divi∣ded into factions. Against him, Alexander the fifth, and the Florentines call in Lewis of Anjou, son to the former, who defeats Ladislaus; but afterward An∣jou was worsted, and the Florentines forced to make peace on disadvantagious tearms. Ladislaus is poisoned at Rome; to him succeeded his sister Ioan in the kingdome, who adopted Alphonsus, king Ferdinands son of Arragon, and after∣ward dis-inherited him, she promiseth the kingdome to Lewis of Anjou, grand∣child to the first Lewis: Hereupon a war is raised between Alphonsus and Lewis, in which Alphonsus at last got the victory, and left the possession of the  kingdome to his base son Ferdinand. Lewis, by Ioans consent, makes his bro∣ther Renatus Heir to the Crown; but she dying, he lost his right. His son Iohn was defeated at Troy. Renatus the father conferred his right upon his brother Charles his son, who was onely left alive of the stock of Anjou; he left his right by will to Lewis the 11. of France. Charles the eighth, the son of Lewis, by claiming his Right, occasioned great wars between Arragon and France. Rome, in the Popes absence, is torn in sunder by the Columnii and Ursini. One Nicholaus a Scrivener did so insinuate himself into the foolish multitude,  by his wit, that he made them beleeve they might recover the Cities ancient Monarchy, by adhering to him; whereupon he took upon him the Titles of Augustus, Severus, and Clemens; then seiseth upon the Capitol; multitudes both of the City, and abroad, adhere to him: he sends his Edicts to the Italian Princes to submit themselves to him; he sends to the Pope to repair into the City within the prefixed time of a year, or else to lose his Pontificat; he com∣mands the seven Electors, and other Princes of Germany to wait on him, or else he would proceed against their contumacy; but the next year this short-lived Emperour was by the Popes forces driven out of Rome and Italy, and after∣ward being apprehended, was sent in chaines to the Pope. About this time  the Pestilence so raged through Europe, that it swept away the third part of mankind: The Jews were accused and burned for infecting the Springs.
CHAP. VI. 1. The Eastern Affairs under the Palaeologi. 2. A brief History of the Turks, till the year 1412. 3. The brief Historie of Sweden, Denmark and Norway, till the same year 1412. AFter the death of Andronicus senior the son of Michael, the Palaeologi be∣gan 1332. to reign at Byzantium, which race continued 121. years. Androni∣cus junior having (as is already said) deposed his Grandfather, reigned eight years, and left Iohn Cantacuzenus Tutor to his two sons, Iohn Palaeologus and Manuel. Sixteen years after Cantacuzenus was driven out, and Iohn Palae∣ologus reigned seven and twenty years, whose successor was Manuel; he ruled four and thirty years, to whom suceeded his son Iohn seven and twenty years, whose Successor was Constantine the eighth and last, for in the eight year of his reign Constantinople was taken by the Turks. Cantacuzenus, for his ambition in aiming at the Empire, is banished; where∣upon he raised an Army, with which he vexed Iohn, and his Mother a widow,  five years together; at last took Byzantium by treachery, and made himself Emperour, and Iohn his Colleague, on whom he bestowed his daughter in marriage; but he disliking his father-in-law's greatness, fled to Tenedos to raise Forces against him, and procured Francis Cataluscus the Genuan to assist him, for whose service he gave him the Isle Lesbos with Mitylene, which his 1354. posterity held till Mahumet the second. Cantacuzenus in the interim enters into league with the Venetians, Catalanians, and King of Sicily against the Genuois. A war is begun, the Genuois in a Sea-fight at Scutari, between By∣zantium and Chalcedon, get the Victory, under Auria Admiral of their Fleet; but the next year the Genuois at Corsica are overthrown by Pisanus the Venetian  who sunk one and forty of their Gallies. After this Auria renewes his Fleet, and fights Pisanus neer Peloponnesus, defeats and takes him prisoner with 5000. more, whom he carrieth in triumph into Genua. Upon this Cantacuzenus re∣mits the Empire to his eldest son Andronicus, and shuts himself up in a Mona∣stery. His youngest son Manuel he makes Despot, and Governour of Sparta in Laconia: His daughter he had married before to Orchanes the Turk; but An∣dronicus is driven out of his Empire by Palaeologus, and flies to Rhodes, hoping to finde assistance of the great Master; but failing of this he repaires to his brother at Peloponnesus, where he spent the rest of his life in pri∣vate. Iohn having obtained the Empire, or shadow of it rather, went to Italy for assistance, but being slighted there, returns to Byzantium and seeing he could not maintain himself against the Bulgarian and Servian Forces in Armes against him, he makes a league with Amurathes, to whose protection he both submits himself and Kingdome, promising a yearly tribute, for the payment whereof he delivers his youngest son Theodorus as hostage: By this means the Greek Emperours became Vassals to the Turk. Iohn, in his absence had made his eldest sonne Andronicus Governour of the Em∣pire; and his other sonne Emanuel, Ruler of Thessalonica. Andronicus was accused of Treason, as if he had conspired with Amurathes his sonne to kill the Emperour; therefore with scalding Vinegar his eyes were put out. Bajazet sent Theodorus into Peloponnesus, having put the Cantacuzeni to death. Blinde Andronicus, having recovered a little sight, complains of his father and brother to Bajazet, who thrust both the Father and the sonne into a dark Dungeon,
and conferred the Empire on Andronicus;  but three years after Emanuel escaped out of prison, and by the help of Ba∣jazet thrust him from his government, and sent him bound with his son Iohn to the Turks Court. Emanuel having profferred a yearly tribute of three millions of Crowns to Bajazet, obtaines the Kingdome; he is enjoyned to deliver up Philadelphia which had been divers times besieged in vain, to give hostages, and to bind him∣self by oath to aid the Turks with Auxiliaries upon all occasions. But not long after, Iohn the son of Andronicus accuseth his Uncle to Bajazet, and alienates him so from Emanuel, that be besieged Byzantium, and seeing he could not take it by force, resolves to gain it by famine; but the sudden breaking in of Tamerlan the Scythian, diverted him from his enterprise. Emanuel intending for Italy  to procure men and money of the Latine Princes against the Turks▪ leaves Iohn the son of Andronicus governour of the Kingdome in his absence; for he was now out of the Turks favour, for complying secretly with his brother: Theodorus, the other brother, fearing lest Bajazet would have taken Byzantium, when he lay before it, sold Argos and Nauplium to the Venetians, and Sparta to the Rhodians; But the Turks afterward destroyed Argos, and Sparta returned to the Palaeologi. This Emanuel had seven sons, by his Turkish wife, widow to the King of Trapezuntum; Iohn his successour, Andronicus governour of Thessalonia, which he after sold to the Venetians, and so in Peloponesus obtained Mantinaea of his brothers; His third son was Michael; the fourth Theodorus Prince of Peloponesus, he strove with his brother Iohn for the Empire, choosing Amurathes for Arbitrator; the fifth Demetrius, He took from the Albans Peloponnesus by the Turks help, for which he paid a yearly tribute of fifteen thousand Crowns, at last he yeelded himself and Sparta to Mahumet; The sixth Thomas, who after Byzantium was taken, and Pelopounesus lost, lived obscurely in Rome; The seventh Constantine, suc∣ceeded Iohn in the Empire. About these times Greece was torn in peeces by the Venetians, Genuois, Neapolitans, Spaniards, Bulgarians, and Servians, or Triballians, every one of these snatching away a share of that wretched Country; not long after the Ve∣netians lost Athens to Antonius the son of Reinerius the Florentine: The widow of this Anthony after her husbands death, bought the Principality from Mahumet, and falling in love with a Venetian Merchant (who for her sake poysoned his former wife) made him Prince, who being accused by the Gentry of Athens for Tyranny, is by Mahumet commanded to be slain, and his wife also, and then commands the President of Thessaly to take possession of Athens; which afterward, because of the often seditions of the Citizens, he destroyed with its Tower, and so endeth this famous City for Arts and Arms, having flourished from Solon to this Mahumet two thousand years: now it is  a poor Fisher-town. Theodorus Emanuels fourth son kept out the Turks by land from Peloponnesus by building a wall in Isthmus reaching between the Ionian and Aegaean Seas, where stood the two Cities Corinth and Me∣gara. To Emanuel succeeded his eldest son Iohn, who being stript of all power could act nothing memorable; he went to the Councel of Florence, and shortly after his return dyed, to whom succeeded Constantine the seventh his youngest brother. He had done good service against the Turks before he was Emperor; but when Amurathes had taken Heraclea, he was forced to submit to the Con∣queror, and to beat down the wall again of Peloponnesus, which afterward the Venetians set up, but Mahumet totally overthrew it. In him ended the Greek  Empire, Byzantium being taken by Mahumet. The Turks, originally Schytians, or Sarmatians, who had broke into Asia through the Caspian straits, and had served Heraclius against the Persians, who afterward served the Persians, and subdued them, and withall received from their conquered subjects Mahumetanisme: whom afterwards the Tartars
much weakned; but after their departure; the Turks recovered all that they had lost in Asia, and much more, dividing themselves into divers Tetrarchies according to their Families, of which the four chief were, the Assimbei, Cande∣lori, Caramanus, and Ottomanus. The first possessed Cappadocia with Armenia the lesse; The second had the Country Sinope about Pontus; The Carmans had Cilicia, and the Ottomans Bithinia, and the Country about Olympus: but in time Mahumet the Ottoman swallowed up the Candelorians and Caramans Countries, who fled to the Assimbeans for help; of these came Ussumcassanes who subdued the Kingdome of Persia, and had long wars withthe Ottomans, as we shall see hereafter. The occasion of the quarrel were Hali and Homar, the two Interpreters of Mahumets Alcoran; The Ottomans followed Hali, the rest Homar. The first Ottoman began to flourish about the year 1300. and reigned 1327. twenty nine years; He was the son of Orthogulies, chief of the Ogucian family, and was called Ottoman from a small Town of Galatia, named Ottomanzicum. He took Natolia and Ancyra in Phrygia, Sinope in Galatia, where King Mithri∣dates was born and buried, and Sebastia in Cappadocia, it is at this day called Siva; He subdued also Prusia the Metropolis of Bythina, and there made his residence, though some adscribe this to his son Orchanes. A little before his death, eight thousand Turks brake into Europe, having passed the Hellespont, and joyned themselves with the Catallani. Ottoman left three sons; the  youngest Orchanes, (the other two brothers being slain,) succeeded. Orchanes subdued Mysia, Lydia, Lycaonia, Phrygia, and Caria, extending his conquest to the Hellespont and Euxin sea, whilst Cantacuzenus, and the Palaeologi are striving for mastery; some think he was slain by an arrow at the siege of Prusia, others that he was killed in a battell against the Tartars; Some write he reigned two and thirty years, others but two and twenty. To him succeeded Amurathes the first, whose elder brother Solyman, that first of the Turks entred Europe with an Army, was dead of a fall from his horse, as he was coursing an Hare. This Amurathes overcame the Triballians, enemies to the Greeks, and took in divers Towns of Thracia; multitudes of Christians fled into Adrianopolis, whom he besieged and took. Then desirous to transport  them into Asia, he was advised by his Priests to pick out every fifth man that was most handsome and sound; these were distributed among the Turks, to learn their discipline and exercises, and after three years to be brought to the Port and made Ianisars, in which consisteth the Turkish strength against Chri∣stendome. He makes Adrianopolis the seat of his Kingdome. He plunders Macedonia, and gives the booty to his Souldiers; but understanding that the Mysians and Triballians had raised a great Army against him, was resolved to restore to the Greeks their Cities again, and to return into Asia, had not the Earthquake which overthrew the walls of many Townes, invited  the Turkes to possess them. He falls upon the Triballi as they were in drink, and subdues them. Susman King of Mysia, to pacifie Amurathes, bestows his daughter on him, the other he marrieth to Andronicus the son of Iohn, who became stipendary and tributary to the Sultan. After this, Amurathes subdues the Governours of Asia who had revolted from him. Whilst he with Iohn the Emperour were absent in Asia, his son Sanzes, with Andronicus Iohns son, combine against their Fathers, who were rewarded both with the losse of their eyes. Amurathes at last subdued Lararus the Despot of Servia or Triballia, and put him in prison: to revenge this wrong, a servant of Lazarus faining himself a fugitive, got access to the Sultan, whom presently he run through with his sword; and so dyed Amurathes, after he had fought seven and thirty Battels, and reigned two and thirty years, some say but three and twenty. His sonne Bajazet suc∣ceeded. 1389. Bajazet the first, with strangling his brother Iagupe, begins his Reign: he enters with a great Army the
Bulgarian and Servian Countries, called  anciently Mysia and Triballia, along Isther to the Pontic sea, and defeats Marcus the Despot with all the Nobility, and so rangeth through Illiricum, Macedonia and Albania, even to Hungary without opposition, driving thence multitudes of Christians, and infinite store of plunder. Shortly after, he over∣runs Thessaly and Thrace, even to Bosphorus, then destroyes the Suburbs of Byzantium, and so affrighteth Iohn Palaeologus, that he is forced to seek out aid of the French; Charles the sixth then reigning, sends Iohn Earl of Nivern his Cousin-german, who afterward got the Dutchy of Burgundy with an Army to assist Sigismund King of Hungary against the common enemy; divers Princes of France and Germany accompanied Iohn. After they had joyned their  forces with Sigismund, they march through Servia, and obtained some small victories by the way. Then they laid siege to Nicopolis, which gave time to Bajazet to arm himself, who having gathered together two hundred thou∣sand, sent before eight thousand light horsemen, which the French set upon, and after them the Hungarians and Germans; but on a sudden they were en∣compassed 1396. with the whole Turkish Army. The French first go to wrack; the Hungarians seeing the French horse returning without their Riders, betake themselves to their heels; Sigismund escapes to Byzantium in a Galley; Iohn and divers others are taken, some whereof were cut in peeces by Bajazets com∣mand; Iohn with five others were ransomed for two hundred thousand  Crowns, which was paid by Iames Prince of Mytilene. Iohn upon his return or∣dained the Order of the Golden-Fleece, in memory of his banishment in that Country where the Golden-Fleece was found by ason, and where Peter and Andrew the Apostles preached: Their garment is of crimson Velvet, with a Mantle of the same lined with white, and richly embroidered round about with a border of Flames and Fleeces; the Hood also is of crimson Velvet, the Collar of gold, the Toison or Fleece hanging thereat, either in memory of Iasons, or of Gideons Fleece. Some think this order was instituted afterward by Philip Duke of Burgundy and Earl of Flanders in the year 1429. having a resolution to conquer the Holy-Land. Bajazet after this victory returns to the siege of Constantinople, which he was forced to give over, upon the entring of Tamerlan into Asia, having four hundred thousand horse, and six hundred thousand foot. This Tamerlan, called by the Greeks Timyres, was a Citizen of Samarcanda Metropolis of the Zagatains in Tartary. He entring Asia takes in some Towns of Armenia, and sets on fire Sultania called of old Tygranocerta sometime the seat of the Persian Kings. So having crossed Euphrates, he enters Cappadocia where he took Sebastia now called Suias, and in it put to death Orthobules Bajazets son. He caused his horse to tread to death all the Captives, being innumerable. Bajazet with a great Army met him at mount Stella, where Pompy overthrew Mi∣thridates, at the foot of Antitaurus, a cruel battel is fought, in which a hundred and forty thousand were slain; Bajazet is taken, his horse being shot under 1400. him with many arrows, who being brought to Tamerlan was shut up in a iron Cage, which was in derision carried through Asia, and made Tamerlans footstool when he took horse: thus was the murtherer of his brother used, and that cruel Butcher of Christians two years ago, when he defeated the French and Hunga∣rians. At last perceiving how he was made the scorn of the world, and forced to eat the scraps that were flung from Tamerlans table like a dog, and seeing his Concubines abused in his presence, chiefly his beloved Wife, the daughter of Lazarus the Despot, out of impatience dasheth out his brains against the  iron grates of his Cage, and so dyed, being unwilling to be carried alive in triumph to Samarcanda. After this victory Tamerlan having passed over Taurus, enters Mesopotamia, subduing all before him even to the Syrian sea. He defeated the Egyptian Sultan, not far from Pelusium. All the Cities of Syria, even Damascus at last yeelded to him. His custome was to present a white Flag the first day that
he sate down before any place, the next day a red one, and the third a black; the first did signifie mercy, the second punishment, and the third death to those that held out three dayes against him. So having glutted himself with spoils and victories, and the plague raging in his Army upon the desarts of Egypt, he returns in triumph to Samarcanda, where he died; he reigned forty years, and Bajazet 24. others say 26. What Tamerlan suddenly got, was as sud∣denly 1402. lost by his sons, in their mutual quarrels. Bajazet left five sons; the first Ioshua, who seised on the Dominion by the help of the Souldiers, and four years after was killed by his brother Mulsuman, whom some call Solyman. This fought with his other brother Moyses, whom Tamerlan had taken prisoner,  and set at liberty. This Moyses was overcome by Mulsuman; but afterward for his insolent government he is deposed, and delivered by the army to Moyses, who put him to death. Moyses afterward for his tyrannie is delivered 1412. to his other brother Mahumet, who strangles him, and imprisons the other brother Mustapha for aiming at the Empire. But the Greeks give to Baiazet two sons only, to wit Celebinus and Mustapha. Scandia or Scandinavia, from whence of old issued out upon the Roman Empire, Swedes, Normans, Vandals and Goths, contains now three Kingdomes, Swethland, Denmark, and Norway: Swethland is the ancienter, giving original to the Kings of Denmark and Norway; for Dan the first king of Denmark, which from him was called Dania, was the son of Humel the sixteenth King of Sweden;  but there had been five and twenty Kings in Sweden, before there was any King in Norway. Haland and others who succeeded him were but petty Kings, Harald the first was the first Monarch there. Sweden was governed by its own Kings, till Erichson (otherwise Smeck) King of Sweden and Norway was deposed by his subjects, and Albert Duke of Megapolis his sisters sonne made King, who oppressing the Nobility, and filling the kingdome with Germans, the Peers fell off from him to Margaret Queen of Denmark and Norway, who was then in arms against Albert, and so the three kingdoms were united; till the Kings began to despise the Swedes, and commit all power to the Danes; whereupon the Swedes and Norwegians chose Charls the son of Canutus, a Noble  man of Swethland, for their King: but the Norwegians being enticed by Chri∣stiern the first, King of Denmark, submitted to the Danes. In Swethland, Gustavus the first descended from the ancient Swedish kings, freed his country from the Danish yoke; in thankful remembrance of which benefit, his posterity are allowed by the Swedes to inherit the kingdome. The first Christian King of Swethland was Biornus; before whom though they reckon an hundred Kings, yet are their stories so defective, that most of their names and actions are buried in oblivion. This Biornus lived about the year 816. in the time of Lewis son to Charls the Great. The next we find after him is Ericus Sanctus, whom they reckon their 124. King. After him the posterity  of Suercherus and Ericus reigned by turns: for Suercherus king of the Goths and Swedes, being murthered by his own servant, Ericus obtained the king∣dome by his worth and prowesse; He made good lawes, converted the Fin∣landers to Christ, and governed his kingdom in peace and justice; yet he was murthered by his Nobility. To whom succeeded Charls the son of Suercherus, after he had reigned two years over the Ostrogoths, who fell off from the Swedes for choosing Ericus to be their King; after whose death he governed both kingdoms eight years: but being hated for his affection to the Daes, he was murthered by Canutus the sonne of Ericus Sanctus, who believed that Charls had conspired with the Danes to murther his father: He died in the  year 1168. Cauutus succeeded, the son of Ericus Sanctus, who died with grief for murthering Charls, in the year 1192. Suercherus the son of Charls succeed∣ed; He intended to revenge his fathers death upon the posterity of Canutus, but his Danish forces were overthrown, and he in another battel was killed by his subjects, an. 1210. Ericus the sonne
of Canutus, having escaped the fury of Suercherus, reigned 6 years and died, an. 1216. His son Iohn, a youth of great hopes, died the third year of his reign. Ericus Balbus, great grandchild to Ericus Sanctus, succeeded; His kinsman Canutus conspired against him, and drove him out of his kingdome; but he raised an army, defeated and killed Canutus, and returned in peace to his kingdom; He subdued and converted the Tavestii, by the help of Birgerus Prince of the Ostrogoths, and then died, an. 1250. Valdemarus the son of Birgerus was chosen King in his fathers absence, who returning from the Tavestii challenged the kingdome, as being rather due to him then to his son; but was resisted by the Army, and contented to be Tutor  or Protector during his sons minority. Valdemar after his fathers death, by the instigation of his Danish wife, tyrannizeth over his brothers, for which he is deposed by the Swedes, and stript also of the kingdom of the Goths. His brother Magnus Ladolus succeeded, an. 1276. who took his brother Valdemar prisoner, and so the quarrel about the dominion ended; He murthered at a feast the chief men amongst the Folchungi: then giving himself to devotion and works of piety, died. Brigerus his son succeeded, an. 1282. the murtherer of his bro∣thers, whom he accused of treason; they to defend themselves, raised an army against this Tyrant, and took him prisoner; afterward reconciling him∣self to them, invites them to a feast, and treacherously layeth hold on them and puts them in a dungeon, where they perished with stench and famine,  (for he flung the keyes of the prison into the deep river hard by, that none might have accesse to help them) upon this his subjects take arms and drive him out of his kingdome into Denmark, where he died miserably with his wife. Magnus Smeech son of Ericus, killed by his brother Birgerus, succeeded an. 1319. He was a wicked and libidinous Prince: In his wars against Norway he was taken prisoner by Haquin the Norwegian king, from whom being de∣livered he fled into Denmark; there he proscribes all the Swedish Peers; which they slighting, call in Albert the Megapolitan, whom by publike consent they confirmed in the kingdom at Stockholm; He proffers reconciliation to Magnus,  which he rejected, preferring war to peace; wherefore he is taken prisoner, and kept in custody seven yeares, till he was freed by his son Haquin. Albert afterward began to slight the Swedes, therefore is slighted by them, and in his wars with Margaret Queen of Denmark is taken and detained seven yeares a prisoner, at last is forced to absolve the Swedes from their allegiance, an. 1394. Margaret the Dane, wife to Haquin king of Norway succeeds, and is now Lady 1394. of three kingdoms; A magnanimous Princesse, but covetous, and one that made no bones to break oaths and promises; she committed the chief places of trust to the enemies of Swethland, and out of hatred to the Swedes left them and made her residence in Denmark, having first procured the kingdome to Ericus her Nephew by her sister, she died, and was buried at Flensburgh 1412. an. 1412. In Denmark, Waldemar the third, whom they reckon their 94. King, suc∣ceeds his father Christopher; he was sirnamed the Reprobate, for his wicked life. In the begining of his reign, an. 1340. he cuningly got the possession of Scania from King Magnus, and his Castles which were kept by the Germans. The next year he invaded Onland and Gotland, having slain in that 500. in this 2000. and lost them both again the same yeare. He found his kingdom much im∣poverished and wasted by foraign incursions, but he left it rich and flourish∣ing: He was a cruel Tyrant against his Nobility, which he endeavoured to  extinguish, therefore they often rebelled against him; but his daughter Margaret Queen of the three kingdomes afterward severely punished those rebellious Lords. This Waldemar being threatened with an Interdict by the Pope for his tyrannie and perfidiousnesse, returns this Answer:
Waldemar King of Denmark to the Pope of Rome, sends greeting. We have our nature from God, our Kingdome from our Subjects, wealth from our Parents, and our faith from thy Predecessors, which if thou wilt not let us enjoy quietly, we 1375. send it back again by these presents. Farewel. He died, An. 1375. To him succeeded his daughter Margaret, who by her father had Denmark; by her husband Haquin, the son of Magnus Smeec, or Smeg, Swetbland and Norway: She reigned 32. years after her husbands death; she finished the war begun by Haquin against Albert King of Sweden, whom sho 1389. took prisoner with his son Ericus, and his father Duke of Megopolis, with the Earl of Holsatia, and many Barons. Albert after six years captivity, is let free  on condition to pay 60000. Marks for his ransome, or to deliver up the City Holme, or else to return a prisoner; Holme upon his Letters is delivered up, and so the three kingdomes are united; and it is agreed, that in the election of the King, the Swedes and Danes should have the first suffrage by turns; but the Danes not content with the first suffrage in the election of Ericus, they challenged it also in the election of Christopher, which so offended the Swedes, that they chose them a King of their own, Charles the son of Canutus. Marga∣ret being childless, (for her son Olaus was dead) she sends for Ericus her Ne∣phew out of Pomerania, and makes him King at fifteen years of age; so they 1396. reigned together till she died. He married Philippa the King of Englands daughter. At last Margaret died, and was richly entombed at Rosehilda, 1412. An. 1412. CHAP. VII. 1. The affairs of Italy, Germany, Bohemia, the Netherlands, under Charles the Fourth, and Wenceslaus, Emperours. 2. The Wars between Venice and Ge∣nua for the Isle of Tenedos, from the year 1349. till 1400. ALthough Charles the Fourth, son to King Iohn of Bohemia, had been crowned at Bonna before the death of Ludovic the Emperour; yet he now being dead, divers of the Electors make void Charles his Election as fraudulent; wherefore in the Dyet of Frankfort, Mentz, Palsgrave, Saxon, and Brandeburg proffer the Empire to King Edward the third of England, who had lately beat the French and Scots; but he prudently considering the dif∣ficulties of that great place, and the danger his own Kingdome might incur by the French and Scots in his absence, waved that proffer: Then they invited Frederick Marquess of Mysnia, a rich and potent Prince; but he refused the motion, knowing that he could not enjoy the Empire (being Charles was al∣ready chosen) without much trouble; therefore Charles presents Frederick with a gift of 10000. Marks. The Electors at last set up Gunter Earl of Swarce∣burg in Thuringia, who came with an Army to Frankfort, whither Charles also 1349. came with his Forces, but refused to hazard all his fortunes upon one bat∣tel, therefore labours to undermine his enemy without shedding of blood; whereupon he makes his peace with the sons of Ludovic his Predecessor, whose lands he had spoiled with fire and sword; then he marrieth the Palsgraves daughter, and so got the House of Bavaria to stand for him: He also by a Phy∣sician poisons Gunter, who died the sixth moneth after his Election; but Charls  is content to pay to his Heirs in recompense of their fathers losses and char∣ges, 22000 Marks of silver, and withall to resign over to them two Townes in Thuringia; he also brought back the publike Mart to Frankfort, which he had thence translated to Mentz: and so at last Charles obtaines the Empire a∣lone, not without much bribing.
Charles in his younger dayes was educated in France with King Charles; therefore brought many French customs into Germany, and parted with the rights of the kingdom of Arles to the French, to the great detriment of the Empire. This Arles is the chief city of Narbon, which the Burgundians made the metropolis of their kingdome; in this three famous Councels have been held. Charles also to weaken the greatnesse of the German Princes, armed di∣vers Cities against them with immunities and priviledges; he inlarged Bohe∣mia with Silesia and Lusatia, and made divers Countries thereabout feudatory to Bohemia. He made Iohn and Albert, Princes of the Henets on the Baltick sea, Dukes of the Empire. He advanced the power of the Senate in Norimbergh,  which had hitherto been oppressed by the popular fury. Being invited by divers Letters from Petrarch and others, to settle the tumults of Rome, he re∣pairs thither; After he had been crowned at Milain with iron, is there crowned with gold. There he stayed but a short while, for so he had promised by the 1355. Cardinals to Pope Innocent 6. lest his long abode there might weaken the Popes power, and cause alterations. At Milain he made Galeacius and Barnabas the Vicounts, Vicars or Lieutenants of the Empire in Liguria. This Galeacius was a great Lover of Learning; therefore by the advice of Petrarch erected a Library, having before instituted a famous Colledge, in which his son Iohn Galeacius allowed large stipends to Baldus and the two Raphaels to read the Law, to Marsilius to professe physick, and to Emanuel Chrysoloras to read the Greek tongue. Charles having returned into Germany, calls a Diet of the Princes, where he contracts and digests all the ancient rights, customs, priviledges and constitu∣tions belonging to the Empire, into an Epitome and method: this was called Lex Carolina, & Aurea bulla, the golden Patent. This contains all the rites and lawes concerning the Emperors election, and shewes how far each Princes au∣thority extends; By this all contentions about the Emperors election are cut off, and each Prince confined within his own bounds. This Patent or Bul was made and proclaimed at Norimbergh. After this Diet, Charles repairs to Pope Urban 5. at Avenion, whose stirrop he held, and followed him on foot. Then dedicated the rest of his life to works of charity and piety; To setling of 1356. Bohemia, where he instituted the University of Prague, and enriched divers Monasteries and Colledges of Canons. At last he laboured with the Pope and 1361. Cardinals, also with the Electors by great sums of mony, for his son Wenceslaus to be his successor, whom with much ado he got to be crowned, and then within two years after dyed, having reigned since the death of Gunter 28 years, in all 31. 1376. About this time, the Dukedome of Gelder fell from Reynold for want of issue male, to William Earl of Iulia, who married his daughter Mary. After∣ward, for want of issue, William of Monts seised upon both Gelder and Iulia; and because Arnold of Egmont laid claim to Gelder, Gerard the son of William gave up his right to Charles Duke of Burgundy. Not long after this, Cleve fell to the Earles of Marca, for want of issue male. Burgundy was then in the possession of Philip the Bold, brother to Charles the fifth of France, who bestowed Burgundy on him, that he might the more easily obtain the marriage of Margaret of Flanders. This Dutchy fell to Iohn Father of Philip, by the death of Otto Duke of Burgundy. Brabant was in controversie be∣tween Wenceslaus of Lucelburgh, and Lewis Earle of Flanders, in right of their Wives; Lewis prevailed, and left to his daughter Margaret, who  married with Philip the Bold, Flanders, Artois, the County of Burgundy, Ni∣vern, Rethelin, Salina, and Mechlin. Philip left Flanders, Burgundy, and Artois to his son Iohn; Brabant and Lucelburgh to his son Antony; to his third son Philip, Nivern and Rethelin. Antonies son Iohn Duke of Brabant, founded the University of Lovain.
The Emperor Charles having sold and given away so many Towns, lands and priviledges from the Empire, much weakned it; his chief care was to en∣rich and honour Bohemia; he carried to Prague (which he had beautified and enlarged) the Lance with which Christs side was pierced, the Nails, the sponge, and part of the Cross, with the sword of Charles the Great, and a Tooth of Iohn Baptist, which the Pope had honoured with a solemn Holy-day. He gave to the eldest of his Predecessours sons the Principality of Upper-Bavaria, to his other son Brandeburg, to William the third son Holland and Hannonia, to Margaret the widow their mother a yearly pension: but she discontented for the loss of Holland, requires it again from her son William, which he refused;  upon this a war is raised, and a cruel battel fought between the Mother and Son; at last Hannonia is given to the Empress for her life, after whose death William grew distracted, and so continued many years. Charles before his death divided Bohemia into twelve Counties, and abolished the new sect of Whippers; he bought the Marquisat of Brandeburg from the poste∣rity of Bavare, and bestowed it on his sonne Sigismund: when he sent his sonne Wenceslaus to be christened at Aix, he sent with him his weight in gold, to make him the more welcome to the Virgin-Mary; at two yeares old he gave him the Crowne of Bohemia; at fifteen he made him Augustus; having promised to each Elector a hundred thousand Crowns, for payment of which he made over to them the publike tributes of the Empire: he married his son Sigismund to Mary the daughter of Hungary, therefore sent him thither to be educated in the language and custome of the Country, in hope that he should be King; he made Lunenburg a Dutchy, and punished those that imprisoned any Clergy-men. About this time, the Venetians and the Genuois quarrelled, because Petrinus King of Cyprus at his Coronation, had preferred the Venetians to the Genuois; whereupon Cyprus is wasted, and Tamagusta taken by the Genuois. Shortly after the Florentines being offended with the Popes Legat, caused many Cities of Italy to fall off from the Pope, who in their Banners carried the word Liberty; with those the Bononians joyned; Pope Gregory sent an Army  of Britons to reduce them to obedience, but in vain; wherefore being perswaded by Catherine of Sena, and perceiving what losse Italy sustained by his absence, returns to Rome, and so much the rather, because one day reproving a Bishop for being so long absent from his charge, who answered, 1376. And why do you who should give example to others, stay so long away from your Bishoprick? Divers Towns of Germany finding no favour or assistance from their Princes, enter into a mutual confederacie; these are called Hans-towns, whereof there be six in Vandalia, eight in Pomerania, six in Prutenia, four in Li∣vonia, thirteen in Saxony, ten in Westphalia, six in Clivia and Monts, seven in Geldria, three in Transilvania, and three in Frisia, besides fourteen other Towns that fell off afterward an. 1554. To Charles succeeded his son Wenceslaus in the Empire: when he was bap∣tized he fouled the water with his dung, and so he did the Altar two years after when he was crowned King; this presaged his foul and vicious life, for he was notorious in drunkenness, tyranny, cowardise, and letchery: In his time most Cities were infested with seditions, and the high-way with robbers, whilst he lay wallowing in lust and pleasures; nor durst any man admonish him, he was so cruel, that he spared not to murther them at his table; he carried about a Hangman with him, whom he called Gossip, because he christened his childe; many times he would make him light from his horse in the high-way, and  murther some whom he met, when he had a minde to it: He was so offended with his wife the daughter of Albert of Holland, that because she reproved him for his whoredomes, he drowned her Confessor for that he refused to discover her sins she had confessed; and then he set his Mastif-dog which he kept and fed in his chamber,
upon her, and murthered her: He permitted many  thousand Iews to be murthered in a tumult at Prague; for which cruelties that City was so visited with the plague, that in one Parish in the space of four months, there dyed three thousand five hundred: about which time was found out by Bertholdus Niger a Monk, the diabolical art of shooting with Guns, worse then the plague: The Venetians were the first that made use of them against the Genuois. The people being impatient of such a Tyrant, notwith∣standing his strong guards, which he was stil changing out of jealousie and fear, seised upon him, and imprisoned him four months at Prague: at last, by much intreaty he was permitted by the Senate to bathe himself, and to wash away 1393. the filth of his body; in the mean while having retired a little towards the  bank of the River to cool himself, he spies a fisherboat, into which he leaps, being naked, and his naked washer, Susan by name, with him, and so escapes to the new Tower on the River, where he is defended by his brother Iohn Mar∣quess of Lusatia, and Procopius the Moravian: but he was never a whit bet∣tered by his imprisonment, for he made as much use of his Gossip the Hang-man as before, and was not ashamed to use Susan for his concubine; so that the people being enraged against him, sent for his brother Sigismund who was now King of Hungary, his father in law being dead, and his Competitor Charles of Naples slain; but he was run so much in debt, that he was forced to mortgage the Marquisat of Brandeburg to his Cousin-germans, Iodocus and Procopius  Marquises of Moravia: this is that Sigismund whom Bajazet overthrew with the French; he upon the invitation of the Bohemians, enters the Country with an Army, seiseth on his brother, and carrieth him to Vienna to Albert of Austria, notwithstanding the opposition made by Iohn his brother, and Procopius his Cousin-german: this Albert was son in law to Sigismund. Ludovic of Austria was slain by the Switzers. Wenceslaus willing to escape, promised great matters to a Fisher-man, who used to bring the prisoners sometimes small Fishes, out of pity: this Fisher-man by the help of a long string got him into his Boat, and brought him to Vicegrad, whence he got away in a Beggers habit to Prague, where having  got within the Castle, cries out, He was the King, and wished all Royalists to assist him; upon this, above twenty repaire to him, and seise upon the Governour, whom they put in irons: Then did Wenceslaus force him to write Letters, and to seal them with his own Seal, inviting divers Magistrates into the Castle, who not dreaming of the Kings being there, were by his command apprehended and put to death: the Fisherman was Knighted. Then to strengthen himself, he marrieth with Sophia the daughter of Iohn Duke of Bavaria: but the Electors perceiving that he grew rather worse then better, did unanimously depose him from the Empire, having reigned two and twenty 1400. years after the death of his father Charles; he was fifty seven years old when he  dyed, being taken with an Apoplexie at dinner, when news were brought him that the people were in Arms, had slain the Senate, and were now com∣ming towards the Castle. Among other wrongs done by him to the Empire, the selling away of the Principality of Millan, was not the least; for whereas till now the Go∣vernours of Millan were the Emperours Lieutenants and Deputies, Iohn Ga∣leacius the Viscount, for a sum of money, is made Duke and absolute Lord for him and his posterity, and the Cap with the Scepter are sent him from Wenceslaus. Under his father Charles the Empire was weakned by great quar∣rels 1377. and wars between the Earles of Wirtenberg, and the Cities of Suevia:  In the first combat three Earles, seventy two Knights, with divers Barons were slain by the Cities: but in the second conflict the Cities upon the Rhine, and those of Suevia who had joyned their forces, were defeated by the Wirtenbergians and Bavarians, but not without great losse on this side, for there 1286. were slain four Earls, sixty Knights, and a multitude of common souldiers: the Helvetians had better success against Leopold the third of Austria, whom in
a  great battel they defeated and slew, so that the Princes were forced to yeeld to the Switzers. The great quarrel between the Venetians and Genuois fell out upon this occasion. The two brothers Andronicus and Manuel strove for the Greek Empire; Andronicus the elder claimed it by right of primogeniture, Manuel the younger by his fathers last will, who bequeathed it to him: With An∣dronicus the Genuois sided, with Manuel the Venetians. The one bestows the Isle Tenedos on the Genuois, the other on the Venetians, who presently seised on it, lying in the mouth of the Hellespont, convenient for Trade. Upon this, Legats are sent from Genua to Venice, demanding restitution of  the Island; the Venetians refused, affirming they had it of him who had most right to it: wherefore the Genuois sent a Fleet of ten Gallies under Arnus Strupa to Tenedos, which took some of the Venetian Ships and burned them, but could do no good upon the Fort, being strongly manned; therefore they went to infest the Venetian Islands in the Aegaean Sea; hereupon the Venetians rig out a Fleet, and the Genuois add ten Gallies more to their Fleet under Lewis Fliscus, who meeting the Venetians, fell unadvisedly with five of his Gallies upon them before the rest could come up; a cruel conflict ensues, in which many were killed on both sides; at last the five Genuoy Gallies were taken, the rest escaped save one which fell upon a  rocke, and was sunke: The Genuois hearing of the overthrow, were solici∣tous for Famangusta in Cyprus, which they had taken from the King of that Island, fearing lest the Venetians would seise on it, or assist the King to re∣cover it, therefore they send one of the Gallies that escaped thither with Arms and Men; the other three were committed to the charge of Peter Picconus, with command to repair to their other Fleet; with this Peter sails into the Adriatic sea, where he did much annoy the Venetians, who enter into a league with Bernabos Prince of Millan, knowing that he being a near neighbour to Genua, could much annoy them, and hinder provisions from them by land out of Gallia, and all commerce thence; they wisely also make a league with Ianus King of Cyprus, angry with the Genuois for the losse of Famangusta: the Genuois being much troubled at this league of the Venetians with the Millanois, which would hinder all Trade with Gallia, Cisalpina, and besides force them to employ their men in Land-service, which they should send abroad to Sea; they resolve to make a league with Henry the Emperour, being offended with Venice for Illiricum, which they took from him: They also send Legats to the Patriarch of Aquilaea, from whom the Venetiàns had taken Trioli; and to Francis Carraria Prince of Padua, on whom Venice did still in∣croach. The Legats of Genua complain to the Emperour of the wrongs done by the Venetians to the Empire; of their insolencies in maintaining the younger brother against the elder, and in seising upon Tenedos, and that their aim was to invade the Empire: Henry answers them, That the Turkish wars kept him off from punishing the Veuetians, yet as soon as the season of the year permitted, he would either come or send an Army against hm. With this answer the Genuois were pleased; therefore they cause two and twenty great Ships to be built; and because the Auriae, chiefly Lambas and Pagnanus had done good service heretofore against Venice; they pitch upon Lucianus Auria, whom they make Admiral of their Fleet, and call home all that had been pro∣scribed or banished for robbing in the high-wayes. In the meane while,  Dominicus Fregosus Governour of Genua, is removed by a contrary faction from his place, and Nicolaus Goarcus made Governour: shortly after, all the Fregosan family are banished the City; Dominic Fregosus and Peter im∣prisoned, but Peter escaped. The King of Cyprus who had lately married his daughter by the the Venetians means to Bernabos of Millan, attempted by
the  help of five Venetian Gallies to take Famangusta, but the Garrison within had notice of the plot, and prevented it by their vigilancie. Aruns Strupa having returned with his ten Gallies from the Aegaean Sea, Lucianus Auria is sent into the Adriatic with two and twenty Saile, which much annoyed the Venetians. In the interim, the Emperours Army enters into the Teritory of Frioli; Francis Carraria besets Tarvisium with Horse and Foot, the Towne held out a while, but seeing no succour come from Venice, yeelded themselves to the Emperour, by the permission of Francis. The Venetians upon this, began to despaire of their Townes in Illiricum and Frioli; but they were more solicitous after their Sea affaires; there∣fore  having rigg'd out twenty Gallies fraighted with five hundred Soul∣diers, besides Mariners, under Victor Pisanus: Lucianus encounters with them near Polla; the fight continued long and doubtfull, the greatest slaughter was on the Venetian side, which so heartened Lucian, that he pull'd off his Helmet, hoping the victory had been got, and in the in∣terim was shot through the head, and so dyed instantly: They that were next to him, for feare lest the Souldiers should be disheartned, or the Enemy encouraged, convey him aside, and place another in his Arms where he stood. Victor held out as long as he could, at length having lost fifteen Gallies, flyeth backe to Venice with the remainder of his  Fleet. The news of this victory wrought great joy in Genna, which was quickly quailed by the report of the Emperours death, to whom they appointed yearly supplications at the Altar of Iohn the Evangelist in St. Georges Church, with yearly salaries out of the publike Treasure to his son and posterity. Then they make Peter Auria their Admiral, who repaires with one Galley onely to the Fleet in the Adriatic. The Venetians were much troubled for their losses, therefore they send to Bernabos to invade the Genuois by land, they might be forced to call home their Fleet out of the Adriatic. Barnabos raiseth an Army, invades the Territories of Genua  with such celerity, that they plundered about the City before they had news of his comming; he seised also on divers Citizens, who were that time of the year in their Country houses. The City was in a great fear and uproar; Nicolaus the governour fearing lest his adversaries would take occasion to thrust him out of his Principality, commands that none should take up Arms but those whom he trusted; and then having paid a great summe of money, easeth the State of the Enemy, and prevents sedition against him∣self: In the mean while the Venetians send nine Gallies to molest the coasts of Genua, which plundered some small Islands, and Sea-towns of the Enemy. The Genuois upon this rig out nine Gallies, because they would not call  home their Fleet out of the Adriatic. The Venetians perceiving this, set sail presently to their Islands in the Agaean Sea; and the Genuois missing the Enemy, sail immediately to Petrus Auria in the Adriatic, so that now they make up thirty Gallies besides other vessels for carriage, by which Venice is shut up. About a mile from Venice on the Adriatic shore, stands the Church of St. Nicolas, which fenced them with a strong wall, and a deep ditch; along the shore were divers forts: hither Peter came with his Fleet to straiten the Enemy; having landed his men, he falls on the wall before the Church, and with much losse gains it, and with it the Church. Then he comes to the Town called Clodia Fessa, at this day Chiogia, with his Fleet; Francis marched along the shore with his Land-forces. The Venetians had filled the Towne with hired Souldiers. Peter and Francis with all their Forces fall to storming of the Towne, which was strongly defended by the Souldiers, with much ex∣pence of blood on both sides; at last the Townes-men being wearied out, and over-powered with multitudes, delivered up the Town and Garrison.
The Venetians hearing of this loss, and calling to mind the loss of Tar∣vistum, and of their Fleets, the exhausting of their Treasure, the want of commerce and decay of trade, with the small hopes they had in Ber∣nabos, they send Letters to Peter in Clodia, to intreat for peace, alledging to him the inconstancy of Fortune, the good that Genua should get by this peace, and the glory that Peter had purchased to the Genuois, it making Venice sue for peace, which had hitherto been so often victorious, and had never been forced in seven hundred yeares till now, to sue for peace. Peter replies, that he was not ignorant either of the inconstancie of Fortune, or of their ancient greatness, but that now they must consider not what they have been, but what they are, and that the conquered must accept of such a peace as pleaseth the Conquerour to give; but the conditions were such, that the Venetian Senate rejected them with scorne, preferring all extremities of warre to such unjust conditions of peace; therefore they resolve to send Legates to Bernabos, complaining of the miseries they were driven to, and that they had no other hope left but in him, who by his Land-forces wasting the confines of Genua, might occasion the calling home of their Fleet: So the Romanes by in∣vading the Carthaginians drew Halciar out of Sicily, and Annibal out of Italy: Upon this Bernabos assures them, that he will not faile them in this their extremity, and therefore presently hireth three thousand horse-men,  who had been high-way robbers, these suddenly make inroads up∣on the Genuan Territories, which so affrighted the Countrey-people, that some fled into the hills, some into the Cities; the Genuois presently put themselves in Armes, with a resolution to assault these Robbers, which when they perceived, they resolve to be gone, but ambushes are laid for them, and all by-wayes and Groves are intercepted, so that few of these Robbers escaped alive: In memory of this defeat an annual supplication is appointed at S. Georges Church. In the mean while Peter shut up the Adriatick, so that Venice was in danger to be starved for want of provision. Manuel the son of Calciannes, the Veneti∣ans friend, besiegeth Pera the Genuan Colony by Bizantium; whereupon the Genuois send Nicholaus Marcus with three Gallies thither, but the siege was rai∣sed before they came; in the way Nicholaus meets with some Greek Gallies, and beats them. The Venetians understanding that the Genuois were careless and secure in Clodia, and that most of their Fleet were sent abroad, they in the dead of the night go to Clodia in smal boats, and were scaling the walls, but were discovered by the clashing of their armour, and so forced to return with some loss. Upon the coming back of the Genuan Fleet to Clodia, one of their Gallies appproaching too neer Saint Georges Church, within halfe a mile of Venice, stuck fast as the Sea ebbed, and was seised on by the Venetian  Boats; they lost also to the Venetians a great Ship richly laden, as she was riding at Anchor neer Rhodes. The Venetians resolve to try once more with Genua, for their lives and liberties; therefore privately they prepare a Fleet of three and thirty Gallies, within their Arsenal, with other Vessels of burthen, intending if they could not master the enemy, to transport themselves into Candy with their wealth and Families; for effecting of this work, because the Treasure was exhausted, many pri∣vate rich men cheerefully brought in their Gold and Silver to the Se∣nate, for which piety they were made Senators. Andrew Contarenus then Duke of Venice, an expert Sea-man, with the greatest part of the Se∣nate, and four of the Nobility, arrive at Clodia in the night unexpectedly; the Genuois then had in the Harbor nine and twenty Gallies, the rest were dis∣persed in the Adriatick; the fight begins
with exhortations, Peter wishing the Genuois to remember their former successes. Andrew desiring the Venetians to fight for their liberty, for their parents wives, children and countrey: the skirmish was doubtful a great while; but the Venetians at last were worsted and forced to flie back to Venice: the Genuois supposing the enemy had been totally defeated and disheartened, grew secure, and neglected to guard the Clodian Harbour; Upon this the Venetians finding that some Keels of their great Ships which the Genuois had burned, were sunk in the mouth of the Harbour, resolve to sink some more filled with stones, in the same place, so that the Genuan Fleet could not get out: the Venetians having done this, they gave a great shout, at which the Genuans were amazed, not dreaming the Venetian Fleet had been so neer; therefore they get presently on Ship-board, intending to fight the enemy; but as they were sailing out of the Harbour, their Ships stuck on the sunk vessels, and could go no further; so they perceived their errour, of which they repented, but too late: those in Genua not knowing of this stratagem in the Adriatick, had sent thirteen more Gallies under Math. Marrufus to joyn with Peter, who finding his Fleet useless, that he could not get out, exposeth his Forces on the shore, and made excur∣sions upon the enemies Territories; but as he was besieging the Castle Bron∣dulum, he was shot in the head, and so died; yet the Castle was taken by the Genuois, who understanding of their disasters in the Adriatick, were much grieved, knowing that their treasury was exhausted, and that the vigilant  enemy would not rest here; therefore they choose Gasper Spinola, a brave man, for their Governour, who prepares to encounter the Venetians by land. Venice having lost almost three years the possession of the upper Sea, which now they had recovered, resolve to besiege Clodia, being furthered by the Plebcians, and women, who brought in their Plate and Jewels; their Army sits down between Brondulum and Clodia, to hinder all provision from the Clodians. Spinola who was now come to Clodia, fearing the loss of Bron∣dulum, made a bridge to relieve it, and perceiving the enemy advancing to∣wards him, exhorts his Souldiers to be couragious, a bloody battel ensueth, in which the Genuans being defeated, flie disorderly back to Clodia; in this flight many were drowned, the Bridge which they had lately made breaking under them with their weight. The Venetians having thus de∣feated the enemy, fall to the siege of Brondulum, which presently yiel∣ded; then they besiege Clodia by Sea and Land: The Genuois were much disheartened, having no Land-Army, nor any by Sea, but their thirteen Gallies under Marrufus, who durst not come neer to Clodia, for fear of the Venetian Fleet; and suspecting that Bernabos with an Army would invade their Countrey, they build a Tower five miles off from the City  in a narrow passage, to keep off Bernabos. Marrufus meets at Sipontum six Venetian Gallies, and twelve Ships of burthen, these he sets upon and bumes, and takes the Admirall Thadaeus, whom he sends prisoner to Genua, and makes his way through fourty Venetian Gallies. Ianisius with five Gallies is sent from Genua to joyne with Matthew, but they could not get to Clodia, by reason of the enemies Fleet; in the interim Ber∣nabos had sent some Troops of horse to plunder the Genuois Countrey, but they were beat back with loss. The Clodians having now sustained six moneths siege, and being forced for want of food to eat dogs and cats, and finding all passages for their re∣lief 1380. shut up by Sea and land, deliver up the Town to the Venetians, who  sent the chiefe prisoners to Venice; the Genuois were known from others by pronouncing crapa instead of capra, and were detained, the rest were set free. After this the Venetians take in , ,
Pola, with other Towns and Castles they had lost. The Genuois perceiving that they were all bent upon their Land-service, and neglected the Sea, rig out thirteen new Gallies, appointing no Admiral, but that each Captain should be Admiral by turns for some dayes. These are commanded into the Adriatick to joyn with Matthew; they much annoyed the Venetians. But Ni∣colaus Goarcus Prince of Genua, understanding that Peter Fregosus his enemy, who had escaped out of prison, had raised Forces and joyned himself with Bernabos against him and the State, sends for Spinula and Marulus to come home with some part of their Fleet: These having set their Forces on shore, Peter with his Companies run away. After this, the Venetians by land, the  Genuois by sea, do much annoy each other. Vpon this, Amatus the 7. Prince of Savoy endeavours to reconcile these two States; to this purpose Ambassadors are sent to him from both, to whom the Prince makes a speech in commenda∣tion of peace and concord, of the mischief of war, and of the vanity in striving for a barren Island with the expence of so much blood and treasure. At last it was agreed that both States should renounce their claim to the Isle Tenedos, seeing there could be no peace so long as either of them possessed it; The Bishop of Aquileia was to enjoy his right in Friuli: so the peace is concluded, the fourth year of this war. The Genuan Fleet is called home from the Adri∣atick: The Venetians send to the governour of Tenedos, to come away with  his garrison, and to slight the castle; which he refusing to doe, the Genuois were permitted to storm the castle, and to demolish it. CHAP. VIII. 1. The lives of the Popes, from the year 1305. till 1389. 2. The history of Holland and the next Provinces, from the year 1298. till 1404. The history of  Savoy, from the beginning till the year 1397. WE will now speak a little of the Popes of these times. To Boniface the 8. succeeded Benedict 10. some say 11. he sate eight moneths and seventeen dayes; He excommunicated all those who had a hand in the death of his Predecessor; he reconciled Iames and Peter de Colona (whom his Predecessor had degraded from their Cardinalship) to the Church again; he absolved also the French king, whom Boniface had excommunicated, and  his kingdome from the interdict. About this time Ottoman laid the founda∣tion of the Turkish Empire; which Nation had been now five hundred years 1305. in Asia, but without a Monarchy till now. About the same time also, Flavius Melfensis in the Kingdome of Naples, found out the use of the Load-stone, and Mariners Compasse. To Benedict succceded Clemens the fifth, of Burdeaux; he sate eight years and ten moneths; he had been Archbishop of Burdeaux: This was he that translated his seat to Avenion, where his suc∣cessors continued seventy years, till Gregory the 11. Jt was at his Coronation, that the wall fell down, which killed the Duke of Britain with many others; the Popes Crown fell from his head, by which he lost a Carbuncle worth 6000  Florens. He made 26 Cardinals, among which were Iames and Peter de Colona, whom Boniface had degraded. He confirmed the King of Arragon in the king∣dome of Sardinia. In the Councel of Lions (which was the 15 gen. Councel) he condemned the Begards & Beguins, who denyed the Popes power, and held 1312. that man might be more perfect in this life then Christ was, and that one may be without sin. He abolished the
Templars, who had stood 184 years: in his time Philip the Fair banished the Jewes out of France; 7. years after Lewis Utinus re∣ceived them again. Rhodes is taken after 4. years siege from the Turk. The pain∣ted Horse of Constantinople, to the great terrour of the people, neighed twice in one night. Iohn King of Armenia left his Kingdom to his brother, and became a Minorite. Clemens confirms the University of Orleans, which Philip erected. To Clement succeed Iohn the 22. who sate nineteen years and four moneths; he erected the Arch-bishoprick of Toledo, under whom he appointed six Suffra∣gans: He set up in Portugal a new Order of Knights, and also in Algarbia, cal∣led the Knights of Jesus Christ, on whom the Templars estates there were be∣stowed, to resist the Sarazens: He set out the Constitutions called Extrava∣gantes: 1319.  He appointed the Ave-Mary Bel to be rung three times a day, towards the evening: He maintained that the departed souls rested in certain recep∣tacles, in which they had not the vision of God, till the Resurrection; this opinion he retracted upon a Decree of the Facultie of Paris: He canonized Thomas Aquinas: He confirmed Burgundian Colledge in Paris, erected by Ioan wife to Philip, the fifth daughter to the Earl of Burgundy: In his time Alphonsus the eleventh king of Spain, by the assistance of Alphonsus the fourth king of Portugal, his father-in-law, overthrew the king of Morocco, and five other barbarous Princes, besides 450000 Sarazens, with the loss of 20 Christi∣ans onely. The Plessean Colledge at Paris is erected by Godfrey Plessy. The  Earl of Burbon is made a Duke. Uladislaus receiveth the Crown at Cracovia from the Pope, whose predecessors, for the murther of Stanilaus, had lost it. Against this Pope was set up Nicholaus the fifth, by Ludovic the Emperour, who having sate three yeares and three moneths, died in prison at A∣venion. To Iohn succeeded in the Popedome Benedict the eleventh or twelfth; he sate seven years three moneths: He founded the Colledge and Temple of the 1335. Bernardines at Paris; he set out a Decretal, thwarting his Predecessors opi∣nion concerning the departed souls; In his time two other Colledges were built at Paris, to wit, the Colledge of Eduen by Bertrandus Bishop of Edua, and  the Colledge of Turon by Burgolus Archbishop of Turon. The Sultan of Egypt committed the custody of Christs Sepulchre in Ierusalem to eight Franciscan 1342. Friars. To Benedict succeeded Clemens the sixth, who sate ten years six months: He sent into Germany to have war proclaimed against the Turks, promising indulgences to all that should contribute towards that war, and besides, li∣berty to eat eggs and milk upon all fasting dayes, except Lent; this priviledge was procured by the Bishops of Trevers and Colen, to their Diocess; but because the Bishop of Mentz refused to give aide, his Diocess was denied this privi∣ledge, so that to this time they eat no eggs on fasting dayes. Clemens reduced the Jubilee to each fiftieth year, and abolished the Whippers: In his time the  Delphinat of Venna is sold to Phil. Valois for 40000 Crowns by Prince Humbert who became a Dominican, upon this condition, that the French kings eldest son should be called the Delphin, and that Humbert for his life should be al∣lowed yearly 10000. Florens. About this time in France was instituted the knighthood of the Star, and in England the knighthood of the Garter. This Clemens was a great enemy to Ludovic the Emperor. To him succeeded Inno∣cent the sixth, who sare nine years eight moneths; he reconciled the Kings 1352. of France and England: he ratifies the University and Archbishoprick of Prague in Bia, erected by Charles the fourth. About this time Iohn Wickliff began to broach his opinions in England. To Innocent succeeded Urban the fifth, who sate eight years four moneths; this Pope consecrated Marius the Nestorian Patriarch, who came purposely 1365. from Mosal or Selencia, where the Patriarchs seat is, to be consecrated at Rome. He confirmed the Order of Saint Briget. At this time Iohn the French king invaded Burgundy, and annexed it to France, which Charles of Navar imed as his inheritance; this Charles the fifth afterward bestowed it on his brother
Philip the Bold. This Pope confirmed the Order of Mount-Olivet. To him succeeded Gregory the eleventh, who sate seven years two moneths; he brought back his Chair from Avenion to Rome, upon the revolting of his Towns in Italy. Charles the wise about this time ordained, that the sons and heirs of the 1371. French Kings, should be crowned and consecrated at fourteen years of age. Iohn Galleacius having bought the Dukedome of Millan from Wenceslaus, took away Verona and Vincentia from the Scaligers; Padua, Tarvisium, and other Towns from the Cararians, and subdued Trent, Perusium, and other places; he defeated also the Florentines, with their Auxiliaries the French. The Polan∣ders for 900. years, even till the death of Casimir the Great, had enjoyed their own Kings and Princes, that is till the year 1370. except Wenceslaus the Bohe∣mian;  but now Casimir dying without issue male, Ludovic the Hungarian, and his son-in-law Uladislaus Iagello the Lituanian obtained that Crown, which his posterity enjoy till this day. After this Gregory had returned into Italy, there arose a great Schisme in the Church, for the Italians chose an Italian Pope, to wit, Urban; the French chose a Frenchman, Clement the seventh, who betook himself to Avenion; this schisme lasted 36. years, even till the Councel of Constance. To Clement succeeded Benedict the 13. of Arragon, who sate in Ave∣nion. About thirty years after Urban the Italian Cardinal chose Bonifàce the ninth, Innocent the seventh, Gregory the twelfth; France, Spain, England and Scotland followed the French Pope, Italy and other places the Ita∣lian. 1378. To Gregory succeeded Urban the sixth a Neapolitane, who sate eleven years, he appointed the Feast of the Visitation of our Lady; In his time Iagello Prince of Lituania, after the death of Ludovic King of Hungary and Polonia, whose daughter he married; he imbraceth Christianity, and is crowned King of Po∣land in Cracovia, and is named Uladislaus; his Countrey Lituania was the last in Europe that received Christianity. Great contestation arose between Iohn the first King of Castile and Legian who had married the daughter of Ferdinand King of Portugal, and Iohn the bastard of this Ferdinand, about the Crown of Portugal; but Iohn the Bastard in the end carried it, and of a Monk became a King. This Pope allowed and confirmed the Monkish Order of Jesuites, so called for often using the Name of JESUS. Iohn Columbanus and Francis Vincentius of Seva were the first Authors of this Order, they wore a white coat, girt with a leather girdle, and a cloak of fine wooll over their coat; they went bare-footed, only they used wooden soles. Charles the sixth of France re∣duced the many Lillies in his Armes to three: In his minority the Clergy lost their Tithes, which were employed upon the wars. The University of Cracovia is instituted by King Iagello, and confirmed by the Pope. Professors 1389. were brought from Prague, they were maintained out of the Customes and Tole of Salt. Two Colledges were erected, one for Divines and Philosophers, the other for Lawyers and Physicians. To Urban succeeded Boniface the 9. fourteen years eleven moneths; this Pope injoyned the Anuates, or one years fruits of Benefices, to be paid into the Apostolical Treasure towards the wars against the Infidels. About this time Emanuel Chrysoloras, by the Popes allow∣ance, brought back into Italy the Greek Tongue, which had been banished thence 700. years. The University of Erfurd is erected, and four Colledges more at Paris. At Avenion to Clement the 7. succeeded Benedict the 13. Anti∣pope, who was deposed by the Synod of Paris. We said before, that to Iohn the fourth of Holland succeeded Iohn the Hanonian, who descended from King William by his sister; this Hanonian was opposed by Iohn Renessius heretofore condemned for Treason; he drew to his side most of the Nobility, and seised upon Walachria; the controversie is referred to Charles the French King, by the Earle of Renessius; but he per∣ceiving Charles inclined to the Earl, appeals to Albert the Emperour, pre∣tending that Holland did now fall to the Empire, the Earles Family having
failed; Upon this Albert raiseth an Army, whom the Earl meets with his Forces; when they were ready to fight, the Bishop of Colen interceded, and a peace concluded, conditionally that the Earl should hold Holland in see of the Empire; so Renessius his hopes were frustrated, and commanded to forbear medling with Zeland; yet he raised some troubles afterward in Holland, but he was defeated and driven into Brabant. After this the Earl had wars with the Bishop of Utricht, in which the Bishop was killed, and another substitu∣ted in his place. At last the Earle desirous to live quiet, bestowed Holland upon his eldest son, and Zeland upon William, and so went back to Hanonia or Nervia, but his tranquility was interrupted by the wars of Flanders with Philip of France; for the Earl of Artois, son-in-law to this Hanonian, had in∣volved  himself in this war, in which he lost his life. The Flandrians having defeated the French, invaded Hanonia, because it sided with the French; whereupon Holland, to help the Hanonian, and to call back the Flandrian Forces thence, falls upon Flanders: under the conduct of William, the Flandrians in the interim invaded Walachria, William is forced to encounter them; but his success failed, for he was defeated, and hardly escaped to Mid∣dleburgh, which he was also forced to quit to the Fleming, who had now got all Walachria, onely Zirizea remained, which was a shelter for William; this Town held out a siege, and at last with a few resolute Souldiers slew and drowned 1500. of the enemies. Guy of Flanders upon this resolved to invade  Holland, and first he defeats the Battavian Army; then takes in all the Towns of North-Holland, except Harlem. The Duke of Brabant claimes title to South-Holland, which submits to his Forces, except Dort; this Town not onely held out against him, but at length, with incredible success, drove him quite out of Holland. Guy returnes into Zeland, besiegeth again Zirizea, which stoutly re∣sisted, though much oppressed by the enemy without, and famine within. A French Fleet is sent to joyn with the Zelanders against the Flemings; Four of the French Ships stuck upon the shelves, which the enemy intended to burn with some fire-ships; but the wind turning about, drove the fire upon the enemy; a great fight ensued, in which the Flandrians were  defeated, and Guy carried prisoner into France: so Zirizea and all Zeland are now at liberty. Renessius the prime incendiary, who had fled to U∣tricht, not daring to trust the Town, was making an escape by boat, which in the River by the weight of the passengers was sunk, and so they were all drowned. Hannonius hearing of the great success of his son, fell sick with sudden joy, and died. After this Robert Earle of Flanders intended to renew the warre with Holland, but is reconciled by the mediation of friends. About this time it rained for ten moneths together, upon which followed a general Plague  and Famine. William after this had some controversie with Utricht upon the death of Guy the Bishop, who held some Lands belonging to Holland; he joyned him∣self afterward to Ludovic the Emperour, against Frederick the Austrian, and then forces the rebellious Frislanders to pay tribute to Holland. At last this Earle died, and was buried in Valenciens. He was so just, that he put to death 1337. the Governour of South-Holland, for taking a Cow from a Countrey-man; this was William the third. To him succeeded William the 4. he married the D. of Brabants daughter, by whom he had no children; he assisted Edw. of England against the French, the Borussians against Casimir of Poland, and the Spaniard against the Sara∣zens;  he visited the Holy-Land; to him was offered the Empire, when Ludo∣vic was cast out by the Pope, which he refused to accept; in his wars against U∣tricht he received a wound in the foot; and as he was fighting against the Frislanders, he was slain, and his head cut off in disgrace, and his whole Army defeated; he being dead without issue, his sister Margaret, wife to Ludevic
the Emperour succeeded, who having ruled that Province one year returns to her husband Ludovic, and commits the care of the State to her son William of Bavaria, conditionally that he should pay yearly to her 10000 Scutati; about which time Utricht and Holland fell out, and the Hollanders were beat; but by means of the Duke of Brabant and Earl of Cleve, the Bishop was forced to make peace with Holland. About this time Margaret pretending that her son did not keep his Articles, demands her Earldome again, which he upon this forsook, to the great discontent of Holland, for they loved him better then the Mother: hereupon a Civil war ariseth between those who favoured the son, and them who adhered to the mother: Leiden, Amsterdam, and most of  the Cities held with William, King Edward of England assisted Margaret; there ensued a cruel Sea-fight between the Brill and Gravesend in the mouth of the Mosa. At last it was agreed upon, that Margaret should have Hanonia, 1351. and VVilliam the rest, who married with the Duke of Lancasters daughter, of whom he had no children: The Bishop of Utricht and he had wars, after which he fell mad, and killed one Gerard a Nobleman in his fury, wherefore he is imprisoned, and strife arose about the Government of the State; some standing for Williams wife, others for Albert his brother, who upon this is sent for; the old civil quarrel bursts out again, which not without much blood and trouble, was appeased by Albert, who was Protector of Holland 19 1377.  years; at last William being dead, Albert succeeded. Earle Albert having buried his former wife, marrieth with Margaret the daughter of Adolphus of Clive, of whom he had no children; he do∣ted upon Alitha a Strumpet, who was killed by the consent of the Nobility; these the Earle threatned with death; the Earls sonne interceding for them, was forced to flie into France from his fathers wrath; but Iohn of Bavaria obtained pardon for them all. At length Albert died, and was buried at the 1404. Hague. Savoy or Sabandia, of old Allobroges, from a King of that name, was in the Romanes time a Kingdome, whose king Bitulto was taken by Fab. Max. After the Romanes, the Burgundians obtained this kingdome, and was a part  of Gallia Narbonensis, and of the Kings of Arles; it was a member of the Em∣pire till the year 999. when Berald of Saxony, brother to Otho the third, for killing Mary his Uncles wanton wife, fled from Germany, and seated himself here in the City Morienna, to whom succeeded his sonne Humbert first Earle of this City, which title he obtained from Conradus, some say Henry the second Emperour, because his father Berald had recovered it with the kingdome of Arles to the Dukedome of Burgundy from his enemies, and had made the way through the Alpes, clear from Theeves and Robbers; he married the daughter of the Marquess of Segusia, by which he with his wife became his Heirs. He died at fifty years of age, to whom succeeded his son Amadeus. Humbert was buried in S. Iohns Church of Morienna, which he had beautified and inriched. To Humbert succeeded his Sonne Amadeus Earle of Maurienna, and Marquess of Susa; he was called Candatus by Henry the Third, Empe∣rour, because of his long Traine or Taile of young Gentlemen that al∣wayes followed him. He assisted William Earle of Burgundy against the Prince of Loraine. After he had given good proofe of his valour in that war, he died, and is buried with his Father. To him succeeded Hum∣bert 1080. the second, who having subdued the petty King of Brianconium, that tyrannized over his Subjects and Neighbours: he went against the Sa∣razens,  and in the Holy-Land did good service in assisting Godfrey of Bul∣loign; he contracted in his long journey, a disease, which at length killed him. In his time Bruno having drawn many schollers with him out of Paris, retired into a desart neer Gratianopolis in Narbon, and there instituted the Car∣thusian Order.
To Humbert succeeded his son Amadaeus the second: for his valour and good service to the Empire, he is made by Henry the fifth Emperour, Earle of Savoy, which was held in fee of the Empire, of old it depended upon Burgundy; but when this was a part of the Empire, Savoy was governed by the Emperours officers, who abusing their power in oppressing the people, were put out, and this Amadaeus made Earle. He subdued the Earle of Geneva, who out of spleen, because Amadaeus would not marry his daughter, invaded his Territories with a great Army, which was defeated, and the Genevan himself killed. He had quarrels with Lewis the Grosse of France, which were taken up by St. Bernard: Afterward he went against the Sarazens in Asia, with the same Lewis, and  Conradus the third, Emperour; but in his return home he died in Cyprus. He erected two Abbies. 1148. To him succeeded his son Humbert the third, who so grieved for the death of his wife the Earle of Flanders daughter, that he could receive no comfort, till by the advice of the Bishop of Geneva, he went to two holy men who had retired themselves from the world, and professed a strict kinde of life, near the lake Lemannus; from these he received so much comfort, that in memory thereof, he erected a Monastery in the same place, called Altacomba, which he richly endowed, and furnished it with twenty Monks taken out of the Cistercien Abbey; there did the Earle himself live a monastical life with these  Monks for one years space, and then returned to his government. By the earnest intreaty of his people, he was induced to marry again; his second wife dyed, and his daughter he had of her, which so renewed his grief, that he re∣tired privately to his former course of life in a solitary place near the same lake, where he founded an Abbey to the Virgin-Mary, and having placed certain Monks there, resolves to live and die with them; but that he was again over∣come 1193. with the importunate requests of his people, beseeching him to return to his government, and to marry again for procreations sake: of this third wife he had a son called Thomas; whereat he was so glad, that to testifie his gratitude to the blessed Virgin, he founds a Priory at the entry of the same lake to her,  and to St. Mauritius the Martyr, and filled it with Monks out of the Society of St. Peter of Clunie. At last this devout Earle, after his return from Ptolemais with Philip Augustus, fell into a lingering disease, and then died: He was in∣terred in the Monastery of Altacomba which he built to the Virgin. To him his son Thomas succeeded, being yet a childe. 1201. The Earle of Burgundy, Uncle to this Thomas, undertook his tuition, which he performed faithfully, keeping off all the storms which use to fall upon States in the Princes minority. Thomas being now of years, suppresseth the forces of Guy Earle of Geneva, him he takes prisoner with his daughter, whom he was conveying to Philip Augustus the French King to be married; but the Maid was so in love with Thomas, that she married him against her fathers con∣sent, therefore Thomas would not set Guy at liberty, because he refused to give his consent, till he had made the Earldome of Geneva a Fee-farm to Sa∣voy. After Thomas had returned from his expedition against the Albigenses, whose doctrine was much spread through Narbon, he joyned the Principality of Piemont (which was fallen into divers factions for want of a successor, the Princes issue being extinct) to his Earledome of Savoy. In Piemont he built many Castles to keep the Country in obedience, and eased them of their heavy Taxes, and so prevented all occasions of rebellion. He subdued also the Mar∣quess of Montsferrat, and the Astenses, who were confederate with Piemont.  At last grieving for being forced to side with Frederic 2. Emperor against the Pope, fell sick, and died. 1233. To Thomas succeeded his son Amadaeus the third: he took divers places in Lombardy upon the civil quarrels of that people, and killed the governour for imprisoning his Ambassadours as they were going from Amadaeus to Rome. He restored the Country of Valesia to the Church of Sedun: At last, returning
from Lions, after he had saluted the Pope, and had conveyed his sisters daughter to be married to Charles Saint Lewis his brother, he died, and was buried with his Ancestors in the Monastery of Altacomba: whose son Boniface suc∣ceeded; 1246. his fortune was not answerable to that of his Predecessors, for as he was fighting against the Marquess of Montsferrat, the Taurini and Astenses, he is taken prisoner and carried to Taurinum, with his chief companion and counseller the Marquesse of Salusia, where he was unworthily used, notwith∣standing Pope Alexander 4. had laboured for his liberty, which would not be granted, and therefore the Taurinians are excommunicated; in the interim Earl Boniface with grief, some think with poison died, never having married; his body being ransomed with a great sum of mony, was buried in S. Iohns  of Manrienna. At this time fell out the captivity, of Saint Lewis and his brothers. 1256. Though Boniface had a sister, yet she was not permitted to succeed, because of her sex; therefore his uncle Peter is made Earl of Savoy. Henry the third of England, who had married Elianor his sisters daughter, made him Earle of Richmond. For his fortitude and successe, this Peter was called Iunior Charles the Great. He purposed to be revenged of Taurinum for the death of Boni∣face, therefore layes a strait siege to it; which was relieved with victuals strangely; two hundred Boat-men, for a great summe of money, chained certain barrels full of provision, which they sank into the river Po, so artifici∣ally,  that neither did they sink to the bottom, nor appeare above the water; behind them certain Divers swimmed under water, which thrust the Casks forward; and before there dived others, who pulled the Casks into the town: but at last this trick being either found out or suspected, a bridge of boats is made over the river, and great peeces of timber driven into the ground, that nothing could passe that way; so the Town having spent her provision, was forced to surrender. The first thing Peter did, was the punishing of those who had a hand in the death of Boniface; afterward this City of Turin was bestow∣ed by the Emperor upon Peter. After this, Peter subdued many of the neighbouring places, took in divers  Forts and towns upon the Lake of Geneva, and dismissed all his prisoners with∣out ransome, having sworn fealty to him. So Peter quieted all about him, and takes a journey for England to see Queen Elianor his sisters daughter. The Earl of Geneva takes occasion by Peters absence to stir a rebellion against him, and therefore seiseth upon some of his castles, giving out he was dead. Vpon the report of these doings, Peter procures 4000. English foot, which he trans∣ported by sea to Savoy; his coming was so sudden, that none knew of it till he was there: He first takes in the Castles that were revolted, and puts the Governors to death; then falls upon the Territories of Geneva; but by the mediation of the Earl of Burgundy a peace is concluded between the Savoyan and Genevan, so that the Genevan should pay a great summe of mony to the Savoyan for the charges he had been at in this war, and withall Amadeus should keep the Castles which he had regained. Then he builds a Town called Mar∣gesus, upon the bank of the Lake and four Castles in the Territories of Vienna; afterward he makes a journy into Germany to visit Richard Earl of Cornwal, who had married Elianors sister Queen of England, and was in competition with Alphonsus for the Empire. Peter having sworn fealty to Richard, obtains of him full power and right over the Taurini, Ueragri, Salassii, and Uaulxii, for him and his posterity; but at length Peter being returned from Germany into Savoy, fell into a lingring malady, of which he dyed, having made his 1268.  brother Philip (being then at Rome) his heire and successor, in confirmation of which he caused his Ring to be delivered to him, as Alexander did to Perdices, this custome continued ever after in Savoy. Philip having received the ring of S. Maurice, (which had been given to Peter by a certain Abbot) succeeds in the
Earldorne; he was a Church-man,  and held the Bishopricks of Lions and Valentium in Commendam; but this Church∣life he forsook, and married. Those of Berne and Friburgh, having made their peace with the Emperor Ralph of Habspurgh, who had made war upon the Switzers, he takes some towns and forts from this Philip, who complained thereof to the Pope, hoping he would have dealt with the Emperor for satis∣faction; but finding none, he fell sick with discontent, and so for ten yeares together pined away, and died. He divided his estate before he died, among 1285. his Brothers sons: to Thomas the eldest he bequeathed Piedmont; to Lewis the youngest, the Barony of Uaulxium; but to Amadeus the middlemost, whom he had bred and loved best, he gave Savoy; for confirmation of which, lest his  brothers afterward should quarrel with him, he bestowed on him S. Maurice his Ring, and caused mony to be stamped with his name on it; he also by his last will ordered, that if either of the other two brothers should repine at this division as being unjust, he should forfeit his legacie. Before his death, he caused proclamation to be made through Savoy and Burgundy, that if he had done wrong to any man, or was indebted to him, he would make satisfaction to the full. He bestowed the richest furniture of his house upon the Abby of Altacomba, where he would be buried with his Ancestors, and increased the revenues thereof. To Philip succeeded Amadeus 4. his brothers second son. He had long war with the Earl of Geneva, and Humbert the Delphin of Uienna: the Genevan laboured to incense Thomas, under pretext of wrong done him by Amadeus his younger brother, for accepting Savoy; but Thomas was so faithful, that he would not stir against his brother; wherefore the Delphin got him with some of his forces which he had raised in defence of his brother, into an ambush, and slew him: but fearing lest Amadeus would be revenged upon his Country for this slaughter, he invites the Genevan to fall with fire and sword upon the lands of Lewis the youngest brother, hoping by this to keep off the Savoyan forces from his own land. Amadeus seeing that one of his brothers was killed, and the lands of the other wasted, fals suddenly with an army upon the Gene∣van  territories, seiseth on the bridge which joyned Savoy with his brothers country, and guards it; the Genevan being amazed at this sudden coming of Amadeus, presently flies; the Savoyan takes in some forts and castles, which he furnisheth with men and provision to keep off any more incursions into his brothers country; the territories on both sides are miserably wasted with fire and sword, and the inhabitants with plague and famine, till peace was concluded by the Popes Legats, and the English and Burgundian Ambassadors: 1298. but this peace lasted not long; for when the Delphin understood that the Friburgers whom the Savoyan assisted, were overthrown by the Bernens, he took occasion upon this to invade the Savoyan territories, against his oath  and promise. Amacleus was now forced to take arms, therefore invades the enemies country, takes the town Bellocomba, and puts all that made resistance to the sword; then he marcheth to Goncelli whither the Delphin had fled; to him Amadeus sends an Herald, accusing him of his perjury, and challenging him either singly into the field, of to meet him with his army; the Delphin returned him this answer, That he would not contend with him in strength of body, in which mans glory consisted not, for Buls were stronger then men, but he would encounter his Army with another, when time served. Amadeus perceiving the siege would be long, and his provisions failed, marched back, and in the way took in a Castle, and seised upon great store of cattel▪ but the  Rear of his Army was cut off by the Delps souldiers who lay in ambush, and much of the cattel were regaitted. The Savoyan upon this resolves to raise more forces, but by the means of Charles King of Sioily a peace is made be∣tween the Savoyan, the Genevan, and the Delphin. The city Iurea upon the confines of Piedmont, being long oppressed by the factions of Cuelphs and G∣bellines, at last chose Auadeus for their Protector, who reconoiled the
faction,  and abolished their names. But in the absence of Amadeus, the Earle of Geneva builds a Castle near the Town, much offensive to the Savoyen. He again on the other side builds a Castle to offend the Genevan, and so the peace is broken again. The Delphin also, who still sided with the Genevan against Savoy, draws away some of the Savoyen Tenants from their allegiance, chiefly Mom∣belius Lord of Entrementium. Hereupon Amadeus besiegeth Entremontium, and takes it and in it the Lord, who falling on his knees begged pardon, and had it. Whilst Amadeus was employed in besieging Entremontium, the Earle of Geneva by the help of a faction in the City, got possession of it, which did properly belong to the Bishop of Geneva, not to the Earle; but in a short time the City declaring for the Savoyen, drove out the faction, and the Earle was fain to flie: Many were laid in irons, and their houses pulled down, whom Amadeus put to death as soon as he came, and took the Castle which held out against him, putting all within it to the sword, except the women: shortly after the Bishop was banished for plotting to bring in the Earle of Geneva again, and his Castle pulled down: Not long after the Earle of Geneva dieth, and so doth the Delphin, whose sons conspired to continue their fathers quarrel against the Savoyen, who hereupon sends his son Edward with a puissant Army against them; Edward obtains a glorious victory, and returns to his father with great joy: At length the Countries being wasted with long war, a peace is concluded, and the Savoyens daughter is married to William Earle of Geneva; but this peace lasted not above two years; for the Delphin perceiving that he could not perswade the Genevan to break with his father in law, labours by treachery to get the Town and Abbey of Ambrunaya, for that purpose deals secretly with three wicked Monks of that Abbey, born in Delphiny, to betray the place, which they did, by letting in through a back∣gate the Delphins forces; this being done, the three Monks seise on the Abbot in the Church-porch betimes in the morning as he was going to Masse, and hanged him from a high window, because he was alwayes averse from their wicked courses; the Savoyen hearing of this wicked act, sends a considerable Army thither, who suddenly seised on Ambrunaya, puts all to the sword that  were for the Delphin, and sends the three Monks to the Ecclesiastick Magi∣strate to be punished. The Delphin upon this, takes by treachery from the Savoyen the Castle Mirebellum, which he strongly garrisons, and returns to Delphiny, when he heard that the Savoyen was upon his march with a great Army, who sits down before the strong Town of St. German in the Delphinat; but perceiving the place was well provided of all things to endure a long siege, he useth this stratagem: He riseth with his Army pretending to besiege Languienum; when those of St. German seeing the danger Langienum was in, sent out their chief provisions and forces to relieve it: Upon this, the Savoyen returns with his Army to S. German, which he takes with ease, being destitute of their aid, which could not get in to them, yet the Towns-men fought till they were almost all slain; the Castle also at last yeelded: then Amadeus be∣siegeth and taketh the Town Amberievum. The loss of these two places so grieved the Delphin, that shortly after he fell sick and died. About which 1304. time was the war between Philip of France and the Flemings; Philip to make himself so much the stronger, got the Savoyen and Delphin to resign both their Armies to him, which they did; and after a long war peace is concluded. Amadeus made his son Edward General of the Savoy forces. This Amadeus for his good service at Rhodes was honoured with the title of Great, and a silver Crosse (the Arms of the Knights of S. Iohn of Ierusalem)  was added to his Arms. He instituted a Colledge for six little children in the Monastery of Cluny, who were to pray for the Earles of Savoy; because the Earle and his wife both dreamed at one time, that they saw six little children pray to God to send the Earl and his Countess issue which hitherto they wanted: This Colledge was called the Holy Covent. At
last, Amadeus, as he  was going to Avenion to procure aid for his son in law, the Emperour of By∣zantium, against the Turks, died, and was buried in Altacomba. Edward the ninth, Earle of Savoy, received the Ring, and succeeded to his 1323. father; he was a good Prince and Souldier, but so wasteful in his expences, that he was forced to raise heavy Taxes from his people; he picked a quarrel with Foucignius who married his sister Mary, and without any cause at all, made war upon him, in which his Army was defeated, and had almost been taken prisoner himself, but that he was rescued by the Lord of Entremontium, whose life he had saved heretofore, when he was taken by his father Amadeus. This same Edward interceded for his life the second time, where being Am∣bassadour  for the Delphin at Paris, he killed in the Kings own presence the governour of his Palace, for which he had suffered, if Edward, being then pre∣sent, had not begged his pardon. This Edward died with grief at Paris, for 1329. the ill success he had in his former war, and is buried in Altacomba. Amadeus the fifth, brother to Edward being at Avenion with Pope Iohn 22. is called home against his will, and invested in the Earldome by the Ring; Edwards daughter, by the Salique law, is put by; but her husband the Duke of Britan would not suffer her to give up her right till she received a great summe of money for it. The Delphin growing insolent for the victory he got a while ago over Edward, began now with fire and sword to waste the borders of  Savoy. Hereupon Amadeus, though otherwise a peaceable Prince, is forced to take Arms in his subjects right, having first made a league with the Earl of Geneva; he therefore first sets upon the Castle Monthousiun, which he took with great resolution and courage, for he was the first that scaled the walls, and leapt down thence upon a Plain, keeping off the Enemy till his forces came to his assistance: after this he built and took in other Castles. The Delphin to requite Amadeus, besiegeth the Castle Perrieria in Savoy; but as he was coming too near to view the works, is killed with an arrow; whereupon the Castle was the more fiercely assaulted, and at last surrendered, upon con∣dition that they should have their lives; but the Articles were presently bro∣ken by the besiegers, who put all the besieged to death, for the losse of their Commander, having no regard of sexe or age: the Castle also is totally demolished. But when Humbert the Delphins brother succeeded, Philip Valoise makes a firm peace between Savoy and the Delphinat: So Amadeus gives himself totally to building, repairing, and enriching of Religious houses; he gathered together all his Ancesters bones which had been buried abroad, and laid them up in the Chappel of Altacomba. At last he died, having lost a young son Amadeus nine years old. Amadeus 6. succeeded, surnamed the Green, because he and his Court did wear 1342. usually green cloaths. Upon the death of Robert King of Sicily, the Principality of Piedmont fell to this Amadeus, and to Iames Prince of Mora. Roberts Neece being rejected by the Salique law. The first act Amadeus did, was the restoring of the Bishop of Sednuum to his place, being wrongfully thrust out by the giddy multitude. After this, new quarrels arise between him and the Delphin, because Hugh of Geneva had got the Baronry of Geisium, which was given by Hugard Lord thereof to Amadeus the fifth of Savoy. Amadeus the sixth sends to Hugh that he should come and do his homage for that Baronry; this he refused, saying, that he was bound to do his homage to the Delphin, not to him. Whereupon the Savoyen takes the Castle of Florimontum by storm, and shortly after the strong Town Geisium. Hugh of Geneva to requite this, takes some Forts in Savoy, and puts all to the Sword. Great slaughter and spoil is done on both sides, till the Delphin resigned his interest in the Delphinat to Philip Valoise the French King. Upon this, the limits of Savoy, and the Delphinat are so setled, that all occasion of future quarels are taken away. The river of Guyerus is made the bounder of their Territories: But no sooner had Amadeus disbanded his forces, when the Archbishop of Millan
took occasion to lay  claim to Piemont, therefore entertains the disbanded Souldiers, with a mul∣titude of high-way men, whom he employed to invade Piemont; yet in this action he would not be seen himself. But the Savoyen quickly suppressed these Robbers, and hanged up David and Robert their Captains, with many others whom they took alive. After this he bought the Baronry of Vaulxium, and made war upon the Prince of Morea, for killing the Earls messenger sent to summon the Prince: He took divers Forts and Castles from this Prince, which afterward he restored, being reconciled to him, having lost Baumeus and Chalantius, his two chief friends in this war. This Earle instituted the order of the Anunciada, in memory of the An∣nunciation of our Lady: He ordained fourteen of the prime Nobibity to be  of this Colledge, on each of whom he bestowed a golden Collar, with the Virgins effigies hanging at it; within the links of the Collar, are engraven these four letters, F. E. R. T. which was the Motto of Amadeus the Great, who took Rhodes; for the meaning is, Fortitudo ejus Rhodum tenuit. The annual solemnity is held on our Lady-day in the Castle of S. Peter in Turin: this example was followed by Lewis the eleventh of France, who instituted the order of S. Michael; Philip the governour of Burgundy, author of the order of the Golden-Fleece; and Edward the third of England, who ordained the order of the Garter. This Earl erected a Monastery of Carthusians to pray for the safety of this order of the Annunciation. After this, the Earl goeth against the Marquess of Saluzzes, who had conspired with the Archbishop of Millan against him, whom having besieged, he forced him to come into his Pavilion in an humble way, with a napkin bound about his neck, and publikely to beg par∣don, and to take again the oath of Allegiance. Afterward peace being con∣cluded in France, the English souldiers going to help the Marquess of Monts∣ferrat against the Vicount of Millan, were forced to march through Piemont; at which the Earl being offended takes up Arms against them: the English upon this take many of his Forts, and besiege the Earl in Lansa; but upon the payment of two thousand and four hundred pounds, the English are con∣tent to leave off the siege, to restore the Forts and prisoners, and to march peaceably through the Country. After this he raiseth a great Army, and so did Lewis Duke of Burbon against Peter K. of Castile, who to please his whore Mary, had stifled his own wife Blanca sister to the Duke of Burbon, and to the wife of Amadeus: but hearing that Peter was killed by Henry his bastard brother, they alter their resolution from invading Castile, and intend to set upon the Despot of Bulgaria, who under pretence of friendship had imprisoned Iohn Paleologus Emperour of Constantinople; he transports his men to Callipolis, which Amu∣rathes had invaded: the Barbarians resisted his landing a while, but at last were forced to give way. As soon as the Christian Army was landed, they had divers skirmishes with the Turks and Bulgarians, whom Amadeus defeated,  and took in divers of their Forts; afterwards he besiegeth Varna, which caused the Bulgarian to set the Emperor at liberty, who with Amadeus were received into Bizantium with great joy: But the Savoyen disliking divers of the Greek Ceremonies in their Divine-service, urgeth the Emperour to unite the Greek Church with the Latine, to which he condescended; and to let the Earle see he was reall, he sends to Pera, where Amadeus was, the sons of his chief Nobility as hostages, and withall the Imperial Diadem, and shortly after he goeth himself to Rome for that purpose; but being denied by the Pope a few Gallies against Amurathes the Turk, he returnes home without any thing done in the union, which might then have been easily effected. Whilst Amadeus was absent in Constantinople, Barnabas Viscount of Millan, with his brother Galeacius invade Piemont, to whom joyned the Marquess of Salussia, and Philip son of Iames, Prince of Morea; Earl Amadeus hearing of this, was forced to leave off prosecuting the union
of the Greeks and  Latine Churches, and repair with all speed to Savoy, at whose comming the Enemy retreats back to Lombardy; but the Salussian, and Philip of Morea stay∣ing too long behinde, were cut off by the Savoyen. After this, the Marquess of Montsferrat with the Savoyen help, overthrew the Viscounts Army, which had taken some Towns from the Marquess, and besieged Asta; upon this defeat, the siege is raised. After this, Amadeus is employed by Charles the fourth, Emperour, Pope Gregory the eleventh, and Ioan Queen of Naples, all whose lands were invaded by Barnabo of Millan, and his brother Galeacius: against these the Earle marcheth, takes Coma, and restores it to the Queen; then takes divers Towns from the Enemy, and forceth Galeacius to make his peace, which was granted conditionally he should not help his brother, and so all the forces joyn together against Barnabo, who upon this hasteneth to Millan, fearing the Enemy would besiege it, which indeed the Savoyen in∣tended, had the Popes forces come in time, which were now upon their march, but could not joyn with Amadeus, because Barnabo had opened the sluces, and drowned all the passages; yet afterward Amadeus made a shift, and got with great difficulty to the Popes Army▪ at Bononia. These together plundered the Countries of Placentia and Parma, and were preparing to sit down before Placentia; but Amadeus fell suddenly sick, so that he was forced to be carried in a Litter to Murina; and upon this the Army dissolved. After∣ward Amadeus being recovered, and now in the Kingdome of Naples with  an Army against Pope Urban the sixth, in defence of Lewis of Andes, fell suddenly sick again, with the Duke of Andes, and a multitude of souldiers and horses that had drunk of a water which the Enemy had poysoned, all 1383 these died: Amadeus his body is carried to Altacomba. It is reported that Barnabo had poysoned, before this expedition, all the bread and wine in the Town of Vicomercat, whither he knew Amadeus was to come with his forces; but the treachery being found out by some that fell sick upon the eating and drinking of that poysoned stuffe, they were all cured by St. Maurice his ring dipt in vinegar; though this is not likely, yet not im∣possible. Amadeus the seventh, son to the former, having received the ring, succeeds: he was now three and twenty years of age, and had already given good testi∣mony of his valour in his fathers time, by taking in some Towns and Forts upon the River Araris; his dominions were enlarged by the Isle of Teneos, which was given to his father by the Venetians and Genuois, between whom he made peace, after they had quarrelled long for this Island, as we have said; the City Coma also was bestowed upon the same Amadeus the father, by legacy from the Queen of Naples. This young Earle made war, with good suc∣cess, upon the Marquess of Montsferrat, for causing some of the Savoyen subjects to rebel. He took Sedun with their Forts, and made them receive again their Bishop, Edward the Prince of Morea's son, whom they had thrust out: he defeated the Marquess of Saluzes forces which had invaded his Country; the Seigniority of Nicea chose him for their Prince, and so did some other Princes thereabout. But after Amadeus was returned home, one day as he was hunting the Bore, he fell from his horse, and sorely wounded his thigh, which a Montebank out of Africa, who then waited on the Duke of Burbon, undertook to cure, but it's thought he poysoned him, for so the Earl 1397 as he was dying confessed: the Physitian is apprehended and imprisoned, who having cleared himself, is banished out of Savoy, France, Burgundy and Germany, into England. The Earl is buried in Altacomba.
CHAP. IX. The French Story from the year 1313. till 1380. interwoven with divers passages of England, Flanders, Spain, Germany, Italy, &c. IN France, to Philip the Fair succeeded his son Lewis Hutin, who had before 1313. this time succeeded to the Crown of Navarre, by the death of his mother; he caused Enguerrand great General of the Finances, for imposing divers Tributes on the people, to be hanged, and his image to be flung down from the Palace stairs where it stood. This King resolves to make an expe∣dition into the Holy-Land, being enjoyned thereto by his father Philip, who had for that purpose sequestred the Clergies tythes; but before he could ac∣complish his design, he died in the second year of his reign, having left his Queen great with childe, his name was Iohn, and lived not above eight daies: so Lewis had now onely one daughter Ioan, by Margaret daughter to Robert Duke of Burgundy, but she could not succeed, because of the Salique Law, which saith, Let not women succeed in the Salique Land, which was meant of France, because Ammian Marcellin writes, that in his time there were a people in France called Salies; therefore though the Duke of Burguny uncle to this Princess stood for her right a while, yet at last yeelded  to the other Peers of France, and acknowledged Philip le Long, the deceased Kings brother, lawful heir, who was crowned without contradiction; he be∣stowed his eldest daughter on this Odon Duke of Burgundy, and with her the Country of Burgundy: his second he gave to Lewis Count Roberts son of Flanders, who in right of his mother was Count of Nivern: the third was espoused to the Delphin of Vienna: Iane the defunct Kings daughter, was married to Lewis Count of Evreux, who by her obtained the Kingdome of Navarre. In the mean while, the Pope confirms the peace between France and Flanders, by which it is agreed that the Earle of Flanders should pay to the  French a million of Crowns in twenty years by equal portions. The design for the Holy-war is hindred, by the debate that was between Lewis of Bavaria, and Frederic of Austria; the Gibellins that were banished out of Genua pro∣cure Mark son to Matthew chief of the Gibellin faction, and Vicar of the Em∣pire to besiege Genua, which sent to the Pope for his protection: the Pope commands Mark to cease from molesting those who sought his protection; Mark refused to obey, whereupon he is declared an heretick, and an enemy to the Church, and so denounceth war against him; for effecting of which he reconciles King Robert with the King of Arragon, whom he makes to re∣signe  Rhege to Robert, who thereupon presents himself before Genua with fifteen Gallies of his own, and ten of the Popes, but these could not make Mark raise the siege, till an Army was sent against Millan, which caused the Millanois return home to save their City: Philip also, son to Charles of Valois, and to King Roberts sister, marcheth with an Army into Italy, upon whose approach Galeas Viscount, and son to Matthew, proffers to submit himself to the French Kings Arbitrator, which this young Prince believing, returned with his forces into France, where he found the King dangerously sick, and a great mortality every where caused by the Iews, who poysoned the waters, partly hired by the Turks and Saracens, and partly to be revenged for their banishment under Philip the Fair; the Iews are apprehended and imprisoned, who that they might not fall into the Christians hands did hang one another in the prison; the last man being left alone thought to escape by a rope, but the rope brake, and he was found maimed, but the 1321. next day was hanged. The King about this time died without issue male.
Charles the Fair, Philips brother succeeded: He falls presently to execution of justice, being omitted by reason of the great mortality, and the short livesof the late Kings. He caused one Iordain, a kinsman of Pope Iohn, to be hanged for murther. Lewis Count of Nevers is imprisoned for his presumptuous behavi∣our toward the King. One Hugh occasioneth great troubles in France, for building a Fort in Guien without the Kings leave, pretending it was English ground; At last, it was after much debate demolished by Charles Valoise, who with an Army defeated Hugh, and his English forces. This Charles was he who caused Enguerranum his special friend to be hanged for which fact afterward he grew so discontented, that he fell sick, and died; but before his death, he pro∣cured  of the King leave to take down the corps from the Gibbet, and to bury it magnificently. In the mean while, Charles the Fair having reigned seven years, died, and left his wife great with childe: King Edward of England, son to Philip the Fairs daughter, sister to the last King, claimed title to the Re∣gency, as being next of kin; but the French told him that he was too young to govern such a Kingdome, and that he had need to have a governour himself. Philip son to Charles of Valoise told him plainly, that France was not to be go∣verned by women, and that it was unreasonable for a daughter of France mar∣ried in England to claim that right, which was denied to her that was married to the rgundian, which was alwaies accounted French; much was debated to and fro about this business: In the interim, the Queen Dowager brought  to bed of a daughter; upon which, Philip of Valoise is declared King, and con∣secrated at Rhemes, and crowned at S. Dennis, thence he rides in great state to Paris, where he is received by the Nobility, City, Clergy and University, in great pomp; and a match is made between this new Kings youngest son 1328. Philip, Duke of Orleans, with Blanch the former Kings daughter lately born. Philip being setled, resolves to make wars upon Flanders, for not paying the million of Crowns agreed upon; Earle Lewis sent his collectors to raise the money, but they were slighted, and he forced to flye, because of a fire that  happened at Turney whilst he was there, the people supposing that he had set the Town on fire. The French King raiseth an Army and besiegeth Cassel, upon the borders where he Flemings had put a Garrison; but he could not either take the Town, or draw the besieged to fight, wherefore he falls with fire and sword upon the Country all about, hoping to draw the besieged out of their strong hold, but could not: At length the Souldiers returning with great booties to their Tents, began to make merry, and be careless; the Flemings seeing this, issue so suddenly out of the Town upon the Camp, that they had almost surprised the King; but the alarm being made, and the King on horse-back, the French fall furiously on the Flemings, routs them, and kills  eighteen thousand; so Cassel is taken, sackt and burned, and Count Lewis is re∣setled in his Country, where the authors of the rebellion are put to death; William Canute one of the chiefest, was fled to the Duke of Brabant, but he was forced to deliver him up to the King, who caused his head to be cut off at Paris. In the Kings absence the Clergy incroached much upon the secular Courts, of which complaint was made to the King; but he favouring the Clergy was content to let them go on in their judicatures. Shortly after there met at Amiens four Kings, to wit, of France, of England, of Bohemia, and of Majorea: King Edward came to do homage for the Dutchie of Guien. The French King prepares for his expedition into the Holy-Land, therefore goeth to Avenion to consult with the Pope about it, and withall makes his son Iohn, now fourteen years old, Duke of Normandy and Regent of France. Then he sends to the King of England to joyn with him in this holy expedition, but he found that he was otherwaies bent, and intended to invade France, wherefore the expedition into Palestine is laid aside. Robert Earl of Artois, who had been so hot for
the Salique law, in the right of  King Philip against the English Ambassadours, is now quite changed, and al∣together for the English Title; whereupon to secure himself from Philips in∣dignation, conveys his chief wealth to Burdeaux, then in the English possessi∣on, and repairs himself to King Edward in England, who had already made war upon David King of Scotland, whereby the French King is ingaged in ho∣nour to assist his friend and allie; and now open acts of hostility are commit∣ted by the French and English on each other both by Sea and Land; in the interim king Philip to strengthen himself the more, bestowes his daughter up∣on the young Duke of Brabant, who was aimed at by William of Henault, for one of his daughters, and drawes in all his ancient Confederates to joyne  with him in this war; for this purpose he reconciles the Savoyans and Del∣phinats; there is also alliance made by marriage between France and Bohemia; and for fear lest the Flemings should side with the English, the Pope con∣firmes a solemn league between the French and Flemings, these swearing fide∣lity to France, which they promise to keep, or to forfeit a million of Crownes; peace also is made between Arragon and Navar, both kings engaging them∣selves to stand for France; but Lewis of Bavare the Emperour takes part with king Edward against the French, because he thought the French king kept off the Pope from absolving him; William of Henault also was against the French, because he intercepted the Duke of Brabant, with whom he meant  to marry his daughter; the Duke of Guelders, the Marquess of Iuliers, and Bishop of Colen were also enemies to France; but the Earl of Flanders stood firm to the French, he beheaded Le Courtisien a French Lord at Gaunt, for keeping correspondency with the English, upon which the Commons fell to mutiny, and killed some of the Earls Officers, and the Earl himself, pretend∣ing he was going to hunt, fled to France; the English in the mean time take some Townes from the French; these invade England, and plunder and burn Southampton: Cambray is summoned to surrender to king Edward, as Vicar or Lieutenant of the Empire, alledging that the City belonged to the Empire, not to France, but the French Garrison within refused to obey. The French Army consisted of four Kings, to wit, of France, Scotland, Bohemia, and Navar; of six Dukes, among which were the Duke of Britany and Lorain, six and twenty Earls, four thousand Knights or Cavaliers, in all 100000 Souldiers; the English and German Camp consisted of 60000. which by the advice of Robert of Artois was raised from the siege of Cambray, because he thought such a gallant Army would do better service in the Field, then to lie idle a whole Summer before so strong a place. The Count of Henault, upon the borders of France, took his leave of King Edward, shewing that he waited on him so long as he was within the limits of the Empire, being the Emperors Lieutenant, but he would not enter into France to make war against his Un∣cle: The two Armies being within two leagues of each other, prepare to fight; the Challenge is sent by an Herald from the English, and entertained by the French; but king Philip is advised by Robert king of Sicily, and his wife Councel, not to fight with the English, and hazard France upon the fortune of a Battel; the Dutch being weary of the French delayes, began to think of re∣turning home; King Edward gave them leave, and retires to Flanders with his Army, purposely to draw the Flemings from the French to his side, which they were unwilling to do, because of their engagement and promise; Upon this King Edward takes the title of France upon him, and weares the Lillies in his Colours, by this telling the Flemings, that they did not violate their oath in submitting to him, being both King of France and England, and so got the Flemings to side with him, for which they are excommunicated by the Pope. After this, King Edward went over to England to raise money, having left his Queen at Gaunt ready to lye in; in his absence, King Philip by his Neece the Empress, got the Emperour Lewis of Bavaria to renounce the English, and to take away from Edward the Lieutenantship of the Empire, because he had not
paid the summe he promised to the Emperour; in the mean while the French and Flemings made daily excursions upon each others borders; the Earle of Salisbury before Lisle is taken prisoner, and carried to Paris, two hundred of his men being cut off by the French, who took the Towns of Escandure and Thin. The French sent a Fleet of 380 saile to lie before the Sluce in Flanders, which now sided with the English: King Edward encounters this Fleet with another 1340. of fewer Ships, but taller and better manned; a terrible skirmish ensues of six hours, in which were killed 30000 on both sides; at last the English got the victory, King Edward received a hurt in the anckle, which was shortly after cured; then having recruits from England and Germany, with the help of upper Flanders, he besiegeth Tournay, and Robert of Artois with 30000 men sits down before Saint Omer, in which the Duke of Burgundy was with a strong Garrison, who sallied out upon the besiegers; Count Artois drew the Duke as far as he could from the Town, hoping to have surprized him, but the Duke fell with such fury on the Flemings, that he made them retreat disor∣derly, having killed 3000 on the place; the Count retreats to the Camp before Tournay; many sallies were made out of the Town, but at last they were put to that straight, that the French Army under King Philip was forced to encamp within three leagues of the English; in the night time Philip re∣lieves  the Town with 2000 horse, which made King Edward out of hope to gain that place; therefore upon the intreaty of the Countess of Henault, his wives mother, and sister to king Philip, he makes a Truce with the French for three years; the Flemings are absolved by the Pope; the prisoners set free on both sides; the Scotch King is carried home in French ships; the King of Bohemia stayes in France; the Duke of Brittain dieth by the way home∣ward: the King of Navar raiseth an Army against the Sarazens. It fell out well for Spain, that this peace was made; otherwise the three African Kings who had joyned their Forces with the Sarazen King of Grenada, and had defeated the Spaniards divers times both by Sea and Land,  were like totally to have subdued the Countrey, but that the two Alphonsus Kings of Castile and Portugal, with the French and Navar Forces in a great bat∣tel totally defeated the Barbarians, seised upon all their rich plunder, and car∣ried the African Banners in triumph to the Pope at Avenion, where they were hung up in the chief Church. About this time Count Evreux king of Navar died; and immediately began the war of Britany, upon the death of Duke Iohn, who died, as is said, going home from Tournay; he had married his onely daughter before to Charles son of the Count De Blois, and of Margaret sister to Philip the French king; but Duke Iohns third brother Count de Mont∣fort laid Title to the Dutchy of Brittany, and for that cause seised upon Nantes, Brest, Rhemes, Venuez, and the treasure of Limoges. Charles de Blois in right of his crooked wife, claimed the Dutchy, both appeal to the Peers of France and Parliament of Paris, who declare the Right to be in Charls: At which, Iohn de Montfort in a discontent goeth into England, and entertaines a league with king Edward; but when he was returned into Brittany, he is accused for do∣ing homage to king Edward for that Dutchy, this he denied; yet when the king had commanded him to stay in Paris, he stole away thence by night, which so exasperated the king, that presently he sent his sonne, Prince Iohn Duke of Normandy with an Army to settle Charles de Blois in his posses∣sion of Brittany, who laid siege to Nantes, and took it upon composition,  and in it Iohn de Montfort, who is sent to Paris, and imprisoned in the Louvere. Clanda, the masculine wife of Montfort, took up Armes in her husbands quarrel, sends to England for aide, seiseth upon Hembont whilst Charles is besieging Rhemes, which being surrendred he brings his Army to Hembont, where as he was assaulting the wall, Clauda slips out with a party at a gate,
and enters the enemies camp, which she plunders and sets on fire; but upon the comming of the English supplies, Charles raiseth the siege. Pope Clement the sixth being newly elected, procures a truce of two years between Charles and Montfort. Clauda upon this goeth over to England, where a Match is pro∣posed between her young son and the kings daughter: then she procures a fleet from England, under the conduct of Robert of Artois: the English being landed, seise upon Vennes; the French with an army besiege it; but as Robert was striving to raise the siege, he reived a hurt, of which he shortly afterward died, at which king Edward was much grieved, and with an army passeth him∣self into Britany, where having taken some townes, upon the Popes desire a  truce for three yeares is concluded between France and England; wherefore Montfort is set free, and shortly after died. King Philip in the interim caused a strict search to be made for such as fa∣voured the English in the former war; divers of the Nobility of Normandy and Britany are sent to Paris and beheaded, Ieoffry de Harcourt escapes into England. About this time, one Iames de Arteuel a Fleming, at Gaunt, made a speech against the French in favour of the English, and adviseth the people to drive out their Earl for favouring the French, and to choose a new one, or to admit of him whom king Edward should send. Upon this the Flemings were so enraged, that they tore him in peeces and flung his carkasse to the  dogs. King Edward in the mean time with a thousand sail arrives in Normandy, 1346. takes divers towns, burieth honorably the heads of Persi and Bacchon, which were set up at Carentan, for their fidelity to him. Then he went to Caen, where he fought with Raoul the Constable of France, and the Citizens, whom he beat into the town, and the English entred pel-mel with them, about five hundred English were killed out of windowes and from the house-tops; the Constable having saved himself a while in the tower, yieldeth to king Edward, who commands Ieoffry to set the town on fire, becausé of their obstinacie; but he desired the town might be spared, because he had divers friends and kind∣red in it, which was assented to by the king. In the mean while a Herald is sent from king Philip to king Edward, to appoint a day and place for a bat∣tel; king Edward sent word, that he would fight neer Paris, in the view of that great city, which the French believing fitted themselves there for the battel; but the English having deluded the French, encamp themselves neer Crescy in Ponteu, by a great wood; in this battel the English were victorious, in which were killed thirty thousand men; Count de Blois, and de Sancerre, with the Earl of Flanders, and king of Bohemia with all his forces were slain, besides twelve hundred Chevaliers, all of antient families; the King himself had his horse shot under him, and being mounted again by Count de Beaumont, fled to Broy, and from thence to Amiens. Ieoffry de Harcourt hearing that his brother was killed, fell off from the English, came to king Philip with a rope about his neck, and cast himself at his feet craving mercy for his rebellion, for which the king pardoned him. King Edward finding Calice a fit port for his passage into England, sate down before it with his Army, and having besieged it eleven moneths, at last took it upon composition; sixe of the chief Burghers were demanded by the king to be put to death, who willingly offered themselves, whose courage when the king perceived, he pardoned them all. The French king during the siege came with an Army hoping to raise it, and therefore presented battel, but the Eng∣lish would not leave their trenches, whereupon the French retreated. Charles de Blois and his two sonnes were prisoners in England; but he was set  free upon the earnest request of his cousin-german the Queen of England. The same year died king Philip of France, who left two sons, Iohn his successor, 1350. and Philip Duke of Orleans. Then a Truce was made with England for two years; in which time Rioul Constable of France, who was taken at Caen, initi∣ated this young Kings reign with his blood, for he lost
his head, being accused  of Treason, the Delphin having lost his son in this war, and being about to sell his Signiory to the Pope, the French so prevailed, that it should be an∣nexed to France, conditionally the kings eldest son might be stiled the Del∣phin. Charles d'Espagne is made Constable, whom Charles king of Navar so hated, that he caused him to be murthered in the night time; and withall, gave out that he was forced to do it in his own defence, and that the Consta∣ble intended to murther him: Upon this King Charles is summoned to answer in person to his accusers, which he refused o do; but at last upon better advice he came to Paris, his fact was pleaded before the French King, and being found guilty he is seised upon by Iames brother to the Duke of Burbon, who was made Constable of France after the death of d'Espagne, and delivered to the Officers,  who were to carry him to prison; but by the intercession of three Queens, to wit, of Iane widow to Charles the Fair, this King of Navars Aunt, Blanch the Kings mother-in-law, and Iane the King of Navars wife, and the French kings daughter, he was pardoned; but yet he took this accusation for an affront, and therefore carried a grudge ever after to his father-in-law, who when he was raising some Taxes on his Subjects, to suppress the English, who out of Bourdeaux and Calice did plunder the Countries, this King Charles did what he could to hinder the Taxes, which notwithstanding were rai∣sed, though with some difficulty and opposition, chiefly of Arras, which was  quickly quieted. King Edward understanding that an Army of 30000 French was raising, re∣turnes to England; in the interim King Iohn makes his eldest son the Delphin Duke of Normandy, whom he sends thither to take possession, where he is met at Rouen by the chief Nobility of that Countrey, and by the king of Navar, as being Count D' Evreux; King Iohn hearing of Navars being there, makes haste to Rouen, seiseth upon him and Iohn de Harcourt, who was of Charles his coun∣sel, for which his head was there presently cut off, and King Charles sent pri∣soner to Paris: Upon this the Townes of Evreux and Harcourt stood out a∣gainst king Iohn, and all Normandy ready to mutiny. King Edward being ad∣vertised  of this opportunity, sends the Earl of Gloucester thither with a great Army, with whom joyned Philip, brother to Navarre, and Geoffrey Harcourt Uncle to Iohn who was beheaded, these fall to taking and plundering 1356. of Townes, but the comming of the French king made them retreat; in the mean while Edward Prince of Wales went out of Burdeaux with 2000 horse, and 8000 English Archers, besides the chief men and Garrisons of Gascoigny, these overrun the Countries of Poictou and Berry, killing all the French that made opposition; which K. Iohn understanding, left a flying Army in Norman∣dy, and marcheth towards Prince Edward, who having done his work, which was to draw K. Iohn out of Normandy, retreats to Gascoigny; where having met  with the Popes Legat, who came to make peace, and finding the conditions unreasonable, intrenched himself within two leagues of Poictiers, a place by reason of large Ditches and Vineyards very disadvantageous for the French Horse, in which their strength consisted; these might have starved the English, had they been patient, but they would needs fall upon them in their trenches, 300 of their prime men were chosen to begin the battel, which were defeated by the English Archers; the French Army was divided into three battalions, the first under the Constable, the second was conducted by the Delphin, and the third by the king himself, all these three were defeated one after another, the king and his son Philip taken prisoners, and with them 1500 Gentlemen, 5000 were slain on the place; great debate arose among the Souldiers for their prisoners, so that divers Gentlemen were killed, for the Souldiers would rather kill their prisoners then part with them to others; Poictiers received some of the French that fled, but fearing that the English would enter pell∣mell with them, shut their Gates; the king is honourably received into the Princes Tent, and feasted; thence he was carried
to Burdeaux, but the Gas∣coigns  would not suffer the King to be carried into England, till they were ap∣peased by rich gifts and promises. K. Iohn is received in England with great magnificence; in the mean while the D. of Normandy assembles the chief men of France at Paris, out of which fifty Deputies are chosen to advise how the King should be set free: there it was proposed, that the King of Navar should be set at liberty; that six of the Clergy, six of the Nobility, and six of the third estate should govern the young Delphin; but he disliking this way, dissolved the Assembly. The Parisians murmure for raising the value of money. The king of Navar being let out of prison by some of his own faction, strives to raise new troubles in France, shew∣ing that he had more right to the Crown then the k. of England, which made  k. Edward backward in aiding the Navarrois. David k. of Scotland, who had been taken prisoner, was ransomed for 10000 Crowns. The French king was content to pay his ransome, but not to part with the right of his Crown. The Delphin went about from Town to Town, raising all the money he could for his fathers ransome. Languidoc and the Champerois were very forward, even the women to part with their rings and jewels▪ but the Parisians were hindred by the k. of Navar, who in all things opposed himself to the Delphin, who was in danger of his life whilst he was there, having some of his servants killed in his presence. The k. of Navar raised great Forces in Normandy, and sent for 10000 Navarrois, which took divers small Towns; the Pesants also began to mutiny  and to take up Armes against the Gentry, which made the Delphin leave Paris, and having raised an Army of Gentlemen, defeated the Pesants; then he brings 30000 men neer to Paris to curb their Factions; the Provost-Marshal who stood for Navar, being demanded the keyes of the City-Gates by some of the Delphins friends, is presently slain for refusing, and the Gates are opened for the Delphin, who caused two chiefmen of the Faction to be hanged, and then prepares to suppress the k. of Navar. 1358, The Truce between France and England being ended, king Edward passeth over to Calice, and from thence to Rhemes, a hundred thousand Crowns are sent him to forbear spoiling and plundring the Countrey; thence he march∣eth  to Paris, and offers battel to the Delphin, who will not hazard his strength, therefore king Edward burns and spoils all about Paris, intending to ruine all, or to bring France in subjection; but when he understood the difficulty of this work by the Duke of Gloucester, and being also affrighted with Thunder and Lightning, which killed some of his men, he desisted from his enterprise, desi∣ring pardon from God for what he had already done; so now a final peace is thought upon, which was concluded on these Articles, That k. Edward and his son should quit the right they claimed over Anjou, Tourain, Mayne, and Normandy, and that the French should render Guien to them, and that they  should pay three millions of Crowns to the English, and so the Armies to be disbanded on both sides; which being performed, king Iohn returns to France after four years captivity, where having saluted the Pope, he binds himselfby a vow to make an Expedition against the Infidels, but first he means to settle his kingdome, and having occasion to go into England about some weighty Affairs, he died at London, and was buried at S. Dennis. Charles the fifth son to king Iohn succeeded: he made his chief abode at Paris, committing the managing of the war to his brothers, and other Lieute∣nants; he defeated the king of Navar, by Bertrand du Guescon a valiant Com∣mander. King Peter of Lusignan came from the East into France, solliciting the King to further the Holy-war intended by king Iohn; but he could not  prevail, for the Souldiers were employed in the Civil wars of Brittany: at last peace being made between Iane the widow of Charles de Blois, who was slain, and Mountfort, he is declared Duke of Brittany. Peter of Castile having allied himself with France, by marrying the French Queens sister, daughter to the Duke of Burbon, fell off from
the French, and sided with the English;  his wife he slighted and abused, accusing her that she had procured of a Jew that was a sorcerer, an inchanted Girdle, to bewitch him, whereby he might be made uncapable to govern, and so she might rule; shortly after she died; he in the mean time having stript Henry his Bastard-brother of all his Lands left him by his father, drove him out of his kingdome, and then makes war upon the king of Arragon, a friend to France. The Bastard is brought back by Ber∣trand du Guesquin, and crowned, having chased away king Peter. The Prince of Wales restores Peter to his kingdome. In the interim the king of Navar is surprised, as he was shewing the way to the English Army through the Spanish countrey, and brought prisoner to the king of Arragon. The English defeated Guesquin, and took him prisoner, then drove out Henry, and replaced Peter in  his kingdome. Navar having given his son for Hostage, is set free, and so is Guesquin for a ransome. Henry being furnished with another Army from France, returnes into Castile, where finding Peter forsaken by the English for want of their pay, he defeats and kills him, and then made himself king by consent of the whole kingdome. The Prince of Wales being necessitated, imposeth heavier Taxes on Guien then the French used to do, whereupon they complain to the French king and Parliament at Paris, who would not seem to countenance their complaint till their Hostages were returned from England; then did king Charles upon reiterated complaints send a summons to the Prince at Burdeaux, and open war is denounced against king Edward; hereupon divers Townes revolt from the English; king Edward to defend Guien, sends over an Army to Burdeaux, who took the Dutchess of Burbon, the French Queens Mother, with divers other Dames, prisoners, and let them not go without great ransomes; another Eng∣lish Army lands at Calice, burning and wasting all before them; they took and burnt Limoges for revolting to the French; but at this time the English Army had no great success at Land, and less at Sea, for their Fleet of five and thirty saile was overthrown by the French and Castilian Navy neer Rochel. S. Severe is taken by Guesquin. Poictou and Sainctonge are given to the Duke de Berry▪ Rochel is surrendred to the French, and a part of the English Army under Ca∣pral de Bus is defeated. The D. of Britany, k. Edwards son-in-law, strives to draw the Britains to the English side, but is resisted by some great Lords, which made 1356. the D. retire to England, having left Robert Canol an Englishman Governour of Britany, whom the French besiege in the Castle of Brest, and his cousin Hugh in Derval; these both accorded to surrender their Forts, if they had not succors from England within two moneths, and so Hostages are given; in this mean time supplies come from England, which would not land, though invited by the French, but stayed on ship-board till the two months were expired, & then Canol received the English Army into Brest; the Fench threaten to kill their  hostages; Canol replies, that then he would kil all the French prisoners in Britany. The English Embassadors complain to the Pope, of the wrongs done them by the French, in breaking the peace, and falsifying their Oaths; the French defend themselves, clearing both King Charles and his father from perjury; the Pope would not take notice of their differences, but was content to hear∣ken to the French touching the affairs of Flanders; for king Edward desirous to marry one of his sons to the Earle of Flanders onely daughter, sent to the Pope for a dispensation, which was denyed, because it would cause per∣petuall warre between France and England; for Flanders had thitherto been a dependant of France; so this Match being broken, Philip le Hardy Duke of Burgundy married the Lady, whom if the French King had marri∣ed, the addition of Flanders would have been a great strength to France. After this the King of Navar made his peace with France, who shortly after by some assasinates (who were put to death for this villany) intended to have poisoned the French King. Navars wife dieth about this time, and he is decla∣red enemy to France, from whom they take the City Evreux. Shortly after
died Prince Edward of Wales, and the year following King Edward his father. k. Charles remembring the insolencies that were acted in Paris during his mino∣rity and his fathers imprisonment, ordained that after the kings death his eldest son should immediately succeed, and that he should be crowned at the age of 1377. 14. and then should be out of his non-age, that the Princes Governors should not have too much time to make themselves great. Guesquin. takes many towns from the English on one side, and D. Philip le Hardy on the other took all from them round about Calice, so that he hem'd them in from making excursions. For maintenance of the war, subsidies are laid upon salt and wine; all Eritany except Brest is now under the French: hereupon Ambassadors are sent from England  to the German Princes, complaining of the wrongs done by France; the French Ambassadors on the other side defend themselves, and complain of the wrongs they sustained from the English, chiefly that they exacted more for the ransom ofk. Iohn then the Egyptians did for S. Lewis, and withall they desire the German Princes to renew their alliance with France, which was urged also by Charles the Emperour, Uncle to the French king, and by Wenceslaus his son; who to make an agreement between the two kingdomes went themselves into France, where they were magnificently received in all places where they came, chiefly at Paris, where great joy and pomp was shewed, and all prison doors let open; but these joyes and the Treaty of peace were crossed by the Queens death and  one of her daughters. After this, the Emperors, French and English Embassadors, with the Arch∣bish. of Ravenna the Popes Legat met at Gaunt, to advise about the same peace; but this meeting was also dissolved by the schisme of the Church, which lasted 30 years; for Pope Gregory who removed his seat from Avenien to Rome, being dead, great debate arose between the Italian and French Cardinals about the election of his successor, as we have already shewed, Urban the 6. being chosen by the one, and Clement by the other, who held his residence at Avenion. About this time D. Thomas, uncle to k. Richard of England, went over to Calice with 8000 English, who from thence passed into Brittany to assist the Duke in Flan∣ders. The Gantois complain against their Earl for raising new Taxes upon their  Merchandises, for infringing their liberties, and too much favouring of Bruges who cut a channel for the river Lis to flow through their Lands: this occasi∣oned a war; for the Gantois taking Armes and white Caps, were met with by the Earl and his Army, who upon their Petition promised to take off their Taxes, and to maintain their ancient priviledges; and so they laid down their, Armes and white Caps; but Iohn Leon their Captain disswaded them from laying down their Caps, the badges of their liberty, whereupon they took up their Armes and Caps again, and killed the Earls Governour of Gaunt; this was done by the meaner sort, but the richer and wiser chose 12. men whom they sent to the Earl at Bruges, who faling at his feet beseech him to take pity on their Town, like to be ruined by factious people: Iohn Leon hearing of this, and that his case was desperate, if he should be seised on by the Earl, assembleth his white-Caps together, and falls upon the Earls Palace full of wealth in the Sub∣urbs of Gaunt, which they pillage and set on fire; the Earl highly displeased at this, resolves to raise an Army, and for that cause goeth to Terremond: Leon in his absence marcheth with his white-caps to Bruges, to whom the faint-heart∣ed Towns-men surrender themselves, and opened their Gates; thence he marcheth to Dam, where he is received, and shortly after, as its thought, was poisoned: notwithstanding the death of their Captain, the White-caps la∣bouring to draw all the Flemings to their side, went and besieged Hypre, where  the Earle had some Companies of Foot, and Troops of Horse, which defen∣ded the Town a while, at last were forced by the Towns-men to yield, but Audenard held out against them. D. Philip of Burgundy fearing his own loss in these troubles of Flanders, if his father-in-law should be worsted by his peo∣ple, goeth to his brother the French K. of whom he obtains leave to mediate a
peace between the Earle and his people, for this cause he goeth to Tournay, whence he sends to the White-Caps to lay down Arms, and then he would procure them a general pardon and act of oblivion, conditionally they would rebuild the Earles Palace at Gaunt; so Arms were laid down on both sides, and the Earle received with great joy into Gaunt. In the mean while, Oliver, Cousin-german to Roger governour of Gaunt, who was killed, in revenge of his brothers death, took forty vessels of pro∣visions going for Gaunt, which caused a war between the Gentry and com∣mons of Flanders; the like commotion was beginning in France, for those of Montpellier killed the Kings receivers and collectors of Subsidies, and were taking up Arms, but the Duke of Anjou quickly suppressed them, and hanged  up the chief mutiners, and laid a great fine upon the Town: then was Duke de Berry, the Kings brother removed from the government of Languedoc, and Count de Foix (to please the people) put in his place. This year died King Charles, having left three children, Charles, Lewis, and Catherine; Duke d' Anjou is made Protector, the young King being as yet but thirteen years old; 1380. the Dukes of Burgundy and Burbon are made Tutors to the children. CHAP. X. A prosecution of the French History from the year 1380. till 1407. In which are interlaced divers passages of Italy, Flanders, Navarre, Afric, Britany, England, Scotland, Spain and Hungary. CHarles the sixth is confirmed in his Kindome by the Peers assembled at Paris; so are the Dukes of Burgundy, the Kings uncle by the father, and of Burbon by the mother, established governours to the children. That day the King was crowned at Rhemes, being to dine (as the custome was) at the Archbishops house, a contestation arose between Duke Anjou and Burgundy about precedency; Anjou claiming it as governour of the Kingdome, but Bur∣gundy in respect of his Dutchy, and being Dean of the Peers of France. The King, to avoid further disturbance of that solemnity, ordered that Burgundy for that time should sit next the King; wherefore Anjou being set down first, Burgundy thrusts himself between him and the King. At this time the English had laid siege to Nantes in Britany, but having lost before it some prime Commanders upon the sallying out of the Garrison, they raised the siege: the Britons being wearied with war, desire their Duke to make his peace with the French King, or else they would forsake him; whereupon he was forced to  send Ambassadours to beg for peace, which he obtained, and swore fealty to the King, but would not acknowledge Pope Clement; so the English return home. Anjou the Regent of France did much favour Pope Clement, because he promised to give him the Kingdome of Sicily, which depended on the Church; for his adversary Pope Urban had sent for the Hungarian to selfe on that Kingdome, and to revenge the death of his brother Andrew, murthered by his wife Queen Iane: but Pope Clement who had received Avenion from her, was willing to support her cause, therefore adviseth her to make Duke d' Anjou her son and heir, which she did: he to raise an Army, got the King to grant him Subsidies, which did much vex the people, so that at Paris they mutiny, yet are appeased by good words; but finding no deeds, they fall upon the Iews, whom they plunder; and then upon the Kings collectors and re∣ceivers of his rents, whom they rob of all their monies, and burn their books of accounts: by this example, other Towns deny to pay more Taxes. Lan∣guedoc refuseth to receive the Duke of Kerry for their governour, and caused Count de Foix to raise
an Army against him, which defeated some of the  Dukes companies, after which he adviseth them to submit to him for avoid∣ing further troubles, which they did the more willingly, because he was the Kings uncle. Pope Clement to strengthen Anjou's cause in Sicily, imposeth a tenth upon the French Clergy, at which they storm, protesting both against him and his Cardinals, chiefly the Sorbon: Iohn Gerson declaimed in the University of Paris against this Popes proceedings, which so angred Anjou, that he sent to apprehend Gerson, but the Schollers rescued him, upon this he retires to Rome, where he is entertained by Pope Urban; a trap was also laid to appre∣hend the Rector of the University, but he escaped; the Schollers grew so dis∣content, that multitudes of them forsook that University. Divers Ambassa∣dours  came to Paris complaining against Clement for upholding a schisme to the great hurt of Christianity, seeing Urbans election was generally approved a more lawful then that of Clement: Anjou stood up, and maintained that Urbans election was▪ forced by the Romans, whereas that of Clement was peaceable. In the mean time, Charles whom the King of Hungary had sent with an Army into Italy against the Venetians, having made peace with them, goeth to Rome, where he is by Urban crowned King of Sicily; this Charles was descended from Charles the Lame, and Mary his wife Queen of Hungary: he without great opposition, obtained Sicily and Naples, took Queen Iane and Duke of Brunswick her husband prisoners. Anjou in the interim tries all means possible to raise money, and imposeth in the Kings name a gabel upon the twentieth part of Merchants goods, which is generally refused: At last, as he was endeavouring by other means to raise money, a dangerous mutiny arose in Paris; some of the collectours are killed, the City Magazine broke open, and the people having armed themselves, they chain all the streets, open the prison doors; and let loose all the prisoners: The Bishop being fled, they broke open his prisons▪ and let out one Aubrit whom they make their Com∣mander; he had been Provost of Paris, and done much good in repairing and building some publike places; but being accused of heresie, he was imprisoned by the Bishop: being now delivered unexpectly, he promised the people that if they would return to their houses, he would the next day be ready to serve them; but knowing what danger there was in being Captain to a mutinous people, he stole away that night out of Paris: the like mutiny there was at Rouen, where the people made one Gras their King, commanding him to abolish all taxes and impositions whatsoever. The Parisians seeing that Aubriot was gone, were advised by Iohn des Marais, to send him with some others that were not criminals to the King to beg for pardon, which was assented to, and pardon granted conditionally that they paid sixty thousand Crowns, and that the authours of this sedition be put to death; Marais returns with this answer to Paris, onely he concealed the  putting to death the incendiaries, some of which he caused in the night to be lung into the River, which made a new mutiny: hereupon the corporal punishment is put off, and the King is content with the sixty thousand Crowns. In this mean while Duke d' Anjou is crowned at Avenion by Pope Clement, King of Sicily and Ierusalem; then he goeth about the Towns of Province, desiring them to acknowledge him for their Lord, shewing that he was the adopted heir of Queen Iane, their lawful Countess; but when he saw them unwilling; he forced them, then marcheth into Italy with thirty thou∣sand horse, not against Pope Urban, left the Country should rise, but against King Charles at Naples, who forbore fighting with Anjou, purposely to weary  his Army by delayes: in the mean while Anjou dieth, some say by poyson, so his Army without fighting returns with his corps to France. King Charles reigned four years at Naples; in the interim King Lewis of Hungary dieth: the Peers of that kingdome call home King Charles, notwithstanding Sigismond the Emperours son had married King Lewis his eldest daughter: King Charles
having left at Naples his wife and two sons, hastes to Hungary, where he is crowned, and shortly after murthered in the house of the Queen, widow of Hungary, who stormed that her daughter should be deprived of her inheri∣tance: upon this Sigismund is crowned in Hungary, and Ladislaus the son of King Charles at Naples. About this time a new war began in Flanders, upon the taking of the forty ships of Gaunt by Oliver Cousin to Roger who was killed: One Iohn Pruneau gave out, that Oliver durst not seise on these ships without the Earles command, therefore assembleth the White-Caps, and marcheth to Audenard, and suddenly surpriseth it; the Earle hearing of this at Lisle, complains to the  Gantois, that they had broken the peace made by the Duke of Burgundy; they answer, that he broke it first, by suffering Oliver to take their ships without reproof or punishment: the Earle willing to recover Audenarde, and to live quietly, agrees with the Gantois, that he would banish Oliver, conditionally that they banished Pruneau, which was done, and Audenarde restored again to the Earle, who presently sent to rebuild the demolished walls, and placed a strong Garrison in it: after this Pruneau is apprehended by the Earls Cousin the Duke of Brabant, whom he sends to Lisle in chains, where he is beheaded and his body broken on the wheel; the like end had divers others of Bruges, and elsewhere, who had animated the White-Caps: the Gantois fearing their turn would be next in these punishments, conspire unanimously against their  Earle in desence of their lives and liberties; and to make sure work, they de∣molish the houses of the Gentry who favoured the Earle, they alter the form of government, and make new offices both for Civil and Military affairs; a war began, which lasted seven years, in which died above two hundred thou∣sand men. The Gantois understanding that the Earl was about to besiege Hypre which held with them, sent three thousand men thither, and withal nine thousand were armed to fall upon the rear of the Earls Army, who was on his march with twenty thousand against Hypre, whilst they within should sally  out upon the Vantguard: but the Earle having laid many Ambuscadoes, de∣feated the Hypreans, of whom two thousand and foure hundred were slain, the rest fled, and so both Hypre and Courtray, are surrendred to him, who put to death seven hundred of the chief criminals in Hypre, and took two hun∣dred hostages of Courtray: then he went to besiege Gaunt, which he could not so inclose, but two gates were free to receive supplies from Liege and Bruxels: the Gantois being no whit dismayed at the Earles strength, send out a party by one of their gates which was not besieged, and went immediately to Terremunde which they took, this made the Earl raise his siege: but the Gan∣tois shortly after received some losse, for two Captains with their forces marched out upon some design, one of them was assaulted and defeated by the Earl, so that six thousand Gantois were partly slain, and partly burned in a Church, whither they fled; the other Captain not being able to help these by reason of the marish ground between them. Hereupon the Gantois chose one General who should have absolute power, his name was Philip Artenel, be∣cause many Generals did oftentimes crosse one another; this Philip by the mediation of the Bishop of Liege, the Duke of Brabant, and Albert Count of Henault, endeavoured to make peace between the Earle and his sub∣jects: Philip proffered to the Earle at Tournay, where the Assembly was kept, full power over the bodies and estates of his subjects to banish and fine whom he pleased, so that he would spare their lives; the Earl would not have his power confined, but would have all, both men and women above fifteen years of age, to come out of Gaunt onely with one garment apeece, and ropes about their necks, to be disposed as he pleased: Artenel acquaints the Citizens, that either they must suffer their throats to be cut, or else take up Arms to defend their liberties; for his part
he was resolved to die in maintenance of their  cause; whereupon they all agreed to take Arms: with this he chuseth out of the white Caps five thousand of the stoutest and strongest, with these he marcheth toward Bruges; they that remained were resolved, that if these five thousand were cut off, they would burn themselves and City, rather then yeeld to slavery: the Earl at Bruges understanding of Artenels marching thither, slighting his small number, met him in a place disadvantagious to him, with his Army, which was defeated and driven back into the Town, whither the Gantois entered pel mel with their enemies: Artenel makes di∣ligent search for the Earl, whom he meant to have used with all respect, and to have brought him to Gaunt with all possible honour, to induce him to shew mercy to his subjects; but the Earl hid himself in a poor house, and thence  escaped to Lisle: Artenel gave charge that no hurt should be done to any strangers within Bruges, because he would not provoke forreigne Princes against him. After this he pillaged Hypre, and seised on the Earls treasure, and divers Towns yeelded to him; its thought that now he had above a hundred thousand men in Arms, so that the Earl was forced to implore help from the French King, and acknowledgeth himself to be his vassal; the French were not unwilling to assist him (though he had hitherto befriended the English) be∣cause the Flemings made excursions upon the French borders; order therefore is given for taking out the sacred Standard, called the Auriflamme: this was of red silke interwoven with flames, it was of old sent from Heaven to King Clouis, to be carried in the wars against Infidels: this Standard was not to be used but in great necessity, and to be carried by some holy Knight, but afterward it was brought out upon all occasions, and therefore at last in a battel against the Flemings, it was lost, none knowing what became of it. This Standard being received by the King with great devotion from the Abbot, he gave it to one Peter Villiers to be carried; then having placed the reliques of the Martyrs on the Altar, he begins his march with a gallant Army through Artois. The Flemings hearing of the French march, brake down presently all their bridges upon the River Lis, except one which they strongly fortified: the  King sends the Constable Clisson with the Vantguard to gain the bridge, the Flemings being hardly pressed, were forced to break down this also; in the interim whilst they were skirmishing, a party of French in boats get over the River who charged the enemy in the Rear, whom they utterly defeated, and killed three thousand on the place; so the bridge was gained and repaired, and the whole Army got over. Artenel upon this, leaving a party to continue the siege of Audenarde, marcheth with sixty thousand against the French, and fights them; the fog was so thick that morning that scarce could any per∣fectly discern their next neighbours, till the Auriflamme was displayed, and then (if you will believe) the mist vanished: The French Army is divided in∣to  three battalions; that of the Kings is charged by the Flemings, hoping to take him prisoner, as the English did King Iohn; but the other two battalions falling on the Flanks of the Flemings, did so presse them that their ranks were disordered, who both hindred and hurt one another, and so at last they are to∣tally routed by the French; thirty thousand were killed on the place, and ten thousand in the pursuit; the body of Artenel was found yet breathing, who refused to have his wounds dressed, not desiring to live after the losse of his Fellow-citizens, so presently died, and his body was hanged on a Gibbet. The report of this defeat caused the siege before Audenarde to rise in haste;  then Dam, Bruges, and other Towns yeelded to their Earl; but the French burned Countray, because they found in their great Church the golden Spurs of the French Gentry that were killed in that place eighty years before: There were also found some Letters written from the mutiners of Paris to the White-Caps, which hastened the Kings return thither; by
the way he stopped  at St. Dennis, to give thanks to God and the Martyrs for his victory, and then restored the Auriflamme to the Abbot; thence he marched through Paris with his Army, without taking notice of the Provost and Sheriffs that met him; having at last sung Te Deum, in Nostre Dame, he caused the Townsmen to as∣semble in one place, whom he environeth with his Army; then did the Chancellor upbraid them with their rebellions, and the King threatned to cut them all off, but his Uncles being there begged their pardons; the Townes∣men on their knees cried for mercy, which they obtained, onely a fine was put upon them, and three hundred of the chief incendiaries were beheaded; the chains of the streets were carried into the Loure, and the King ordered that henceforth they should have no more Provost nor Sheriffs: but five years after, their priviledges were restored, with a Provost and Sheriffs. Shortly after this, the Gantois and English, who held for Pope Urban, enter into a league against France, and Pope Clement: Urban had granted to the King of England the tithes of the benefices within his kingdome, towards this war; eight hundred English horse, and ten thousand foot are transported into Flanders, who made war with divers parts of Flanders, and yet pretended they came to assist the Gantois; complaint is made against them, but no re∣dresses: having taken Bourburg and Gravelin, they sit down before Hypre; but hearing the French Army was comming, set the Suburbs on fire, and went  their way towards Cassel, but could not stay to besiege it, because the Con∣stable of France was drawing towards them with his Army, who pursues them to Gravelin, and thence to Bourbourg, where they are besieged, and forced to surrender, having leave to depart wih their baggage. At which time Lewis Earl of Flanders died at St. Omer, and is buried in Lisle; his daughter Margaret, wife to Philip le Hardy Duke of Burgundy, is his sole heir, by which means Philip is now Lord of all Flanders, except Gaunt, which would not yet submit. Shortly after Dam is surprised by one Arteman a Captain of the Gantois, whilst the governour was gone to the Court. About Limosin also and Poictou there was a great insurrection of malecontents under one Peter Bruiers  their Captain; these did much mischief till the Duke de Berry suppressed them in a battel, and hanged the chief incendiaries. The French King having an intention a long time to invade England, pre∣pared a great Fleet at the Sluce, which Arteman the Gantois Captain resolved to burn, but the plot was discovered, divers of the plotters were imprisoned and escaped, sme were hanged. Then the French besieged Dam a whole month; at last Arteman within not able to hold out longer, got away with his forces in the night, the next morning the French enter, and having plunde∣red the Town, utterly destroy it; then they fall upon Zealand with a Fleet, which they pillage for aiding Gaunt, so that they were forced to beg pardon  and peace from the Duke of Burgundy, which was granted them. From the Sluce, where the French had built a Castle to guard the harbor, the King sends Iohn de Vienne his Admiral with sixty great ships, to help the king of Scots against the English; this Fleet, with the Scots forces, burnt and spoiled many places in England; but upon a falling out between the French and Scots, the Admiral returned home, and told the King that he durst not stay long in Scot∣land, because the people banded against him, and that England was in a good condition to be conquered, because the D. of Lancaster, son in law to Peter k. of Castile (who was killed by his bastard brother Henry) was gone into Spain with the best souldiers, to settle his wife in Castile: for, saith he, The English can easily  be conquered at home, but hardly abroad: upon this the French king, with the Duke of Burgundy, prepare twelve hundred sail to invade England; but Duke de Berry the kings other uncle was against this expedition, and disswaded the king from venturing his person, wealth, and Nobility, upon uncertain success, besides that the English were all in Arms to resist his landing; upon this the voyage is put off, and the great Fleet dispersed without action.
The next year Lewis Duke Tourain the Kings brother, married with Valentine daughter to Iohn Galeacius Duke of Millan; and shortly after the King went to  Clement at Avenion, where Lewis of Anjou (son to that Lewis who died 1387. in Italy) is crowned K. of Sicily and Ierusalem, pruposely to crosse Pope Urban, and King Ladislaus son to king Charles of Naples. Languedoc complains to the King against Duke de Berry's exactions, therefore Count de Foix is made their governor, who married the King of Navars sister, whom he slighted, because her brother owed him a great sum of money, which either he would not, or could not pay, therefore sent her with her son to him back again, because she took it ill that her husband should prefer his bastard son to his legitimate son by her;  when she came to Navar, and had acquainted her brother of her husbands bad conditions, he gives her son a bag of powder, which he wished him to be∣stow on his father, and that he would mix it with wine, for it would procure his love to his wife again: the young man simply carried the powder to his father, who finding it to be poyson, caused him to be put to death in a prison. This King of Navar was also extreamly hated of his people whom he impo∣verished with continual exactions; hereupon he is one night burned in his bed, some say by accident, some say purposely; for being feeble with age and letchery, his body was anointed with certain unguents, and wrapt in a linnen cloth dt in Aqua vitae, which presently took fire by a candle that was in the  hand of one of his servants then by his bed, and so he was burnt, and within two dayes died: Count Armignac also died about this time as he was on his journey from Italy, with an Army of French sent to help the Florentines, who were like to be suppressed by the Millanois. After the two Kings of France and England had made peace, and dis∣banded their Armies; many French souldiers who could not live but by the sword, assembled together, and made to themselves Commanders, then in companies dispersed themselves into divers Countries, forcing the Inhabi∣tants by paying contributions to buy their peace of them. Count Armignac having raised a great sum of money, procures fifteen thousand horse and ten  thousand foot of the Bandito's to accompany him into Piemont against the Millanois: Iames Verme the Duke of Millans General, shut himself up in Alex∣andria, not finding it time yet to fight this fresh enemy; who perceiving he would not fight, falls to plundering, and so being laden with store of wealth were marching away securely: Verme being advertised of this, chargeth them in the Rear unexpectedly, kills six thousand, and puts the rest to flight, Ar∣mignac is taken prisoner, and died presently after of his wounds; so France was quieted by the defeat of these unruly souldiers, yet some of them return∣ing made new troubles, till they were all surprised and hanged, and the Castle of Vantadour in Limosin (which they had taken) surrendered. About this time the Genuois being much molested by the African Pirats, which they could not of themselves suppresse, except they would neglect their trading with forreign Nations, wherein the greatnesse of their City consisted sends Am∣bassadors to the French king for aid against these Barbarians, alleadging many reasons for their assistance, as the vicinity of Liguria to France, the greatnesse and wealth, and ancient glory of the French in subduing the enemies of Christ, and the danger that Christendome is in by the greatnesse of the Barbarians, and that the Ports, ships and wealth of Genua was at the French service; besides, that the passage from France to Afric was short. The motion was hearkned to by the French Gentry, the Duke of Burbon is chosen General; England is invited to joyn with the French in this honourable 1390.  enterprise, which is willingly assented to by the English Gentry; great com∣panies passe over to France, who being joyned together march over the Alpes; at Genua they finde a gallant Fleet of Ships and Gallies ready and well ap∣pointed, among which were divers Venetian vessels which they had sent thither for this expedition, joyning their forces against the common enemy,
though otherwayes these two Cities were mortal enemies. All things being ready, they set sail for Afric: when they came within sight of Tunis, the royal City of Barbary, they see the Barbarians in battel array, who strove to keep the Christians from landing; but the English Archers made the Barbarians give way, so that our Army landed: the Barbarous king sent some of his forces into the City, the rest entrenched themselves, who refused to fight, though often invited, some light skirmishes there were between us and the Numidian horse; but when we could not draw the King to fight, though we burned and ruined all the houses thereabout, at last we resolve to lay a strait siege to the Town, which stoutly held out, notwithstanding the King durst not adventure  to relieve it, but kept himself close in his Camp. The Commander of the Towne perceiving his own danger desired a parly, which would not be granted, except he came out himself; this he would not yeeld to, fearing he might be kept as a prisoner; yet some Genuois who spoke the African tongue, are sent to parly with the Town-governour, who wondred that the French and English should come to vex Afric which had never done them hurt; it was answered, that the hurt Afric had done to Genua, and the Isles of Italy, was done to them, being all Christians and of the same faith. At last they come to an accommodation, the King sends to the Christian Army his Ambassadours, where it is agreed that the Africans shall not henceforth offer to molest any of  the Christian Territories, that they should set at liberty all Christian prisoners, and pay ten thousand Ducats; and so the Christian Fleet returneth to Genua, and each man thence to his own home. France is now quiet, but in Britany begin new troubles: for the two sons of Iohn Montfort being ransomed by the Constable of France a Britain, and the eldest of the two married to his daughter, gave occasion to the Duke to suspect that the Constable aimed at the Dutchy for his son in law; therefore one day invited the Constable to a feast, and after dinner pretending to shew him a new house that he had built, detained him there as a prisoner, at which the king was highly displeased; the Duke excused himself, that he did this to  be revenged of some affronts done him by the Constable, being a Britain born: this answer did not content the king; but the Duke of Burgundy mediated for this Duke of Britany, who let the Constable go, after he had parted with a great summe for his ransome, and divers of his lands. After this, Peter Craon the kings favourite, is banished the Court, upon some discontent taken against him by the kings brother the Duke of Orleans. Craon suspecting the Constable, that this affront he received by his procuring, watched him one night as he came late from the kings lodgings, fell upon him, and so wounded him that he left him for dead, yet afterward recovered. The king was so enraged at this Craon, that he caused his goodly house at Paris to be pull'd  down, and turned to a Church-yard; and suspecting that the Duke of Bri∣tany had animated Craon, he raiseth an Army against him; the Duke sent to excuse and clear himself, but could not be heard: therefore the 25. of Iuly, in the extream heat of the year, he takes horse and marcheth before his Army with a thin cap on his head; his Physitians and Peers disswade him from going in such dangerous weather, but in vaine: he was scarce gone a mile from the City Mans, the Metropolis of Maine, when he was taken with such a phrensie, that he killed two of those that were next him, and hurt divers others, laying about him, till he fainted and fell from his horse, and is carried back to Mans, where he at last was cured, but not totally: the Duke of Britany with his wife and children, and chiefest goods, had taken  shipping at St. Mallo for England, but understanding of this accident, returns home again. About this time the people began to murmure against the Constable, that he could not have gathered together so much wealth as he had, without robbing them: wherefore he to stop their mouths, reconciles himself to
the D. and so all  former wrongs are forgot and forgiven. The King being returned to Paris, the government of France by general assent of the Peers is conferred upon the kings uncles, though the D. of Orleans the Kings brother laboured much for it; but he was too young for that employment. Many Playes and Masks were performed at Court to drive away the kings melancholy; in one of the Masks, the king with five others disguised themselves in the shape of Lions, their linnen covers were pitched, that the threds which resembled the hairs of wilde beasts might stick the faster; as these were dancing the round, and singing nuptial songs in honour of a great favourite lately married, the Duke of Orlans stood so near with his torch, that a spark fell on the king which set all on fire; every one running to save the king, left the others to shift for themselves, two of which were burned presently, and died with horrible skritches, two others died the next day: the fifth was saved by water and wine flung upon him; the Dutchess of Berry instantly stayed the fire on the king by the long train of her gown which she flapt upon it; the Duke of Orleans excused himself, that what he did, was against his will: but this accident increased the kings disease, for whose recovery many vows and prayers are made to God. Clement the Antipope being dead, Ambassadours are sent from the kings uncles to the Cardinals of Avenion, to desire that no Pope should be chosen till the schisme were first remedied; they all swore, that if he at Rome would lay down his Pontificat, he should do the like at Avenion, that was to  be chosen: Pierre de la Lune a Castilian is chosen, to whom the kings uncles re∣pair, beseeching him to make a peace in the Church, and that he would sub∣mit himself to a general Council; he answered, that he would not leave the helm of Christs ship, so long as he lived, and so the Princes returned without effecting any thing, which much discontented the king; but the Pope, to please him, authorizeth him to raise a tenth from the Clergy, this made him more odious; whereupon command is given that no Bulls shall be received from him, and that no Clergy man should acknowledge him, and withal an Army is sent to besiege him; whereupon he removes from Avenion, and returns home to Spain, having the Eucharist carried all the way before him, that none might hurt him. Great debate arose about the kingdome of Arragon, between divers Princes descended from king Peter by differentbran ches: Duke de Anjou laid claim to it in right of his wife Iobant, the daughter of Iohn eldest son to king Peter; all parties were contented to submit themselves to the arbitration of some holy and learned men, these adjudged the kingdome to Ferdinand youngest son to the king of Castile, and Leonar daughter to Peter king of Arragon, whose eldest son was dead, having left one son named Iohn of Castile. The kings of England and France meet near Calis, where a match is concluded between the daughter of France, and the king of Englands son. After the Christians were defeated at Nicapolis by the Turk, young Sigismund king of Hungary, who had escaped, returned into his Country: he it was for whose cause king Charles of Naples was murthered by one Nicon at the com∣mand of the old Queen, both which were shortly after put to death by Charles his friends. This Sigismund returning, found that in his absence the people had been much wronged by the Nobility, wherefore he cut off the heads of two and thirty of his chief Lords; some think this execution was done before the battel of Nicopolis; but he was so hated for this, and slighted for his overthrow at Nico∣polis, that two of the chief Lords of Hungary conspired against him, and took him prisoner, committing him to the custody of Nicons two sons, hoping they would keep him sure: then they sent to Ladislaus king of Naples to accept of the Crown, but he remembring the disaster of his father Charles made no haste thither; in the interim the widow of Nicon intreats her two sons to set free the king, lest Ladislaus obtaining the Crown might revenge his fathers death on them; so Sigismund is set free, who instantly cuts off the heads of those
two Lords who apprehended him. About this time Wenceslaus the Em∣perour being deposed, Robert his successour made war with the Duke of Millan, by whom he was defeated and driven back to Germany: two years after the Duke of Millan died. 1405. During the French kings indisposition, there arose a great debate between the Dukes of Orleans and Burgundy about the government of France: shortly after, Philip le Hardy Duke of Burgundy died; but the feud between these two houses grew hotter, so that Paris was much disturbed with the two factions, which came to that height, that one night the Duke of Orleans as he went late from the Queens lodgings, was murthered in the streets, by some that fled immediately into the Duke of Burgundies house; the Duke him∣self fled to Arras, and from thence into his own Country, where he found an 1407. Army ready, which he conducted against the Ligeois, who would not receive their Bishop. CHAP. XI. The History of England, interwoven with some passages of France and Scot∣land, from the year 1301. till 1350. A Peace being made between France and England, King Edward the first makes a third expedition into Scotland, where he did nothing but be∣siege 1301. Sterling three moneths, which in the end was surrendred upon composition; but the King kept not his promise: The Scots complain to the Pope of King Edwards usurpation over them, being hitherto a free Kingdome; the Pope writes to the King to forbear medling any way with Scotland, as be∣longing to the Church: The King desires his Holiness not to trouble him∣self in this matter, alleadging that Scotland appertained to the Crown of Eng∣land. Then being furnished with men and money, he makes a fourth journey  to Scotland, where he had fealty again sworn to him; then returns home, and removes the Exchequer from York. Sr. Nicholas Segrave being accused by Sr. Iohn Cromwel for treason, offers to justifie himself in a duel, which the King denied him; whereupon he leaves the Kings camp, and goeth beyond sea to fight his enemy, for this he is adjudged guilty of death, but by the in∣tercession of the Peers is pardoned: then the King makes inquisition for in∣truders on other mens lands (this writ was called Trailbaston) for batteries, ravishers, murtherers, &c. He terrifies divers of the Nobility for their former insolencies, and got great summes of them: He got the Pope to unty the Co∣venants made between him and his subjects, after he had sent him some golden vessels for his Chamber. But when he heard that Bruce was king of Scotland, he was startled, and begins to comply again with his people: Pembrook, Clifford and Percy are sent with an Army to relieve his Wardens of Scotland; he follows after with another Army: three hundred sons of Earls, Barons and Knights, assemble to wait upon the Prince in this expedition, all whom he girds with a Military belt, as the King did likewise the Prince, whom then he Knighted: then the King made a solemne vow to be revenged on Bruce for the death of Cumin. 1307. The thirtieth penny of the Clergy and Laity, and the twentieth of all Merchants being granted, the King makes his last expedition into Scotland;  before whose arrival, Bruce was defeated by the frauds and family of Cumin, assisted by the English forces that were sent before: Bruce escapes, his brother and some Lords are found out and executed; the wife of Robert Bruce is sent prisoner to London: the Countess of Buchan is put into a wodden Cage, and hung out upon the walls of Barwick. The King calls a Parliament at Carlisle, in which he yeelds to the Pope the first
fruits of all Churches within his  Dominions, and the Pope granted the King all the Tenths of those Churches for two years. In the mean while King Bruce recovers new Forces, assailes the Earl of Pembroke, and defeats him; then three dayes after chases the Earle of Gloucester into the Castle of Ayer, where he besiegeth him; but the siege is raised by King Edwards forces, who at last, having shed so much blood, dieth of a Bloody-flux, upon the sands of Scotland by Burrough, by which we may see, that the Kingdomes of this world are built upon sandy foundations; he reign∣ed four and thirty years seven moneths, his age was sixty eight: his successor was Edward the second, on whom was conferred the Earldome of Cornwall, Edmund King Richards son of the Romans being dead without issue; but this Earldome young King Edward bestowed on Pierce Gavestone, whom he recal∣led from his banishment, notwithstanding his father had forbid him, being he had corrupted his youth, and caused this young Prince to commit divers riots, for which Prince Edward had been a while imprisoned by his Fa∣ther. King Edward the second presently upon his entring into his Government, displeased his people by recalling Gavestone, and bestowing on him not onely Cornwal, but also the Bishop of Chesters goods, who had been his Fathers Trea∣surer; him he arrests, imprisons, and bestowes all his estate upon this Gave∣stone, because the Bishop had complained against the Princes riots to his Fa∣ther; then makes a new Treasurer, and removes all his Fathers Officers with∣out consent of his Councel; he calls a Parliament at Northampton, in which a fifteenth of the Clergy, and a twentieth of the Laity are granted him. After his fathers Funerals, he is married to Isabel, Philip the Fair's Daughter; the Nuptials are performed at Bulloign with great solemnity; in the second year of his reign he is crowned, which was like to have been hindred by the Lords, because he suffered himself to be totally ruled by Gavestone, who corrupted both him and his Court with all manner of excess and debauchery; but he promised the Lords, that he would perform their desires the next Parliament. Shortly after his Coronation, all the Knights-Templars in England are arrested and imprisoned. Gavestone is prosecuted by the Lords, whom he slights and nicknames. A Parliament is called, Magna Charta confirmed, ill Counsellors and strangers are removed, the Kings power restrained, and Gavestone bani∣shed 1310, into Ireland. These Articles are ratified, and Excommunication denoun∣ced against such as should contradict them, by the Archbishop of Canterbury, lately recalled from his banishment; but the King shortly after calls home his minion Gavestone, whom he marrieth to his Neece, sister to Gilbert de Clare Earle of Gloucester, and daughter to Iohn de Aeres, and bestowes on him the Jewels of the Crown, which he sold to strangers, and conveyed away much treasure. The Barons threaten the King with a war, unless he put away his minion, who therefore is banished again, and threatned with death, if ever hereafter he be found within the Kingdome; he shelters himself a while in Flanders, but finding no security there, nor elsewhere, returnes to the King, who joy∣fully receives him; the Lords upon this combine against him, an Army is raised, the King is besought to deliver up Gavestone; but he conveyes him to New-Castle, where understanding of the Barons Army, they both remove by Sea to Scarborough Castle, where the King leaves him guarded, and goeth him∣self to Warwickshire; Scarborough is besieged, Gavestone is taken, whom the Lords (notwithstanding the King sollicited for his life) condemned him to the block, and beheaded. After this the Lords threaten the King, that unless  he would ratifie the last Articles, they would force him: The Prelates, with the Earl of Gloucester, and two Cardinals sent from the Pope, labour to recon∣cile the King and Lords; the Cardinals are checked for intermedling with business concerned them not; yet the Lords yield to deliver up to the king the Treasures and Jewels which they took from Gavestone, so that he would
grant their Petitions. About this time Queen Isabel at Windsor is delivered of a son named Edward; a Parliament shortly after is called, in which the King complaines against the Lords, and they against him; at last they are perswa∣ded to crave pardon of the king, which they obtained, and their Articles are confirmed. In this mean while king Bruce growes strong in Scotland, which he had al∣most totally regained, and with an Army invades England; king Edward rai∣seth an Army of one hundred thousand against him: Neer Sterling upon the River Bannock, Bruce with thirty thousand horse and foot encoun∣tred king Edward; the Scots had digged trenches which they pitched full of sharp stakes, and covered them over with hurdles and turfe, by which the En∣glish  horse were confounded, and their whole Army utterly defeated; here were killed divers Lords and Earls of England, seven hundred knights, Esquires and Gentlemen, of common Souldiers ten thousand, many prime men taken prisoners, but the king escaped back to York, who desired to be revenged on the Scots, but could not; the English borderers run all away, leaving their 1315. countrey to the mercy of the enemy. This war was accompanied with Fa∣mine, Dearth, and Pestilence, so that a Parliament is called at London to abate the price of Victuals; the Dearth notwithstanding lasted three years, by reason of excessive raines, and a murrain among the Cattel, both the King and Lords were pinched in their diet. About this time the Earle of Lancasters wife is taken out of his house at Canford in Dorsetshire, by a deformed Dwarff, claiming her for his wife, and by her the Earldomes of Lincoln and Salisbury; it's thought the King was an actor herein, for which the King was taxed, even by a woman disguised on hors-back, who rode into Westminster-Hall, when the king was at dinner there on Whitsunday, and delivered him a Letter, wherein his evil courses were reproved; she confessed she was hired so to do by a knight, who likewise justified his fact. Not only did Robert Bruce overthrow the king twice, and obtain the Crown of Scotland, but he sends over his brother also with an Army into Ireland, a  great part whereof he conquered, and made himself king, which he held three years. K. Edward it seems intended to have had the Earl of Lancaster murthered by the Scots, as appeared by a Letter sent from him to the Scots k. which was intercepted, and the messenger executed. The Scots plunder as far as York: Hereupon a Parliament is called at London, money and men are raised, but the English Army mutined and came to nothing; Barwick is surrendred to the Scots; k. Edward beleaguers it; but the Scots to raise the siege, enter with new Forces upon England, and had almost surprised the Queen neer York; the Earl of Lancaster withdrawes himself from the siege of Barwick, because the king promised the Towne to Hugh Spencer his minion; this Spencer with his fa∣ther so exasperated the Lords, that they took up Armes against the king, and forced him to banish them both. Ten thousand English are defeated again by the Scots, who killed 3000 of them; wherefore K. Edward concludes a Truce with them for two years, and returns with dishonour home. The Queen is denied lodging in the Castle of Leeds, belonging to the Lord Badlesmore, as she was going towards Canterbury, whereupon the King besiegeth and takes it, hangs up the Keeper, Badlesmores wife and children are sent to the Tower, and all his estate seised on; then the king raiseth an Army against the Barons, whereof divers submitted themselves to him, chiefly the two Roger Mor∣timers; The Lords that held out are discomfited by the kings Forces; the Earl of Lancaster with many other Lords are taken and executed. Presently upon this the King marcheth with a mighty Army into Scotland, whence he was forced for want to return without blowes; the Scots pursue him, and had almost taken him, as they did his treasure with the Earl of Richmond; so ha∣ving wasted all as far as the walls of York, return richly laden into Scotland. Sir Andrew Harkley, who for taking Lancaster prisoner at
Borough-Brigs, was  made Earle of Carlile; upon suspition for combining with the Scots, is drawn, hanged, and quartered for treason, at London. And now the king and his Clergy fall asunder about the Bishop of Hereford, 1358. whom he arrested and accused of high-treason for aiding the rebellious Lords; he refused to answer without leave of the Arch-bishop of Canterbury; his fel∣low-Bishops then took him from the Bar, and delivered him to Canterbury; afterward being taken and convented, the Bishops with their Crosses erected took him away again from the place of judgement, and excommunication de∣nounced against those that should lay hands on him; but the king finding him guilty, seiseth on his estate. In this mean while the French king seiseth on all the king of Englands Territories there, for omitting to come over when he was summoned, to do his homage: The Spencers held it unsafe for him to go over in person, his kingdome being so distempered; therefore the Queen, sister to the French k. is sent, who negotiates so with her brother, that all quar∣rels should end, if king Edward would give to his son Edward the Dutchy of Aquitane and Earldome of Pontheu, and send him over to do homage, which was assented to; so the Prince is sent over with the Bishop of Exeter, who per∣ceiving shortly after his arrival some plots between the Queen, the Prince, and Roger Mortimer lately escaped out of the Tower of London, acquaints the king therewith; he upon this sends presently for them; but they neglecting to come, are proclaimed enemies to the king, and order taken at all the Ports, that they shall not be suffered to land; The Queen, upon suspition that her brother would betray her to the Spencers, who had bribed his Counsellors thereto, withdraws to the Earl of Henault and Holland, whose daughter Philip she contracts with her son the Prince; by the Earls means she is transported over into England, lands at Harwich, with the Prince, the Earle of Kent the kings brother, Pembroke, Mortimer, Iohn the the Earl of Henaults brother, and 2500 Flemings; she is received by divers of the discontented Lords, and by the Bishops of Hereford and Lincoln. The king upon this craved aide of London, but found none; Death is pro∣claimed to those that assisted the Queen; all her adherents are commanded to  be destroyed, except the Queen, Prince, and Earle of Kent; a thousand pounds proffered for Mortimers head. So leaving the City, he departs towards the west, where he is slighted, without hope of any aide; the Queen marcheth with her increasing Army to Oxford; the Bishop of Hereford preached, and con∣cluded from his Text, 2 King. 24. My head aketh, that the aking and sick head of a kingdom was to be taken off. The Queen proffers 2000 pound for young Spencers head, and proclaims, that the Souldiers should not take from the sub∣ject any thing without ready money, otherwise to be punished with the loss of a finger, hand, or head, if the value of the thing taken came to three pence,  six pence, or twelve pence. The king finding no aide, and being persecuted by the Queen, upon suspition that he would have murthered her, secures old Hugh Spencer in the Castle of Bristol, and commits himself to the Sea, lands in Wales, and is hid in the Abbey of Neth: the Queen is met at Gloucester with aide from the North, then wins the Castle of Bristol; Hugh Spencer Earle of Winchester, is taken, drawn, hanged in his Coat-Armour, headed and quar∣tered; at Hereford she proclaimes, that if the king would return and rule the State as he should, he should be restored to all again; but he came not, where∣fore the Prince is made Guardian of the kingdome, hath fealty sworn to him; a new Chancellor and Treasurer are chosen. The king is at last found, and by Henry Earl of Lancaster, brother to the late  Thomas, is conveyed to the Castle of Kenelworth; the younger Spencer now Earle of Gloucester, is drawn and hanged on a Gallows fifty foot high, and had the like execution which his father had; the Earl of Arundel, with two Ba∣rons, and others that adhered to the king, were executed at Hereford; Baldock the Chancellor, being a Priest, was pined to death
in Newgate. The Londoners  force the Maior, who held for the king, to take their part; all prisoners are let out; the Tower is taken, and Iohn Weston the Constable put to death; the Bishop of Exeter, the kings Treasurer, is murthered: the Queen returning with the Prince to London, call a Parliament, in which the King is deposed, as 1327. unfit to govern, Prince Edward is elected; Canterbury preacheth on this Text, Vox populi vox Dei; the Queen seems discontented at this election; the Prince to comfort her, swore he would not accept of the Crown without his fathers consent; wherefore three Bishops, two Earls, two Abbots, and four Barons, three Knights of each Shire, and Burgesses of every City and Borough are sent to the imprisoned King to require the renunciation of his Crown, which he assented to, having excused his misgovernment, and thanked them for elect∣ing his son. After this he is removed to the Castle of Corff, where he was mur∣thered by his Keepers, who through a horn, which they put in his fundament, pierced his guts with a burning spit, having reigned nineteen years and about eight moneths: After his deposing he was the Founder of Orial Colledge and S. Mary Hall in Oxford; he had two sons, P. Edward, and Iohn of Eliham Earl of Cornwal, who died young in Scotland; his daughter Ioan married to David Prince of Scotland, and Elianor to the Duke of Gelders: Some write that he was carried up and down from one Castle to another, that his friends might not find him, and all plots disappointed▪ and that he was murthered in Bark∣ley  Castle; but I will not strive about circumstances. King Edward the third being but fourteen years old when he began his reign was thought unfit as yet to manage the kingdome; therefore five Bishops and seven Lords are chosen to govern the kingdome; but the Queen and Ro∣ger Lord Mortimer ruled all. The strangers that came over with the Queen un∣der the Earl of Henaults brother, are sent to joyn with the English Army at York against Scotland, but a quarrel arose between the English and the strangers, so that nothing was effected, and the Scots Army returned. The next year the 1328. Marriage with Philippa of Henault is solemnized, and a Parliament held at Nor∣thampton, in which a dishonourable peace is concluded with Scotland, and their  homage released; Iane the Kings sister is marred to David son to Robert Bruce; Sr Roger Mortimer is made Earl of March, the Instrument or Charter of the Scots fealty is restored: In the Parliament held shortly after at Winchester, Edmund Earl of Kent this young Kings Uncle, for intending to restore the King his bro∣ther, is condemned; he stood four hours on the Scaffold for want of an Execu∣tioner, at last one was found. The next year a Parliament is held at Nottingham, in which the Queen loseth her great Joynture, being three parts of the kings Revenues, and is put to a pension of a thousand pounds per annum. Mortimer is accused for procu∣ring the late kings death, for receiving a bribe of 20000 pounds from the Scots  by which the Army escaped at Stanhop-Park; for making a dishonourable peace with Scotland, for being too familiar with the Queen, and for the death of the kings Uncle; for these he is condemned, drawn, and hanged at Tyburne, where his body hung two dayes as a spectacle. After this, king Edward being summoned by Philip Valois now k. of France, goeth over to do his homage for the Dutchy of Guien; by this he acknowledged the right of his Competitor for that kingdome, because king Charles being dead without issue male, the Crown by the Salique Law fell to Philip Valois the Cousin-german, and not to king Edward, though neerer, and the Nephew of the said king Charles, as we have already shewed in the History of France. King Edward then did his ho∣mage,  by presenting himselfin person in the great Church of Amiens, in a crim∣son Velvet Gown embroidered with Leopards, having his Crown on his head, a sword by his side, and golden spurs on his heels; king Philip sate in his Chair of estate in a violet-coloured Velvet Gown embroidered with gol∣den Lillies, his Crown on his head, and Scepter in his hand, in the midst of his Peers; king Edward by command of the Chamberlain of France puts off his
crown, sword and spurs, then kneeling on a crimson velvet cushion before king Philip, promiseth to be loyal as Duke of Guyen and Peer of France, to King Philip; the Chamberlain pronouncing the words of homage before, and put∣ing his hands together between the French kings hands; then king Edward riseth, and kisseth the French king (as the Lord of the Fee) in the mouth. After this, k. Edward returns to England, and aids Edward Baliol son to Iohn, who 32 years before had usurped the crown, and was deposed. This Edward Baliol, whilst the young k. David Bruce was in France, got himself to be crown∣ed king at Scone, having first defeated the Bruceans, by the help of those Scots that were for Baliol; yet this new King is driven out of Scotland by the Bru∣ceans.  King Edward comes with a great Army, and after three moneths siege takes Berwick, and defeats the Scots army at Halidown-hill, who came to raise the siege; here were slain 7 Earls, 900 Knights and Baronets, 400 Esquires, and 32000 common souldiers, (the Scotish writers mention but 14000.) The Lord Seaton, who was governour of Berwick, conditions with king Edward, that if rescue came not by such a day, he would render him up the Town, in assurance of which he delivers him two of his sons; but when king Edward saw the Scots forces come before the day, he summons Seaton to render the Town presently, or else he should see his two sons executed: The Lord being doubtful what to doe, is encouraged by his wife rather to lose their two sons,  then his faith to his Prince, charity to his Country, and dignity of his Family. And so the two young Gentlemen were hanged. K. Baliol being setled in Scotland, at Newcastle doth homage to the king of 1333. England, for which the Nobility of Scotland are discontented, and threaten to drive him out: So that k. Edward was forced to raise vast sums of mony upon the English to maintain the Scotish war, and three years together goeth thither in person with new Armies, being desirous to subdue Scotland before he at∣tempted France. A Parliament is held at London, wherein the Flemings are invited hither to make their Cloth, because no Wooll was to be transported beyond seas; this was to draw the Flemings to side with him against the  French: It was also enacted, that none should wear other then English cloth, except the King, Queen, and their children: Tenths, Fifteenths, the Churches treasure for the Holy war, Subsidies of wools, and the goods of Lombards, Clu∣neaques, and Cistercians, are given to the king towards this expedition into France; the Emperour and divers German Princes side with him. Then the King with his Queen and Children go over to Flanders, thence enter France; the two Armies look upon each other, nothing was acted, only a Hare started before the head of the French army, which occasioned a new knighthood, call'd knights of the Hare: other particulars we have mentioned in the French story. K. Edward after a years absence returns into England, leaving the Queen in  Brabant: He lands about midnight at the Tower, which he found unguarded. He calls a Parliament, and receives great subsidies of Clergy & Laity, and hath loans of many wealthy men: For his mighty subsidies, divers pardons are grant∣ed, and the great Charter confirmed. The English are worsted at Lisle, but the French fleet is beat at sea. Tournay is besieged by the English; A challenge is sent by k. Edward to k. Philip, but rejected. After Tournay is besieged 3 months, by the mediation of Philippa's mother (a Nun) truce is concluded for one year. So Q. Philippa after 3 years absence returns to England with the king: she had two sons in Flanders; Lionel D. of Clarence, and Iohn (born at Gaunt) D. of Lancaster. The king complains that he was forced to raise the siege from Tournay, for want of mony, for which he accuseth Iohn Stratford Archbishop of Canterbury;  he by his letters (for he durst not come to the king in person) cleares himself, and accuseth the king of tyrannie and oppression, chiefly of the Clergy, divers of whom he had imprison'd: the king is forc'd to collogue with his Parliament for more supplies of monies, & confirms divers grants, which when his turn was served, he revoked. Shortly afterthis, Iohn of Montfort being in competition
with Charles de Blois about the Dutchy of Britany, craves aid of king Edward, as we have shewed before. Many bickerings there were between the French and English in Britany, till a Truce of three years was conluded. K. Edward after this drives k. David out of Scotland into the Islands. William Montacute Earl of Salisbury conquers the Isle of Man, whom k. Edward stiled king thereof. A Society of the knights of the Round-table, in imitation of k. Arthur is designed, and a chamber of 200 foot round erected at Windsor for the same: then began the Order of the Garter at Windsor, occasioned by the garter of the Countess of Salisbury, taken up by the king in dancing with her, the number 1343. of the knights are 26 besides the king; these held a yearly feast at Windsor,  where the same king Edward founded a Church, and gave to certain Priests and Prebends large stipends to serve there; he ordain'd also 13 aged decayed Gen∣tlemen to be there maintained, to pray for the prosperity of the Knights. In a Parliament at Westminster complaint is made against the collation of Benefices on strangers, therefore a Letter is sent to Pope Clement the 6. from the Lords and Commons, seconded by the Kings Letters, by Sir Iohn Shordich a civil Lawyer, desiring the Pope to recall all such collations and reservations; all Patrons also are prohibited to grant such collations under pain of imprison∣ment or death; in this Parliament Archbishop Stratford upon submission is re∣conciled to the King, and P. Edward about the age of 13. is created P. of Wales, a tenth is granted by the Clergy, and a fifteenth by the Laity, then general must∣ers  are taken through the whole kingdom; then k. Edward goeth over to Flan∣ders, Iames Artevile is imployed by him to induce the Flemings to revolt from their Earl, but he had his brains beaten out at Gaunt for his labour, and so the kings design failed him. And now the wars break out again between France and England; K. Edward left the Lords Piercy and Nevil Wardens of England, and takes with him the young Prince being aged 18 years, and an Army of 4000 men at Armes, 10000 Archers, besides Welsh and Irish; he lands in Nor∣mandy, and divides his men into three battails, one to march on his left hand along the sea-coast, the other on the right conducted by the two Marshals, and  himself in the midst with the main Army; the Earl of Huntington is Admiral of the Fleet, he first sacks Caranton and burns it, having found the heads of Ba∣con, Piercy, and others there massacred by K. Philip, then he takes Lo, Cain, and other Towns, then he goeth over the river Some and defeats the French which were sent to hinder his passage, being 1000 French horse and 6000 foot; the English Army consists of 30000. the Prince hath the Vantguard, wherein were 800 men at Armes, 2000 Archers and 1000 other; the second battel was com∣mitted to the Earls of Arundel and Northampton, the Lords Rosse, Willoughby, S. Alban, Multon, and others, wherein were 800 men at Armes, and 2000 Arch∣ers, the third battail was led by the K. having 700 men at Armes and 2000 Ar∣chers; the French Army consisted of 60000. wherof there were above 3000 Ba∣rons, Knights and Gentlemen, besides 1000 more of the Earle of Savoys, the Vantguard he commits to his brother Count de Alanson, the Rear to the Earle of Savoy, the main battel he leads himself; Alanson contrary to the k. of Bohe∣mia's advice would not suffer the Genoves Infantry (which consisted of 1500 Cross-Bows) should make the first front, therefore by changing the seat of the Army he caused disorder and discontent, besides a sudden rain fell which dis∣solved their strings, and made their Bowes useless. King Edward from a Windmill-hill perceiving the enemy disordered, sends to charge the Genoves, who presently recoil; Alanson with Savoy, Lorain, and  the Delphin de Vienois, through the Genoves rush furiously upon the English battel where the Prince was; the French king seeing his brother like to be wor∣sed by the English, makes up to dis-ingage him; the fight grew hot and doubtful; King Edward is sent for to come up with his aide, but refused, when he knew the Prince was alive, for he desired that the honour of the day should be his; the French Kings horse being slain, and he convey'd out of the field,
the rest were disheartned, and so the English got the day, 30000 were slain, of which were 15000 Earles, Barons, and Gentlemen; other particulars we have touched in the French story: the next morning King Edward sent out three hundred Lances, and two thousand Archers, to discover what was become of the enemy, who found some Troops comming to the Army, being ignorant of what had hapned; these are also defeated. The English Forces sent to aide Montfort against Charles de Blois, prevailed, and took Charles prisoner with some Lords and Knights. That year also King David of Scotland is over∣thrown by the Queen of England and her forces; fifteen thousand Scots were slain, the Earles of Fife, Menteth, Murrey, Sutherland, with the Lord Douglass, the Arch-bishop of Saint Andrews, and others are taken prisoners. Henry of Lancaster with an Army of six thousand pillageth the countrey of Poictou. King Edward besiegeth Calice. The French King having punished his Trea∣surers and Collectors, raiseth a great sum of money, and with it an Army, but could not raise the siege from Calice, and so breaks up his Army and returnes to Paris; two Cardinals are sent to make peace, but could not: Calice is sur∣rendred, which continued with the English two hundred and ten years after; so a Truce being made for some moneths, King Edward returnes triumphing home. These wars were accompanied with great plagues and famine, so that in a short time half of the people died. King Edward goeth over again to Calice,  understanding it was like to be betrayed by the Governour for 20000 crowns, Monsieur de Charney sent the money before, and he comes after with some Forces, the money is received, and the King goeth out with his Forces to meet him; a sharp encounter there was, the King was disguised, and twice beaten down by one Riboumont, whom afterward he took prisoner, and for his valour rewarded, and set him free without ransome. After this the King got the Castle of Guisnes neer Calice for a sum of money, and shortly after the French King died. 1350. CHAP. XII. A prosecution of the English story from the year 1350. till 1399. THe Spaniards had taken some English Ships laden with wines in the Ri∣ver Garoune, wherefore King Edward seised on some Spanish Ships laden with cloath, as they were passing from Flanders. The Monies here are abated in weight, and yet pass according to the former value, which caused much murmuring among the people. The Staple of Woolls is withdrawn from  Flanders, and set up in England, because the young Earl Lewis on whom King Edward would have bestowed his daughter, was got away and married to the Duke of Brabants daughter. A Parliament is held at Westminster, in which Weares, Mills, and other stoppages of Rivers hindring boats, are commanded to be removed, all common Whores are injoyned to wear hoods striped with divers colours, and the wrong sides of their garments outward. Henry Lord Derby is made Duke of Lancaster. Charles de Blois is set free to procure his ran∣some of 40000 Florens. The Pope labours to make peace between the two Kings, but could not, because the French king would not part with the Ho∣mage due for the Dutchy of Aquitain. The Prince of Wales sets forth with 300 sail for Gascoign, with 1000 men at Arms, 2000 Archers, besides the Welch foot. Three moneths after K. Edward passes over to Calice with another Army, where he was met with 1000 German & Flemish Mercinaries, his Army consisted of 3000 men at Arms; 2000 horse-Archers besides the foot; London sent 300 men at Armes and 500 Archers: but this Army returned without effecting any thing, for the French king would not fight.
After this, King Edward is invited over into France by the King of Navar, whom the French king had imprisoned, as we have shewed; for this expedi∣tion fifty shillings is granted to the king upon every sack of Wool for six years: but before he goeth to France, he marcheth with an Army to recover Berwick which had been taken by the Scots whilst he was last at Calis; he re∣gains the Town, and Baliol resigns his share of Scotland to him: In the interim Prince Edward wasteth much of the French Territories, so that the French king is forced to raise another Army, which encounters with the English near Poytiers, and is overthrown by them; the particulars we have set down in the French story: the French king is brought over to England, and lodged in the Savoy: King David of Scotland is ransomed: Paris rebels against the Dolphin,  causeth him to release the king of Navar; the Provost assaults the Dolphins house with three thousand Artificers; he rusheth into his chamber, and slew two Marshals of France, and withall takes and puts on the Dolphins hat edged with gold on his own head, and sets his own party-coloured hat on the Dolphins head, and so he goeth out, causing the two dead bodies to be trailed along the streets for the people to gaze on: then he writes to the other Cities of France to joyn with him, and to take his livery as the Dolphin had done; but they refused: the Dolphin in the mean while escapes from Paris, raiseth an Army, and quels the Parisians. These troubles hindred the Kings ransome. King Edward having kept the French king four years prisoner, and finding that there was no haste to ransome him, and that he would not yeeld to do homage for the kingdome of France, resolves to take possession by the sword; therefore he passeth over to Calis with a Fleet of eleven hundred sail; he di∣vides his Army into three battalies, one he commits to the Prince, another to the Duke of Lancaster, the third he leads himself; he marcheth to Paris, and took divers Towns by the way; the Dutchie of Burgoyne redeems it self from spoil for two hundred thousand florins of gold: the Dolphin was now at Paris which he had mastered, king Edward could not get him to fight, where∣fore he returns to Britany, where having refreshed and increased his Army returns to Paris, which he found so well fortified by the Dolphin that he could do no good on it: at last, being terrified with thunder, vows to make his peace with France, which was done, and king Iohn ransomed: king Edward calls 1361. a Parliament, in which the accord is ratified by the Estates. The Priors aliens have their land restored, which were held from them during these wars. Ano∣ther great plague followed, in which with many other Noble-men, died the D. of Lancaster a good Patriot, whose daughter and heir was married to Iohn of Gaunt, who thereby is made D. of Lancaster: the Prince marries the Countess of Kent, daughter to Edmund brother to Ed. 2. Aquitain is bestowed on the Prince,  who with his wife and Court goeth over to live there; his son Lionel Earl of Ulster is sent into Ireland with fifteen hundred men, and is made Duke of Clarence; king Edward keeps the day of his birth, and fiftieth year of his age, as a Jubile, and pardons divers offences; he causeth the Common-pleas which be∣fore were in French to be turned into English; he makes many good Laws against gluttony, drunkenness, excess of apparrel; he makes Clergy-men his chief officers, because he relied upon their sanctity. He was visited shortly after by Iohn the French king, who died here, as like∣wise by the king of Scots and the king of Cyprus. Prince Edward after his go∣ing over to Burdeaux, assisted Peter of Castile against his brother Henry, whom  the French aided; he beat the French, established Peter in his Throne, and re∣turned victorious to Burdeaux; but not long after Peter is overthrown and killed by his brother, so the Prince is deceived of the great rewards promised by Peter; hence the souldiers murmure for want of their pay, to pacifie whom the Prince is forced to raise taxes on the Country of Aquitain; complaint is made to Charles the fifth the
French king, who summons the Prince to appear before him at Paris, contrary to the Articles of agreement between the two Kings, the Prince refuseth to come, hereupon most of his Country revolt to the French, so that what king Edward with much blood and treasure had been getting in two years, is lost in one. After this, the French king sends a Navy to trouble the coast of England: king Edward sends Iohn of Gaunt with an Army unto Calis, which marched without any great opposition to Burdeaux to the Prince his brother, wasting the Country as he went: another English Army is sent unto St. Omers under Sir Robert Knowles, depopulating all in his way till he came to Paris; he took some Towns in the Earldome of Anjou, which again revolted to the French upon a defeat given to the English by king Charles. King Edward upon this disorder, calls a Parliament, in which the Tempo∣rality grants him a Subsidie of fifteen thousand pounds, but refused by the Clergy, wherefore the king in anger removes them from their places of trust and profit: the Prince being sickly returns home to England, with his wife and son Richard, born at Burdeaux, and resigns the Dutchy of Aquitain to his father; the Duke of Lancaster being left behinde, and having buried his wife two years before in the great sickness, in which also Queen Philippa died, he marrieth Constance, eldest daughter to Peter king of Castile, by whom hee had the empty Title of King of Castile and Leon, but their daughter  Katherine afterward became Queen of Castile and Leon, being married to Henry 3. who was in possession: her posterity were kings of Spain. Edmund Earl of Cambridge married Isabel king Peters youngest daughter; Lionel Duke of Clarence marrieth the Duke of Millans daughter, and shortly after died: the other two returned to England with their wives. Rochel is be∣sieged by sea and land; the Earl of Pembrook is sent with forty ships well manned and monied, but he is defeated there by the Spanish Armado, and taken prisoner; King Edward sent forth an Army to recover these losses, but was beat back by contrary winds; nine hundred thousand marks spent in this expedition. Shortly after this the Duke of Lancaster lost his Army among the mountains of France, before he came to Burdeaux: the next year he returns,  having effected nothing, but lost all the Towns of Gascoigne, except Burdeau and Bayon. King Edward being supplied with a new Subsidie, desires to end the quarrel with France by Treaty; two years are spent about this at ruges, but nothing done; for the French demand Calis, and great sums of money, which could not be granted: In the mean time the Staple is removed from Calis, because of the danger of Merchants goods. Another Parliament is called at West∣minster; the King calls for money, the people for redress of abuses in his offi∣cers, and that the Duke of Lancaster, Lord Latimer the Chamberlain, Alice Pierce the Kings Concubine, and some others might be removed from Court;  to which the King assented. Another Jubilee is kept in this Parliament, being the fiftieth year of the Kings reign; another general pardon is granted, onely William Wicham Bishop of Winchester is excepted by procurement of the Duke of Lancaster; but this Jubilee is turned to sorrow by the death of the Prince, upon which the excluded parties return to Court, the Speaker of the House of Commons la Mare is committed to perpetual imprisonment at Nottingham at the suit of Alice Pierce, who now took upon her to sit and intermedle in the Courts of Justice; the Duke of Lancaster now manageth all: but to prevent mischief, Richard of Burdeaux in Parliament is created Earle of Chester and Cornwall, and then Prince of Wales, lest Iohn of Lancaster  should supplant him; the Earl of March is commanded by Lan caster over to guard Calis, which he refuseth, therefore his Office of Marshal is given to Sir Henry Piercy. Prince Richard is set in the Kings seat in Parliament by Lan∣caster, who demands of the people more Subsidies, which is denied till la Mare the Speaker be enlarged: then
the Duke demands aid from the  Bishops, that is also refused till the Bishop of Winchester be restored. At this time Iohn Wickliffe, being deprived justly of his Benefice in Oxford by the Archbishop of Canterbury, did begin to inveigh against the pride and wealth of the Clergy and Monks, which hath at most times been a pleasant doctrine to covetous mindes; he got presently store of disciples, afterward called Lollards, professing poverty, going bare-footed, and meanly appa∣relled; he taught, that in times of necessity Lay-men might seise on the Churches and Monks revenues. These opinions he preached boldly, being supported by Lancaster and Piercy; wherefore he is cited to answer in Pauls be∣fore the Bishops: at the day appointed he is accompanied by Lancaster and the Lord Marshal, who animated him against the Bishops; some harsh language fell out between the Bishop of London & Piercy, because he commanded Wickliffe to sit down before his Ordinary; Lancaster took the Marshals part, who threatned to pull down the pride of the Bishops, and to pull London out of the Church by the hair of his head; this so exasperated the Londoners, that they vowed rather to lose their lives, then suffer their Bishop to be thus used; the more in∣censed they were against the Duke, because he threatned to take away the Maior of Londons power. The next morning the Citizens assemble, and be∣ing animated by the Lord Fitzwater (whom at first they suspected to be their enemy) take Arms, assail the Marshals Inne, broke open the gates, and set a  prisoner at liberty, but found not the Marshal, who with the Duke dined that day at the Savoy, which by the multitude is assailed; the Duke and Piercy escape by a boat, and complain to the Princess, who then was at Hennington near Lambeth, with the young Prince: a Priest for speaking against Peter la Mare was wounded to death; the people thinking he had been the Marshal disguised; the Bishop of London was fain to go himself and appease the people, who upon his exhortation, and being the time of Lent, forbare to assault the Dukes house, whose arms with the Marshals they hung up reversed in sign of treason: they also were perswaded by the Princess to make their peace with the Duke, which they assented to, if he would have permitted the  Bishop of Winchester, and la Mare to come to their answer. They sent also to the sick King, excusing this tumult, and that it was raised upon information that the Londoners should lose their liberties, which the King assures them was never in his thoughts, but rather to enlarge them. The Parliament considering the Kings wants, grants him a Subsidie, which was to be committed to certain Earls and Barons to see it issued; every one above the age of 14. years was to pay four pence, only Almesmen excepted; every beneficed Parson was to pay 12. pence, and other religious persons four pence the head. The Maior and Aldermen are brought to the King at Shene, and commanded to crave pardon of the Duke for their offences; they again  excuse their innocency, and promise to bring in the malefactors who should make satisfaction, but for all this they were put out of their places, and others put in their room: in the interim, the Kings Concubine and other his attendants, perceiving him dying, snatcht what they could, even the rings from his fingers, and pack away, leaving him alone with a poor Priest, who willed him to ask mercy for his offences, and to remember his Saviour, which he did, and so died at Shene near Richmond the sixty fourth year of his age, having reigned fifty years and four months. He founded East-minster an Abbey near the Tower, a Nunnery at Detford, Kings-hall in Cambridge, an Hospital at Calice, St. Stevens Chappel at Westminster, with the endowment of three hundred pound per annum to that Church, besides his augmenting of Windsor Chappel, with provision for the Church-men and poor Knights; He enlarged also Windsor Castle, and that of Queenborough, with the Fortifications of Calice: his wife built Queens Colledge in Oxford, who bare him seven sons, five of them had issue; Edward Prince of Wales, Lionel Duke of Clarence, Iohn Duke of Lancaster, Edmund Earl of
Cambridge, Duke of York  afterward, and Thomas of Woodstock; she had five daughters, four lived to be married; Isabel the eldest to Ingelra Earl of Soissons and Bedford, Ioan to Alphonso 11. King of Castile, Mary to Montfort Duke of Britany, and Mar∣garet to Hastings Earl of Pembrook. Richard 2. son to the black Prince succeeded, being eleven years old. In the first year of his reign, King Charles of France assisted by the Spaniard, ransackt 1377. and burned Plymouth, Dartmouth, Portsmouth, Rye, and other Maritine Towns; but they were driven to their ships by the Earls of Cambridge, Buckingham and Salisbury. Alexander Ramsey in the night with forty other Scots, scaled the walls of Berwick Castle, and took it, intending also to surprise the Town, but  were prevented by the Townesmen, who hewed away the stayes of Draw∣bridge, which fell into the ditch, and so the Scots were imprisoned; the English besiege the Castle with ten thousand men, at last it was with much difficulty yeelded, Ramsey onely was pardoned for his valour. Shortly after the French land again, who spoil Dover, Winchelsay, Hastings, and Gravesend, and return home with great booty: To be revenged of these wrongs, a Parliament is called, a Subsidie granted of four pence by every man and woman above four∣teen years of age, (but the levying of this caused much trouble) eight thou∣sand men are sent over into France who spoil all in their way till they come to Britany, where they were kindly received by the Duke Iohn Montfort. Upon  the payment of the foresaid Subsidie, a dangerous rebellion began, which was promoted by Iohn Wall a factious Priest, who told the meaner sort of people that they were the sons of Adam, and had as great right to the wealth of the land as the chief Lords thereof; whereupon multitudes of the baser sort both in the City and Country flock together, who make Wat Tyler a Taylor their Captain; Wall the Priest, Iack Straw, Iack Shepherd, and others are made their directors; they march towards London, rifling and pulling down the Lawyers houses, and force the Gentry either to flye or joyn with them; they beheaded Sr Iohn Cavendish chief Justice of the Kings-bench, and Iohn of Cambridge the Prior; causing the Covent to surrender up their Charters granted to them by Canutus their Founder. They require of the king being then in the Tower, to  come and speak with them, who went as far as Gravesend with his chief Lords; but fearing the unruliness of that mad rout, ventured no further, but returned to the Tower: the next day they came to London, and if the gates had not been opened to them, they threatned to burn Southwark, so they are let in, feasted, and rich gifts presented to them to pacifie their fury; they rifled and burned the Savoy, Iohn of Gaunts house, killed all his officers, robbed the Innes of Court, burned their Law-books, and sacrilegiously rifled the Churches; they robbed all strangers about London, and open all the pri∣sons. Wat Tyler caused the head of his old Master, a grave Citizen, to be struck  off, for some correction he received of him for his offences when he served him, his head was born before Wat upon a Lance: they grew to be sixty thousand in number, and affrighted the king, as they lay at S. Katherines near the Tower. The next morning the king goeth to Mile-end Green to speak with the Rebels; in the interim Wat Tylar enters the Tower with forty more, robs the kings mother and broke her head, and beheaded Simon Archbishop of Canterbury, because upon the beginning of this commotion he had imprisoned Iohn Wall. At Mile-end Green they desire the King, that they and their posterity might be made Free-men, which the king granted, and gave them his Banners for their safe conduct, and withall pardons them; this promise the king performs by in∣struments in writing; but Wat Tyler, with twenty thousand, resolves first to ran∣sack and burn London, and so they come to Smithfield, the king repairs thither promising them pardon and liberty; Tyler demands the kings sword from the Esquire that bare it; the Esquire told him, that the kings sword should not be given to a knave; whereupon Tyler swore to have his head off before he did
eat and drink: Iohn Hadley Maior of London then with the King, drew his sword and cut Tyler in the head, and felled him to the ground; upon this, the rest resolve to be revenged for their Captains death: the Londoners to save themselves and the King, sent him an Army of eight thousand men; before they gave the charge, the King desires the Rebels to submit, or else to re∣deliver his Banners, pardons and manumissions, which being in scorn redeli∣vered, the king in their view caused them to be cancelled and torn, which so discouraged the rout, that they ran all away, the chief of which were by their companions delivered to justice afterward, who with fifteen hundred more were put to cruel deaths. After this, the king married Anne sister to Wenceslaus the Emperour; then calls a Parliament, in which his two uncles, Edmund of Langley is made Duke 1385. of York, and Thomas of Woodstock Duke of Glocester; Henry of Bullingbrook son to Iohn of Gaunt, is made Earl of Derby; Edward Plantagenet son to Ed∣mund of Langley, is created Earl of Rutland. At this time the king was mied by his favourites, De la Pool the Chancellour, whom he made Duke of Suffolk, and De Vere Earl of Oxford, and Marquess of Dublin, whom he would have made Duke of Ireland, if his Lords had consented thereunto: he caused his cousin Sir Roger Mortimer, Earl of March, son to the daughter of Lionel Duke of Clarence, to be proclaimed heir apparent to the Crown, but he was after∣ward  slain in Ireland by the Rebels. The king now slights his Nobility and their counsel, and intended to surprise the Duke of Glocester, with the Earls of Warwick and Arundel at a banquet, but was prevented by the Maior of London; and afterward in Parliament, they were so strongly guarded, that he could not seise on them: De la Pool demands four fifteens for the king, which is denied by the Parliament, who declare, that as the king once a year may call a Parlia∣ment, so the Members thereof may break up and depart, if the king absent himself for forty dayes together; they demand also la Pool to prison for his wicked counsels, and require an account of the kings revenues how they were wasted; the king requires fifty of their choisest men to be sent him to  consult with, which is refused, shewing that publike affairs must be handled publikely in Parliament: the king at this was so incensed, that he swore he would rather subject himself to France then to his own subjects; the two Lords which were sent to him, namely, the Duke of Glocester, and Thomas Arundel Archbishop of Canterbury, so qualified the king, that he returns to his Parliament, and then was De la Pool condemned, fined and imprisoned for cousening the King, to whom all his lands are given, and twenty thousand marks besides, his Chancellorship taken from him, and bestowed upon Can∣terbury; thirteen Commissioners are appointed to examine the Kings officers concerning their behaviour, this the King swears to allow; all that should per∣swade  the King to the contrary, should be executed as Traitors: so a Subsidie of one half fifteen is granted. The Parliament being ended, La Pool, and De Vere Duke of Ireland, with di∣vers others are released by the King; and at Notingham the Kings uncle Thomas of Woodstock, and Thomas Arundel Archbishop, are pronounced by the kings Judges guilty of High-treason: the Nobility petition the king that he would ratifie his former oath, and thrust his evil Counsellours from him, which he refused to do: hereupon the Lords raise a strong Army, which these evil Counsellours perceiving, perswade the king to surrender Calice to the French, whereby he shall reconcile himself to France, and shall master his Lords, who otherwaies will master him; but the king would not hearken unto this coun∣sel,  yet endeavours to curb his Lords, by commanding the Maior of London to raise him a speedy Army of fifty thousand men; but the wiser Londo∣ners would not yeeld that they should take Arms against the kings faithful Lords, who advised him to nothing but what tended to his and his kingdomes happiness: hereupon the king relents, and sends
to his Lords, acquainting  them that he would call a Parliament, in which his favourites should be brought to answer to their accusers, and to be punished, if guilty: upon this the Lords disband their Army, which the King perceiving, caused Robert de 1388. Vere to raise five thousand men for his own defence; this made the Barons jealous, therefore they renew their strength, and so encompassed the Duke, that he was forced to swim his horse over the Thames, and so escaped into France, where five years after he was slain by a wilde Boar in hunting, whose dead body was by the kings command embalmed and brought over, his Fu∣nerals were solemnized with all magnificence fit for a Prince. The Lords exe∣cuted some of his chief servants, and dispersed the rest of his guard, when he was gone over the Thames; then they conducted their Army to London, where they were bountifully entertained. Shortly after the Lords are admitted to confer with the King, a Parliament is summoned; the kings wicked Coun∣sellours and Judges are condemned of High-treason, Iohn Earl of Salisbury and Sir Nicholas Brembre lost their heads, Tresilian the chief Justice was hanged at Tiburn; the other Judges were spared upon the Queens importunity, but banished. The truce between England and France being near an end, the French Ad∣miral is sent into Scotland with a thousand of the French Gentry and Nobi∣lity, and two thousand Arms; these were slighted by the Country people who  loved not wars, but were entertained by the Scots Army, which consisted of thirty thousand, these march into England wasting all before them; but hear∣ing that the King was marching towards them with sixty thousand Archers, and eight thousand men at Arms, they went over the mountains into Wales using there all kinde of hostility, as king Richard used the like in Scotland, ha∣ving sacked and burned some of their chief Towns. When the Scots Army returned home, the Country people were mad at the French for comming thither, knowing that France had engaged Scotland in these wars to serve their own turns, and not for the good of Scotland; whereupon they strip the French of their horses, arms and money, and so sent them home; the Admiral and some other honourable Personages they kept as pawns, till satisfaction was made for their losses in this war. The French king sent the money that was demanded, and so the Admiral, Barons, and Gentry are dis∣missed. The French king pretending to conquer England, rigs out twelve hundred ships with a formidable Army; king Richard prepares to welcome him with a hundred thousand fighting men. The French Army is accursed by their own Country-men for their plunderings as they marched; and when they came to the Low-countries, for want of food they sold their arms, horses and cloaths, for their numbers were so great, and the Duke of Berry the kings  uncle, who liked not this expedition, was so slow in comming, and the French were grown so odious for their outrages in those Countries, that this great Army dissolved and came to nothing. After this the Scots invade England, king Richard prepares to go against them; but by the mediation of forreign Princes, a truce for three years is con∣cluded between England, Scotland and France, and afterward enlarged to four years more: and now king Richard having made peace with his neigbours, sends Iohn of Gaunt his uncle with an Army into Spain, to demand the king∣dome of Castile in right of his wife Constance eldest daughter to king Peter; in this expedition the Duke of Lancaster carried himself so bravely, that the king of Spain married the Dukes eldest daughter by his said wife, and gave him eight waggons laden with gold, and a yearly pension of ten thousand marks; and then the Duke married his youngest daughter to the king of Por∣tugal, who had aided him in these wars, and then returned home with wealth and honour. In this interim the king and Pope quarrelled, and then it was in Parliament enacted, that the Popes authority should here cease, and
no more  appeals be made to Rome upon the penalty of a Praemunire extending to per∣petual imprisonment, and forfeiture of lands and goods. Shortly after Queen Anne died, and two years after this the king married to Isabel daughter of Charles 6. of France, which caused a peace of thirty years; the two kings met between Calice and Arde, and then did the king surrender Brest to the Duke of Britain, a place which had cost much English blood. Thomas of Woodstock re∣proves the King for this, and so procures his anger, which set the King upon plotting his death, who also intends to destroy his Barons; for he was made believe, that if he did so, he should be made Emperour: upon this, Glocester, Arundel and Warwick are apprehended, and then he calls a Parliament, in  which Iohn Bush Speaker in the lower House, in a flattering speech impeacheth the Lords, and chiefly Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury of Treason, who was counselled by the King to absent himself, with an oath and promise that he should receive no prejudice, yet for want of his presence to answer for him∣self, is condemned and banished; Arundel is beheaded; Warwick upon his sub∣mission and repentance is confined to the Isle of Wight, where he died in great want and misery; the Duke of Glocester is sent to Calice, though unsentenced, 1396. where by the Kings direction, Mowbray Earl of Nottingham caused him to be smothered between two Feather-beds, for which service he was made a Duke. Authority is granted by the Parliament to eight persons finally to determine all causes as were not ended there, who being named by the King, decreed such things as were hurtful to the kingdome; and because the Kings guard were Cheshire men, to please them, he would be called Prince of Cheshire: he made Henry of Bullinbrook, Iohn of Gaunts son and heir, Duke of Hartford, his cousin Ed. Plantagenet Duke of Aubemarle, and Thomas Mowbray Marshal of England, with divers others, on whom he bestowed the lands belonging to his uncle Thomas of Woodstock, and to the two deceased Earls of Arundel and of Warwick; he granted also pardon to all except fifteen whom he would not nominate, to keep his Nobility in fear, lest any of them might be one of the fifteen. Bullinbrook Duke of Hartford being grieved at the Kings mis-government, acquainted Mowbray Duke of Norfolk therewith, purposely that he might in∣form the King; with this he treacherously mis-informs the King, as if Bullin∣brook aimed to dishonour the King, which was not his intention; wherefore Hartford is sent for, and confesseth to the king what he said, but denied the untrue suggestions which were added, and to clear himself challengeth the Duke of Norfolk to a duel, which was accepted, the king did not suffer them to fight, but exiled the Duke of Hartford for six years, and banished Norfolk for ever; Hartford is honourably received in France by king Charles 6. on whom for his excellent parts, he would have bestowed his uncles daughter  the Duke of Berry in marriage, had not king Richard hindred it. Not long after this, Duke Hartfords father Iohn of Gaunt died, whose lands and move∣ables the king seised on, and bestowed them on his sycophants; for which un∣just dealing, his uncle the Duke of York, and the Duke of Aubemar le his cousin forsook the Court. Shortly after the king farmeth out his kingdome to his favourites, raiseth an Army and saileth into Ireland, which he subdued. In his absence, Hartford, with Thomas Archbishop of Canterbury, returns into England to make claim to his Dutchy of Lancaster; at his landing, both Lords and Commons flock to him in such numbers, that he had quickly a great Army, which he leads to London, where he is feasted, thence he marcheth West∣ward. K. Richard being returned, and perceiving the Dukes strength, and that Scrope Earl of Wiltshire, with Bush and Green his three evil Counsellours had lost their 1399. heads, despairing to do any good by force, comes to his cousin, and proffers to surrender his kingdome to him, which the Duke seemingly refuses, desiring onely his own patrimony, and
reformation of publike abuses; so he caused  the king to be honourably guarded to the Tower, and then assembleth a Parliament, in which these Articles are proposed concerning the kings ill government: 1. That he hindred his duel with Mowbray his false accuser, and yet banished him unjustly for six years. 2. That he would not suffer any man to plead for him in his absence, though he had licensed it under the great Seal. 3. That he would suffer no man to be a Suiter for the said Dukes re∣turn. 4. That he had seised upon his father Iohn of Gaunts lands and move∣ables, and given them to his graceless Counsellours. 5. That he had coun∣selled the Archbishop Arundel to absent himself from Parliament, that he might not answer to his accusers, and then unjustly banished him. 6. That he granted an unjust prohibition under his privy Seal, when the Chancellor re∣fused to grant it under the great Seal. 7. That he caused Mowbray to smother the Duke of Glocester, whom he unjustly banished, and then advanced this Mowbray to wealth and honours. 8. That the King unjustly robbed the Clergy and Monasteries to further his Irish expedition. 9. That he carried with him the plate and jewels of the Crown to Ireland. 10. In laying heavy Fines upon wrong information. 11. That he devised crafty oaths to undo his subjects. 12. That he caused desperate Ruffians to accuse rich men for their wealth. 13. That he enriched his wicked Counsellours with heavy taxes laid on the people. 14. That he cancelled all Records which testified his oppres∣sions. 15. That he said, the Laws were in his own breast, and hereupon put  many unjustly to death. 16. That he used to write craftily and ambiguously to forreign Princes. 17. That he permitted his Cheshire guard to rob and murther without punishment. 18. That he had dishonourably stiled himself the Prince of Cheshire. 19. That he threatned the Lords in Parliament▪ that offered to speak any thing of Reformation. 20. That he exacted great Fines of those whom he had pardoned. 21. That he placed and displaced Burgesses in Parliament as he pleased. 22. That he had exiled and executed divers Lords for procuring a commission in Parliament to enquire of abuses, which commission he had ratified by his oath and instrument in writing. 23. That he procured the Popes bulls to curse such as opposed his unjust laws, contrary to  his own law made seven years before against the Popes authority. 24. That he had displaced good Sheriffs, and elected others that were for his turn. The authentick copy of these Articles is sent to the King, who confessed them, and his own insufficiency in government, and withall under his hand and seal resigns his Crown to his cousin Henry of Bullingbrook Duke of Lancaster: which being read and approved by the Parliament, King Richard is deposed, and the said Duke made King, who was installed by Arundel Archbishop, his companion in banishment: then was king Richard sent to Pomfret Castle; but shortly after by the new kings command, who thought himself unsafe whilst Richard lived, he was treacherously murthered; Sir Pierce Exton, and eight  other armed men more set upon him, from one of whom he wrested a brown∣bill, and therewith slew four of them, then fought with all the rest, till the cowardly knight struck him in the hinder part of his head with a pole-axe, of which blow he presently died: king Henry caused to be proclaimed, that he was lawful king by conquest, by resignation, and by inheritance as next heir to king Richard: But indeed Edmund Mortimer Earl of March, son to that Roger who was slain in Ireland, and declared heir to the Crown by king Richard, had more right, as being descended from Lionel Duke of Clarence, eldest brother to Iohn Duke of Lancaster king Henries father, and third son to Edward the third; but he perceiving that there was no contesting against the sword and  possession, betook himself to a private life, wherein is lesse glory, but more security.
CHAP. XIII. The history of Scotland from the year 1306. till the year 1377. RObert Bruce having made his peace with the Pope for killing Cumin in the Church, got himself to be crowned at Scone, but he had hard be∣ginnings; 1306. for he was twice defeated by the Cumins, assistest by the English, so that he was forced to hide himself divers months together in the mountains and Islands, having onely one friend to accompany him; in the mean while his brothers and friends were searched after and betraied, most of  them were put to death, his wife was apprehended by the Earl of Rosse, and sent into England: but when all his enemies thought he had been dead, he suddenly appears with a considerable strength, and takes in Carick his own Castle, now possessed by the English, whom he puts all to death; from thence he goeth to Ennernesse, and takes that Castle also: The report of this made great commotions in Scotland, so that multitudes being discontented with the English government, flocked to him, and now he hath a considerable Army, with which he marcheth Northward, and demolisheth all the Castles there, that they might not be any more shelters for his enemies, and that he might not  weaken his Army by putting garrisons there. Iohn Cumin Earl of Buchan hearing of Bruce his successe, raiseth an Army of Scots and English, and marcheth towards Bruce; but finding how resolute the Bruceans were, and that he could not confide in his own Army, because many favoured Bruce, he makes a truce with him, in the interim sends for more forces out of England. Shortly after king Edward dieth, and king Bruce falls desperately sick, where∣upon Cumin raiseth an Army, hoping that either Bruce was dead, or unable to fight, and therefore a fit time to set upon his forces; but he knowing how needful the presence of a Commander was in an Army, causeth himself to be  set on horseback, though unable to sit but as he was upheld by two of his ser∣vants; this sight so encouraged his souldiers, that they fought desperately, and defeated Cumins Army near Ennernry. Shortly after Bruce recovered his health, and led his Army into Argile, which he plundered, and drove Alexan∣der Lord thereof into England, where he died in great want. Galloway also is subdued by King Roberts brother Edward Bruce. The report of Bruce his victories drew King Edward 2. of England with his Army into Scotland, which was increased by the Scots that adhered to England, but this great preparation came to nothing; for the English for want of provision were forced to retreat, King Robert having removed all the corn and cattel thereabouts to places of safety. The next year Bruce having regained the Forts which the English held 1310. in Scotland, he invades England with an Army, and returned without oppo∣sition laden with spoil; after this Perth is taken, and the walls demolished by King Robert; Roseburgh, Edinburgh-Castle, and other strong holds, with the Isle of Man are surrendred. The English that were in Sterling Castle, being besieged by Edward Bruce, capitulated to surrender within a year, if no supply came from England in that time, which was assented to by Edward, for which King Robert was angry, yet yeelded to the conditions that he might not dishearten his brother. In the mean time King Edward of England provides an Army of one hundred thousand men, consisting of English, Scots, French, Flemings,  and Hollanders: The Scots Army under Bruce was thirty thousand, these pitch their camp near the English by Bannocbarn, two miles from Sterling; before the battel the English send eight hundred horse towards Sterling, which were encountred and defeated by five hundred Scots horse under Iames Douglasse: the next morning isappointed for the main encounter, the Scots are divi∣ded into three battels, the right wing was led by
the Kings brother, the left  by Randolph, and the main battel by the King himself; the particulars of this fight we have shewed in the English story, onely here is one passage not tou∣ched there, to wit, that the English perceiving afar off upon the mountaines the Scotch Carriages with great store of cattel, and servants that attended on the Army, supposed fresh forces had been comming to assist the Scots; this conceit, after the overthrow they had in the ditches, so disheartned them, that they betook themselves to a disorderly flight, in which multitudes were killed and taken; so great was the loss, that for three years after the English were qui∣et, though provoked divers times by the Scots incursions upon England, 200 of the English Nobility and Gentry were slain, about as many more taken pri∣soners;  the King escaped by means of the Earl of March into Dunbar, and from thence to Barwick, whom Douglas pursued with four hundred horse, but could not overtake him; in this battel four thousand Scots were slain, of the English fifty thousand; Sterling-Castle, according to promise, is surrendred. About this time Iohn Monteth, who for betraying Wallis was made Gover∣nour of Dunbritton Castle by the English, intended by surrendring that Castle to King Robert, to have surprised him, for he hid had a great many English in a low wine-cellar, who should have suddenly seised on the King at dinner, and transported him to England in a ship which they had ready for that purpose; the plot was discovered to the King by a Lock-smith; at the day appointed the Castle is surrendred, and by Monteth the King is invited to dinner, who desired first to see what store of wine was in the Cellar; after some tergiversa∣tions used by Monteth, the cellar-door is broken open, and the English Souldi∣ers brought out, who having confessed the plot, were put to death, and Mon∣teth imprisoned, but his life spared, because he was allied to some great men, whom the King at that time would not offend. The next Spring Barwick is taken by the Scots, having been twenty years in the English possession: then a Parliament is called at Ayer, in which the Kingdom is confirmed upon Robert; and because he had but one daughter, to avoid more controversies about the title to the Kingdome, it was decreed that Edward the Kings brother, after his  decease, should succeed, and his children; but if he should die chiidless, that then Mary the kings daughter and her posterity should inherit, therefore they think of providing a fit husband for her. After this, Edward Bruce is sent over to Ireland with an Army, where he is made king, and presently subdueth Ulster, then marcheth with his Army through the West of Ireland; an Army is sent thither from England; king Bruce goeth himself into Ireland with another Army to aide his brother, who was already defeated and killed by the English before he could come to help him. King Edward of England understanding that king Bruce and much of the Scotish strength was in Ireland, sends an Army into Scotland, which was de∣feated  by Douglas, Governour of the Marches; this Land-Army miscarrying, the English Fleet land their Sea forces, and infest the coast; the Earl of Fife with five hundred horse went to encounter them, but seeing the English stronger then he thought; was retreating, but being met by the Bishop of Dun∣kel with sixty horse, was encouraged by him to return against the Eng∣lish; and with that the Martial Bishop takes his Lance, puts spurs to his horse, and with his company falls furiously on the English, whom he routed, many of whom by pressing into the boats, were drowned about five hundred; this Bishop Sinclar ever after was called the Kings Bishop. That Summer the Eng∣lish besiege Barwick, and the Scots march as far as York wasting all before them; the Archbishop of that place raiseth an Army of Priests, Artificers, and Hus∣bandmen, all which were overthrown by the Scots; the Archbishop with a few more escaped; this was called the white battel, because in it so many Priests were slain. King Edward hearing of this defeat, raised his siege from Barwick, and returned with his Army into England, and then a short truce was made between the two Kings.
King Robert after this calls a Parliament, in which he wills the Nobility and Gentry to shew by what evidences they held their Lands; at this they were much troubled, most of them having lost their evidences in the late wars; there∣fore suddenly they all stood up in Parliament, and drew their swords, crying out that they had their evidences in their hands; the King at this was very angry, yet smothered it, till he found a time to revenge himself, which shortly after fell out, for many of the Lords being guilty, and fearing the Kings wrath, conspire to betray the kingdome to the English; the King hears of the plots, divers Letters are found to that purpose, whereupon the plotters are appre∣hended, a Parliament called, and the Letters produced, so all of them are con∣demned of High-treason, among whom was David Brechen the Kings sisters  son; many were grieved at his punishment, because of his blood, youth, cou∣rage, and strength of body, who had done good service in the Holy-war, and because he was no actor in this plot, but onely concealed it. About this time came the Popes Legats, upon king Edwards procure∣ment, to mediate a peace between the two kingdomes, which when the Scots would not yield to, they are excommunicated, who to shew how little they regarded this excommunication, follow the Legats as they were returning into England with an Army, spoiling all in their way with fire and sword; King Edward in requital of this wrong, marcheth into Scotland with an Army,  but provisions failing them, they were forced to return, for King Robert had conveyed all provision into Garrisons and the mountaines; the English in their return spoil and burn some Monasteries; the Scots follow and destroy all as far as York, so that K. Edward hardly escapes, his Army being defeated, so the Scots return with rich spoils, and king Edwards Treasure. After this, the Scots send away two Embassadours, one to the Pope to appease his anger, which was quickly effected, when he understood that without ground King Edward the 1. had begun this war in claiming superiority over Scotland, which was a free kingdome: the other Embassadour was sent to France, to renew the old League, which was also done, and withall it was agreed, that if any con∣troversie  should arise about the Title of the Crown, the Parliament should decide it, and whom they elected the French king would main∣taine. About this time, one Hanton an English Gentleman, for commending king Robert Bruce, was hurt by one Spencer, whom the next day he killed, and with that fled into Scotland, where he was rewarded by king Robert with large Ter∣ritories, and made a Peer of the land, from him came the family of the Hamil∣tons. King Edward of England being murthered, and king Robert growing old, a Parliament is called, in which King Roberts young son is confirmed his successor, to whom Robert Stuart the kings Nephew by his sister was to suc∣ceed,  if his own son should die without issue; and to avoid all future quarrels about the Crown, Iames Douglas is sent to Iohn Baliol in France with some pre∣sents, to the end he might resign his title to the Crown, which he did willing∣ly, acknowledging the wrong he had done in accepting that Crown; and 1327. withall highly commends king Robert Bruce. King Edward the third of England sends Embassadors into Scotland to con∣clude a peace; but the Scots perceiving some fraudulent dealing, instead of making peace, proclaimed war with England: Thomas Randulph and Iames Douglas are sent into England with twenty thousand horse without foot, that they might run through the Countrey without impediment; King Edward  provides an Army of sixty thousand Dutch and English; Carlile and Newcastle are guarded to keep in the Scots from passing the river, but in vain, for they passed the river where it was fordable; the two Armies were within three miles of each other eight dayes together, before either knew of it, by reason of stormes, rain, and overflowing of the Rivers, onely the English were alarm'd divers times in the night by the Stags running
in heards to and fro,  which they thought had been the enemy; at last the English found that the Scotch Army was pitched on the side of a hill, from which they could not per∣swade them to come down into even ground; but one night the Scots per∣ceiving the English Army careless, Douglas is sent with two hundred choise horse, which got through the Army even to the Kings Tent, and had cut two cords thereof; but the Alarm being suddenly given, the Scots returned safe to their own Camp, having killed three hundred of the enemy: the English expecting hourly when the Scots would give onset, at last they understood that Douglas with all his forces were marched back into Scotland, the English resolve to return home likewise; and not long after Embassadours are sent 1328.  from England to treat with the Scots for a perpetual peace; in the interim a truce is concluded for three years. The next year, in a Parliament at Northampton peace is made with the Scots, the Articles we have mentioned in the English story. King Robert having cele∣brated the marriage of his son with the king of Englands sister, and being now aged and sickly, he commits the Government of the kingdom to Tho. Randulph his sisters son, and Iames Douglas, and betakes himself to a private life, then he makes his will, in which he names David his son his successor, being now eight years old, and next to him Robert Stuart; he exhorted his Lords to mutual love, and wished them rather to send yearly Governours unto the Islands called  Aebudae, then to appoint one Lord over them, because there would be less cor∣ruption, and more quietness; likewise that they should not in their wars with England hazard all upon one battel, but rather tire them with alarms and skirmishes; and lastly he forbids them to make long peace with England, lest for want of Military exercise they grow either careless and effeminate, or else fall out into intestine quarrels; he recommends also to Iames Douglas his Vow which he had made for an Expedition into the Holy-Land, which by reason of his age and troubles he could not perform, therefore wisheth him to carry his Heart to Ierusalem, there to be interred, which Iames undertook the next year with a company of resolute young Gallants, who joyn themselves with the king of Arragon being then ready for the same Expedition; in this war against the Sarazens he did good service, but at last rushing too desperate∣ly upon the enemy neer an Ambush, he lost his life; king Robert was 1330. dead a year before this Expedition, Anno 1329. the four and twentieth year of his Reign. Randulph Earl of Murrey is made Protector, as the king had ordained; he so cleared the kingdome of theeves, High-way-robbers, and idle wanderers, that the country-people could securely keep open their doors, and leave their rural utensils all night in the open fields; if any goods were lost, the Country Justices were to make reparation, and the king to satisfie them out of the  goods of those that were found guilty; one cunning-fellow had stole his own goods, went to the Justice for reparation, which he had, but after being found to be stealer of his own goods, he was hanged for his labour, and all his estate confiscate; it was lawful for any publike Officer to kill him that made resist∣ance. King Edward of England perceiving he could do no good upon Scotland so long as this wise and vigilant Viceroy was alive, sent a Monk who professed Physick thither, who understanding that Randulph was troubled with the Stone, got access to speak with him, and undertook the cure; Physick is given mixt with poison, which wrought gently; the Monk pretending he wanted some drugs, got money to buy them, and to defray his charges, he returns to king Edward, assures him that by such a day Randulph would be dead; upon  this an Army is levied, and sent into Scotland; king Edward sends spies to view the Scots posture, who finding they had an Army, and that the Viceroy was there yet alive, return and acquaint king Edward therewith, who causeth the lying Monk to be punished, and the Army to retreat, leaving some Garrisons on the borders to keep off excursions; Randulph not being able, because
of his  sickness to pursue the enemy, disbands his Forces, and presently after died at Musselburg, having been Viceroy two years. The King now being but ten years old, Duncan Earl of Marre is elected Pro∣tector: that very day newes is brought, that Edward Baliol was entred the Forth with a great Fleet of Ships; he had been encouraged by one Laurence Twine an English-man, who lived in Scotland, but for his misdemeanors was forced to flie over to France; he acquaints Baliol of the distractions in Scot∣land, of the weakness of the King, and the sickness of his Protector Randulph, of the aide which he should have from King Edward, and of many friends he should find in Scotland; upon these perswasions, Baliol obtains a Fleet of ships and six thousand men from King Edward: As Baliol was landing his men at Kinghorn, Alexander Seaton a Nobleman of those parts, with some Forces oppo∣seth him, but Seaton was killed with a great part of his Forces; Baliol having refreshed his Souldiers, which now were increased to ten thousand, marcheth towards Perth, and sits down neer the river, the Scots Army was divided into two bodies on each side of the river; Baliol fearing to be inclosed, resolves to fight with one of those bodies a part, and first on the Viceroy which was far∣thest off, and seemed most secure; one Andrew Murrey in the night guided Baliol over the river where it was fordable, who falling unexpectedly on the Viceroy's Army, routed them, though at first some resistance was made, yet  the disorder in the Scots Camp was so great, that instead of opposing the Ene∣my, they fell foul among themselves, three thousand Scots were slain, the rest fled to Perth, but shortly after yield the Town to the English, which Dumbar with the other Army resolved to besiege, but upon better advice they retreat; Baliol upon this good success, and finding multitudes of Scots to flock to him, resolves to declare himself King, to whom divers Lords whom he had taken prisoners, were forced to swear fealty. Baliol finding himself sufficiently strong, goeth to Scone, where he is crowned. 1332. Young King David with his wife, to be out of danger, are conveyed over to the French king; his party make Andrew Murrey, King Robert Bruce his sisters son, Viceroy, who presently raiseth an Army, and besiegeth Perth, which after three moneths siege they took; the Earl of Fife, who held the town for Baliol, is sent to prison with his wife and children; Murrey of Tilibardin, for guiding Baliol over the river, is executed; the walls of Perth are demolished; a thou∣sand horse are sent into Anandel (where Baliol was secure) by the Viceroy, these fell suddenly on his forces in the night, so that he was forced to flie away half cloathed upon a horse without bridle or saddle, divers of whose friends were killed; Alexander Bruce, King Davids kinsman, who had taken part with Baliol, was taken, but pardoned: the Brucians knowing that Baliol acted all for and by the King of England, fortifie Barwick, where they put Alexander Seaton Governour; an Embassadour is sent into France, to see the young king, and to require aide; but the the Brucians are twice defeated by the Baliolans; king Edward sends Forces to aide Baliol, who otherwise could not subsist a∣gainst the other faction, not regarding his affinity with Bruce, nor the peace that was made, nor the oath which he took; and to make shew of a just war, he demands Barwick, which Bruce had by right of Arms gained from the English; king Edward besiegeth the Town by Sea and Land, Douglas brings an Army to raise the siege, he was advised to go with his Army into England; but he to be revenged on king Edward for hanging up Seatons two sons, would needs fight upon unequal ground and tearms, and so lost the day; in that conflict ten thousand Scots were slain, the English also lost many, besides their Fleet, which was fired by the Scots. After this, Baliol had divers bickerings with the Brucians, sometimes pre∣vailing, sometimes yielding; in the interim a new Army from England enters Scotland, both by Sea and Land; in the Forth, the English Admiral, with most of the other ships, were
battered against the Rocks with stormes; the Land∣army marcheth as far as Glasco, where an English Parliament is called, there David Cumin Earl of Athol is made Governour of Scotland, and King Edward carried with him Baliol into England, for he durst not confide in him. Cumin seiseth upon all the Lands of the Stuarts, and having the Southern parts at his devotion, he marcheth Northward, where the Counties of Buchan and Mur∣rey submit to him. All Patents went under the stile of Edward and Baliol; but whilst Cumin was so far North, Robert Stuart who had hid himself in Dumbrit∣ton began to appear, and having raised four hundred of the Cambels in Arguile went to take in some of the next Forts, which they did with good success; upon this some of the neighbour Counties began to side with him, so that his  Army increased like a snow-ball, besides Iohn Randulph Earl of Murrey was returned from France with assurance of aide from thence; so now having ta∣ken courage, they make two Viceroy's, to wit, this Robert Stuart, and Iohn Randulph; he with a considerable Army marched Northward, at whose ap∣proach David Cumin being forsaken by divers of his Souldiers fled to Lochaber, where he was besieged, and forced to yield, and withall to swear fealty to king Bruce, and trusting to his promises left him there as his Lieutenant, then being returned to Lothien, he with the other Viceroy calls a Parliament, in which was great emulation between Cumin and Douglas lately returned from Eng∣land. Shortly after King Edward with Baliol invades Scotland by Sea and Land; a Fleet of a hundred and sixty saile enters the Forth; King Edward by land mar∣cheth towards Perth; in the mean time Robert, one of the Viceroyes falls sick, so the whole burthen lay upon Randulph, who with a part of his Forces en∣counters the Gelderlanders neer Edenburgh, and defeated them, for they came to assist the English, but he used them kindly for Philip Valois his sake; but as he was conveying of them, he was intercepted by the English Faction, and brought to King Edward then besieging Perth, which being surrendred, King Edward returns to England, having had some loss by stormes in his Fleet. Da∣vid Cumin is by him left Viceroy, for he carried Baliol with him. Cumin who  had found favour before, shews none now, but persecutes the Brucians with all cruelty; yet a party took head against him, under the Earl of March, Mur∣rey and Douglas, who never would yield to Baliol; these with considerable Forces defeat the Cuminians; upon this Victory Andrew Murrey is made Vice∣roy, for Stuart was sick, and Randulph a prisoner. New supplies are sent of English, to relieve Cumins wife, who was besieged by the Brucians; they march as far as Elgin in Murrey, burn Aberden, take divers Forts, and relieve Cumins Lady; they enjoyn the six next Monasteries to rebuild the walls of Perth. No sooner were the English gone home, but Andrew Murrey with new supplies regaines all the Forts and Castles beyond Forth, except Perth and the  Castle of Cupre, then enters England, and returns with great booties: the Gar∣rison of Cupre, for want of provision, was forced to be gone, who returning homeward through Lothian over the sands, were all drowned upon the com∣ming in of the tide. The next year, Dumbar-Castle is besieged by the Earles of Arundel 1337. and Salisbury six moneths together, and at last were faine to leave it, having lost many men before it by sallies; after it was relieved by Alexander Ramsey in the dark of the night. Murrey having beaten out the English from most parts of Scotland in two yeares and a half, died, whom Stuart succeeded as Viceroy, who by  the help of Douglas got divers Victories over the English and their parties in Scotland. Perth is besieged above four months by the Scots, at last the Earl of Rosse takes it; the English are dismissed with bag and baggage; Sterling also is sur∣rendred
by the English, and Edenburgh-Castle is taken by Douglas. Fraser and twelve more, being disguised in sea-mens apparel, as if they had come lately from an English Ship then in the Forth with wine and other provision were let in, who presently killed the Porter, took away the keyes, opened the Gates, and let in some companies who lay in ambush; after a great skirmish, the English were forced to yield: In the mean while Alexander Ramsey enters Northumberland with an Army, which plunders the Country, and returns with great booty; he is pursued by English Forces, which he defeats by drawing them into an ambush, where he had hid great store of foot, and so brings home his plunder; then he takes in Roxburg; after this, he with Randulph and Dou∣glas 1342. drive the English out of all their Holds in Scotland, leaving them nothing  but Barwick. This year returns King David Bruce with his Queen, after nine years absence. King Edward having made peace with France for three years, prepares all the strength he can to invade Scotland; he had then in his Army 6000 horse, and 40000 foot, besides a great Fleet, which was so shattered with stormes, that it did him little service. Upon King Davids return, Scotland is divided into factions, caused by the murther of Alexander Ramsey, whom Douglas treacherously killed, because he had got from him the government of Teviot: This much troubled King Da∣vid, who made search for Douglas, and found him, but by the mediation of Ro∣bert Stuart,  and others, he was pardoned and made Governour of Roxburg and Teviot, for such then was the power of Douglas, that the King durst do no otherwise. Differences being thus composed, David contrary to the advice of his Lords raiseth an Army against England, into which he made three several excursions, and returned with great spoiles; At last a peace for two years is concluded with England, conditionally that King Philip of France would rati∣fie it, without whom King David could make no peace, nor King Philip with England, without the Scots; but the French being defeated by the English, stir up King David against England, who invades and spoiles all as far as Durham, in an unseasonable time, his own Countrey being distracted by civil broils be∣tween  the Earl of Rosse and the Lord of the Islands; the English Army come unexpectedly upon King David, a battel is fought, in which many of the Scots Lords were taken or killed; King David was taken prisoner by Copland, two of whose teeth he strook out with his fist after he had lost his weapons; upon this Victory divers of the South Countries of Scotland yielded to the English, the rest being employed in civil broiles against each other; but the English shortly after lost these Countries again. King Iohn of France sends money into Scotland to raise Souldiers, desiring also that the Scots would make no peace with England, they receive the money, a few Souldiers are raised which make excursions upon England; they take also Barwick and burn it; the English enter  Louthien with fire and sword; Baliol again swears fealty to king Edward. The English being again driven out of Scotland, king David is ransomed, who upon his return dis-inherits Robert Stuart, his elder sisters son, and makes Alexander the Earl of Sutherlands son, and his Nephew by the younger sister, his heir; but he dying shortly after, king David is reconciled to Stuart; after this Scotland is much afflicted with great inundations of water, and the Plague; king David wanting issue, in a Parliament proposed, that for the good of both kingdomes, the king of England or his son should succeed to the Crown of Scotland; this motion was so disliked, that it was presently hushed: In the mean while the High-landers continue in arms amongst themselves, whom  when the king could not reconcile, he increaseth their quarrels, to the end they might destroy each other, and so the kingdom should be quiet; At last the king dieth in Edenburgh-Castle, the nine and forty year of his life, and the 1377. seven and forty of his reign.
CHAP. XIV. A prosecution of the Scotish History, from the year 1377. till the year 1400. KIng Robert Stuart succeedeth to his uncle David Bruce: his Coronation was opposed by William Earl Douglasse, who claimed the Crown in right of Baliol, and the Cumins, of whom he was descended; but his claim was so distasted by the Lords, that he was glad to give off and submit to King Robert, and to confirm his allegiance; the King marrieth his daughter to Earl Williams son. This year, the fourteen years peace between the two kingdomes is broken by the English, who at a Fair killed a friend of George Dumbar; he being denied satisfaction, the next day with some forces he plunders the Fair, burns the Town and kills many in it: the English to be revenged, fall with fire and sword upon the lands of Sir Iohn Gordon, who in requital invades England, fights with Iohn Liburn, whom he takes prisoner with many other, and carrieth them with great booties to Scotland. Henry Pierce Earl of Nor∣thumberland raiseth seven thousand men, and with them marcheth to Dunce in Scotland, where Iohannes Scotus subtilis was born, this Village is six miles  from England: the Country people thereabout in the night-time upon the hills made such a noise with their rattles, which they use in driving away the Deer from their Corn, that the English horse being affrighted, broke their halters, and ran away; the English also fearing more danger then there was, took their flight, and left their baggage behinde them; the same day Gordon by ambush took Thomas Musgrave governour of Berwick, with some of his Troops which were going to joyn with Piercy. Shortly after this Ambassadours arrive from France, to renew the old League with King Robert, and to perswade him to invade England: In the mean while Alexander Ramsey takes Berwick Castle, and afterward surrendred it. Iames Earl Douglasse invades England with twenty thousand horse and foot, and returns with great booties: the English in requital enter Scotland with fifteen thousand under Talbot, who as they were returning through a narrow valley with their spoil, in the night time were set upon by five hundred Scots; the English thinking the number of Scots had been far greater, fled disorderly, many in the flight were slain, many more drowned in the River, two hundred and forty taken. Iohn Duke of Lancaster is sent into Scotland to mediate a peace, which was concluded for three years; Lancaster hearing of the civil broils in England, upon the publike Faith stayed in Scotland till the English storm was over. The three years Truce being ended, Douglasse Lord of Galloway, with the 1384. Earl of March, besiege some English Forts and takes them: Lancaster is sent against Scotland with great forces both by sea and land, who for the kinde usage he had received a few years before at Edinburgh, would not suffer the souldiers to use any violence; the Sea-forces in the Isle Armona burned down a Monastery; the like cruelty they used in some other places, till the Scots forces fell upon them, and having killed some, and taken others, drove the rest on ship-board, forty of which were drowned as they held by a cable which was cut. Scarce was Lancaster returned home, when Douglasse falls up∣on the English forts, and regains them: A peace in the mean while is made be∣tween France and England, in which Scotland was also included; but before the Scots knew of it, the English with ten thousand horse, and six thousand Archers invade Scotland, and spoil the lands of the Douglasses and Lindsey's, which being done, they shew the Scots, that a peace was concluded, and with∣all the French Ambassadours come to assure them thereof; the Scots enraged at this perfidiousness and mokery resolve to be revenged;
king Robert labours  to pacifie them; in the interim Douglasse, Lindsey and Dumbar stole away pri∣vately from the Court, and unknown to the king, raise an Army of fifteen thousand, with which they enter England, wasting all with fire and sword to Newcastle; then having returned with great booties, and many prisoners, they cause a peace to be proclaimed. About the end of the peace, the French Admiral with two thousand soul∣diers, and pay for six months, comes into Scotland; he brought also four hun∣dred compleat Arms for so many Gentlemen; these with the Scots aid invade Northumberland, overthrow three Castles, but by reason of the great rains and floods, were fain to return with their booty: King Richard of Eng∣land,  in revenge of this wrong, enters Scotland with sixty thousand foot, and eight thousand horse, besides with a great Fleet by sea, these with fire and sword waste the Country of Lothian. The Scots unwilling to encounter so great an Army, resolve to draw King Richard out of Scotland by invading England, therefore they enter Cumberland, spoiling all the Country there∣about: King Richard would have pursued the Scots Army, but could not by reason of the rocky and mountainous waies between them, and the difficulty to finde the Scots Army, therefore he returns home the same way he came; and the Scots also retire out of England, who with the French resolve to take the Town and Castle of Rosburgh; but because the French would have  had the Town to themselves if it had been taken, which the Scots would not yeeld too, they gave off their intended siege; the French souldiers being sent home, and the Admiral retained as a prisoner till satisfaction were made for the wrongs they had done to the Country people of Scotland. William Douglasse son to Archibald Lord of Galloway, sails over to Ireland with an Army to requite the wrongs he had suffered by the Irish, who had made excursions into Galloway. Douglasse having landed his forces near Kerlinford, so affrighted the Town, that they sent to article with him: Douglasse accepts of a Treaty; in the in∣terim the Town sends to Dundalk for aid, five hundred horse are procured, with these and their own forces they march out against Douglasse, hoping to subdue his Army, and to seise on his ships; but they were subdued themselves, their Town sacked and burned, fifteen ships then in the harbour are taken and laden with booty, so Douglasse returns victorious to Galloway, having plunde∣red the Isle of Man by the way. At his return, when he understood that his father was marched upon an expedition into England, he follows him: the Scots being willing to be revenged on the English for the spoil done on Lothian the former year by King Richard, desire King Robert that an Army might be sent: he being now aged and willing to be quiet, would not yeeld to any invasion of England, therefore the Lords repair to the Earl of Fife he Kings second son,  (for the eldest Iohn was lamed by a horse, and unfit for action) these resolve to raise an Army without the knowledge of either King; but they could not carry the matter so close from King Richard, who by Spies was advertised of the Scots proceedings, and therefore wills the Northern Countries to be in readiness: the Scots Army consisted of thirty thousand; the English sent a Spie disguised in a Scots habit, to discover the Armies intention; he having found out all, and returning to his horse which he had tied to a tree, missed him being stoln, so that he was fain to foot it, which caused suspition, therefore he is pursued and brought back and forced to reveal the whole English plot, which made the Scots alter their resolutions. Two Armies being raised, the bigger marcheth by the way of Carlisle  under the Earls of Fife, Iernia, Mar and Sutherland, and Douglasse Lord of Galloway; the other enters Northumberland under the Earls of Murrey and March, this lesser Army wastes the Bishoprick of Durham; Henry and Ralph Piercies, the old Earl of Northumberlands two sons, are sent with some forces to secure Newcastle; thither the Scots march, some light skirmishes for
two  daies together they had with the English: At last Iames Douglasse and Henry Pcy fought a duel in sight of both the Armies; Piercy is beat off from his horse, and his spear taken by Douglasse, which he carried away with him: the Scots were marching away with their booties, with an intent to joyn with the bigger Army; but because Piercy bragged, that Douglasse should not carry his Lance to Scotland, therefore he resolves to stay two or three dayes to see what Piercy would do, who was very eager to pursue the Scots to recover his Lance, but was advised not to do so for fear of Ambushes, for they could not think that so small an Army would have ventured upon Newcastle, but that they had greater forces at hand; yet finding there was no ambush, Piercy with ten thousand horse and foot pursues the Scots, which were scarce half so many; a cruel fight ensueth, which continued till it was dark, the dayes being then at longest; so having rested a while, and the morning appearing, the conflict is renewed, in which Douglasse is slain, but his death concealed; at last both the Piercies being wounded and taken prisoners, the English are disheartned and flie, of whom one thousand and eight hundred are slaine, and a thousand wounded, and one thousand and forty taken prisoners; of the Scots one hundred are slaine, and two hundred taken. And now the Bishop of Durham with his forces were come, they should have joyned with Piercy,  but he would not stay for them, so earnest he was to regaine his Lance: The Bishop understanding that Piercies Army was defeated, was in a doubt what to do: At last being encouraged by the Country, which made up his Army ten thousand, hee pursues the Scots, hoping to finde them carelesse upon their former successe, or else wearied with fighting. The Earl Murrey, who now had the charge of the Army, Douglasse being dead, understanding that the Bishops Army was comming upon his forces, calls a Councel of war concerning the prisoners; some would have had them put to death, being dangerous to keep so many, but this was held cruelty,  therefore an oath is taken of them that they should not stir during the time of the fight; then they put themselves in battel-array, each one is commanded to sound a horn, which by the eccho of the neighbouring hills made a hideous noise, so that the English supposed the Scots to be more numerous then they were; this noise, and the sight of so many dead bodies before them killed in the former conflict, the unskilfulness of the Commanders, and rawness of the souldiers, so disheartned the English, that they retreated: Upon this the Scots return homeward, Ralph Piercy not being able to travel by reason of his wounds, got leave with six hundred of the other prisoners to return home upon their parol, the poorer prisoners were let go without ransome; Henry Piercy with four hundred more are carried into Scotland, and shortly after ransomed. The other Army which was in Cumberland, was not so glad for this victory, as sad for the death of Douglasse, a man highly honoured and beloved for his valour, and so much the more because he was killed in the prime of years. And so much of this battel fought at Otterburn, not far from Newcastle. Upon the return of the Scots, King Robert by reason of his age finding himself slighted by his Lords, and unfit for action, calls a Parliament, in which Robert his younger sonne is declared Lieutenant and Governour of Scotland. Not long after this King Robert died, the seventie fourth year of his 1390.  life, and nineteenth of his reign; upon whose death Alexander Earl of Buchan, to revenge himself of the Bishop of Murrey, who had angred him, sets the Ca∣thedral Church of Elgin on fire. To King Robert succeeded his son Iohn, who by an Act of Parliament had his name changed to Robert, either because the two Iohns of England and France were unfortunate Princes, or else because the two first Roberts of Scotland
were brave men; there were two Families  of the Highlanders, whose feud was so great, that they could never be re∣conciled, till it was agreed that thirty of either family should fight hand to hand in the Kings presence, which was done accordingly in open field by Perth, whither multitudes came to see that horrid butchering spectacle; they 1396. were all killed except one of the one party, and eleven of the other, who were all grievously wounded; and so the fiercest of these families being slain, the rest remained quiet for many years after. Two years after this, the title of Duke came into Scotland, the first that was so called was David king Roberts son, being eighteen years old, whom the king in Parliament stiled Duke of Rothesai, and his brother Robert Duke of Albaine: This title of Duke was  proffered to Earl Douglasse, but he refused it. Not long after, George Dumbar Earl of March had betrothed his daughter to David king Roberts son, and had already paid a great part of the portion; At this Arohibald Earl Douglasse being offended, complained to the Parliament that the king had bestowed his son without their consent, and withall proffers his daughter with a greater por∣tion, which is accepted: Upon this Dumbar with his family removes in great discontent into England, joynes himself with Piercy, raises forces, and invades Douglasse his lands: hereupon Dumbar is proclaimed Traitor, and his estate confiscate; a Herauld is sent to king Henry of England to demand Dumbar, and to complain that the peace was broken; king Henry having given no satisfaction to the Herauld, besides, because Piercy and Dumbar with two thousand horse and foot had entred Scotland, (but were driven out again with the losse of their booty by Douglasse) open wars are proclaimed against England. 1400.
THE SIXTH BOOK OF THE SECOND PART: Intreating of the Histories of the World, from the Year, 1400. CHAP. I. 1. The Affairs of Italy, Germany, Hungary and Bohemia under Wenceslaus, Rupert, Sigismund, Emperours. 2. The Councels of Constance and Basil, with some other passages from the year, 1400. till the year, 1439. IN the time of Wenceslaus fell out the year of Jubilee, which 1400. should have been a year of rest and gladness, but proved the beginning of that miserable rent in Christendome, which is not yet made up; Iohn Husse, or Goose (for so the word signifies) having read Wickliffs books sent him from England, began to preach openly in the University of Prague against Jubilees and Indulgences, against Purga∣tory, Image-worship, Transsubstantiation, and other points held by the Church; this new Doctrine of his made such a distraction in the University, that most of the Schollers went away thence to Erford and Lipsia, where out of the ruines of Prague sprung up these two Universities. About a hundred years after out of this Goose's egg was hatched that Gosling, which did more hurt to new Rome, then the Goose of the Capitol did good to old Rome. Husse being driven by the Bishop from Prague, retires to the Village where he was born, and preacheth there openly the same doctrine; complaint is made against him to Wenceslaus, but he neither could nor did any thing against him, for he was shortly after deposed by the Electors of Mentz, Colen, Trevers, and the Palsgrave. Iodocus Barbatus Marquess of Brandeburg, is named Empe∣rour by Colen and Mentz, which election was approved by Wenceslaus his Cou∣sin-german; but he was never crowned, for within six moneths of his election he died; then was Frederick of Brunswick named by the Electors, but as he was coming to be crowned, the Bishop of Mentz set upon him in the way and mur∣thered him; at length Rupert of Bavaria Elector Palatine is made Caesar, and  crowned at Colen by the Bishop, for Aix which favoured Wenceslaus, would not open their Gates; but them and other Towns which held with Wenceslaus, shortly after Rupert brought under; this Rupert was descended from Ludovic the Fourth. The Pope upon the Florentines request, who were molested by Iohn Galeas of Millan, gave way to Rupert to require from the Priests of Germany their
Tenths for raising of an Army against Galeacius, whose wealth and power was become formidable both to the Pope and the other Italian Princes; but Rupert was resisted by the Bishop of Millan, who also made Leopold of Austria and the Bishop of Colen his enemies: Trevers likewise made resistance, yet he raised an Army, being promised by the Florentines two hundred thousand Florens; as soon as his forces had touched the Territories of Galeacius, he marcheth thence into the Country of Brixia, but was beaten back into Trent by the Dukes Army; thence he came to Padua upon the desire of the Vene∣tians, where he was met by the Florentine Ambassadours with some forces and money to renew the war; but not finding the forces and money answerable to  his expectation, and that neither the Pope nor Venetians would openly assist him, he returns into Germany: Whereupon Galeacius sends his forces against Bononia, assisted by the Florentines, he obtains the victory and the City with∣all, which had been the occasion of fifty years war; Bentivolus the tyrant of that City was slain. He besiegeth Francis Gonzaga at Mantua, and forceth him to yeeld the Town, being almost drowned by letting in the Rivers Po and Athesis; he took from Scaliger, Verona and Vincentha, and shortly after Padua from Cararius whom at first he assisted against Scaliger. After he had taken in Bononia, he crossed the Apinines with his victorious Army, and struck a great terrour at Florence, but a violent feaver stopt the career of his victories,  whereof he died in this expedition, having left behinde him Iohannes Maria, and Philip, who were the last Dukes of Millan of that race of Vicounts, and one daughter Valentina married to Lewis Prince of Orleans, son to Charles 5. of France. After the death of Galeacius, the Guelphs and Gibellins at Millan fell again to destroy each other with fire and sword; the Cities lately taken by Galea∣cius, fell off from his sons, and the jurisdiction of Millan, to their several go∣vernours; Brixia to Pandulphus, Papia to Facinius Canis, Cremona to Benzones, &c. Among the rest Bononia fell off to the Pope, so did Assisinum and Perusia Cities of Umbria. The Florentines with their money purchased Pisae from Gabriel  the Bastard-son of Iohn Galeacius. Sena having killed Corregius their Go∣vernour, reassumed their liberty, which was accompanied with many bloody seditions. The Venetians upon these changes, promoted their Territories as far as Forum, Iuly and Istria, so they grew great by the ruines of the Scaligers and Carrarii; for Novellus Carrarius the son of Francis, having recovered Padua by the Venetian assistance, forgetting his benefactors, stirs up William Scaliger to recover Verona, which when William had obtained, Carrarius poysoneth him, and then murdereth his two sons, that without opposition he might enjoy the Empire of Verona; and not content with this, he assaied to take in Vincentia, which hating his tyranny, cast her self upon the Venetians patrocine;  they being glad of this occasion, make open war against Carrarius, whose forces they subdue, and drive him within the walls of Padua, where being straitly besieged, he with his two sons were forced to yeeld to the Venetians, who caused them all there to be strangled, his other two sons escaped, but died shortly after in Hetruria: Upon this the Venetians obtain Verona, Vincentia, Colonia, Feltrium, Bellunum and Padua. And thus was the greatness of Millan which had swallowed up almost all Italy on this side of Latium, torn in peeces. Iohannes Maria became a most bloody Tyrant, taking delight to fling to hungry Mastiffs condemned persons, or such as he hated; these dogs he used to feed with mens flesh, and then to keep them hungry that they might prove the more fierce and cruel; but he was at last by some Assassinates murthered in the Church, who cleft his skull close to his eyes, and cut off his right leg, a grateful spectacle to the people, who extreamly hated him: his brother and successour Philip revenged his death, and recovered Brixia, Placentia, Comus, Cremona, and some other places, but lost quite Hetruria, Umbrio, Aemylia and Picenum; he beheaded Fundulius the governour of Cremona, who being upon
the Scaffold; was exhorted to repent, answered, That he was so far from re∣penting, that he was sorry he had not broke the necks both of Sigismund the Emperour, and Pope Iohn 23. when he entertained them with a banquet upon the battlements of his high Tower. Rupert the Emperour seeing but little good to be done in Italy; returns, as we said, to Germany, permitting the Italians to decide their own quarrels; who were then distracted into Italian and French factions by means of the Anti∣popes. Ladislaus King of Naples, seeming to favour the faction of Gregory 12. came suddenly upon Rome, being then in great distractions, and took it, with some other Towns belonging to the Church; he threatned also the Florentines;  but Lewis of Anjou being invited by the Popes letters, comes and joyns his Forces with those of Florence and Seva, upon hope to obtain the Kingdome of Naples; so he recovers the City for Alexander 5. and drives out Ladislaus, who not long after, with greater forces returns and takes Rome, having suppressed the Pontificans and French Auxiliaries; he killed many of the Citizens, over∣threw the walls, took the Castle of S. Angelo, with divers Towns belonging to the Church, and kept them till his dying day, notwithstanding that he was anathematized by Pope Alexander; he left by will the Kingdome to his sister Ioan, who as is said, repudiated her husband Iames Burbon Earle of Marchia, and adopted Alphonsus King of Arragon, thinking thereby to make  her party strong against the Pope, and those of Anjou; Alphonsus having slighted her, was rejected by her, who sent for Lewis of Anjou's eldest son, after whose death she surrogated his brother Renatus, whence arose bloody 1412. wars between the houses of Arragon and Anjou, the Popes siding sometimes with the one, sometimes with the other. In the interim Rupert having reigned ten years died, and was buried at Heidelberg; he was married twice, and left divers children behinde him. In his time shined a terrible Comet which presaged the wars of Bohemia raised by Husse, the troubles of Italy by means of the Antipopes, and the defeat of the Christian Armies by the Turks. He built a Church and Colledge at Heidelberg. To Rupert succeeded Sigismund the son of Charles 4. whom Ludovic King of Hungary had adopted for his son, intending to make him heir to the Crown, and husband to his daughter; but Ludovic being dead, and Sigismund as yet a childe, the Queen-mother governed the Kingdome; the Nobility disliking her government, send for Charles King of Naples, son to Andrew King Ludovicks brother, who being received with general applause, was by the Queen-widow poysoned, and the Italians driven out of Hungary; but his death was revenged by Iohn governour of Croatia, who put to death the murtherers, and having dragged the young Queen with her mother by the hair upon the ground, caused the old Queen to be drowned, and her daughter  he imprisoned; whom shortly after, fearing an insurrection, he set at liberty: Sigismund upon this comes out of Bohemia with a great Army, invades Hungary without opposition, and being now 20. years of age, is crowned and married to the young Queen. After this he repairs to Croatia, besiegeth the governour whom he took and beheaded, with 32. more that sided with him in his rebel∣lion against the young Queen: the Hungarians repining at this severity im∣prisoned him, committing the charge of him to one of the widows of those whom he had beheaded; but upon great promises made to her, she dismissed him, who having again obtained the Kingdome, which he secured with gar∣risons in all places, he put to death Steven Veivodas the chief author of his im∣prisonment,  by which he quieted the rest. Concerning Sigismunds bad successe against Bajazet the Turk, we have already spoken, whose fortune was no better in a second Battel against Celebin Bajazets sonne, who had got over the Hellespont, and had faln upon Bulgaria and Macedonia. Sigismund encountred with the Turks near Samandria, not farre
from the Banks of Danubius,  but lost the battel by comming too late. Notwithstanding this bad suc∣cesse, he is called to the Empire by the Electors; his chief care was to settle peace in Christendome now distracted by three Antipopes, to wit, Benedict 13. Gregory 12. and Iohn 23. whose residence was at Bononia, Gregories at Areminum, and Benedicts at Avenion. Sigismund finding that a Synod was fitter then Armes to compose these distractions, procured by the consent of the Christian Princes, a Synod to be called at Constance, where were present all the Princes or their Legats, even from Byzantium and Trapezund. Here Adolphus 2. Earle of Cleve, and Amadeus Earle of Savoy, were created Dukes of the Empire; the Marquisiat of Brandeburg, with the Electoral dignity is sold to Friderick Burgrave of Noriberg, who had done good service for Sigismund against the Hungarians and Bohemians. Albert the Septemvir of Saxony died about this time, whose Dominion and Electorship Sigismund transferred upon Frederic, surnamed the Stout; Marquesse of Mysnia for his charges and good service in the Bohemian warres: he erected out of the ruines of the University of Prague, that of Lipsia. The Synod being dissolved, Sigismund intended to make warre against the Turk, and to repaire his honour lost in the two former battels, but he was taken off from this designe by the commotions of Bohemia, therefore  having made Moravia sure to him, and Silesia, he put to death the sedi∣tious Citizens of Uratislavia the Metropolis of that Country for invading the Government, and flinging downe the Senators from an high Tower. The Bohemian warre was hastened on by the violence of the Hussits, who were enraged for Husse's death; therefore they persecuted with all hostility the Priests and Monks, some of which they banished, others they murthered, having pulled downe and burned the Religious houses, and broken to peeces the Images and Statues in their Churches. Divers battels were fought, but the Hussits under the command of Zisca obtained the victory; the Emperour enters Bohemia with his forces to suppresse these tumults; 1420. and having taken Prague, was crowned and anointed King of Bohemia; then he falls upon the Bohemian forces, but was repulsed and beaten by them, and compelled to retreat into Moravia for a new leavy; In the mean time Pope Martin 5. by the Cardinal of Winchester, had stirred up all Germany against Bohemia; three Armies were raised, one of Saxons by their Duke, the other of Francons by the Marquesse of Brandeburg, and the third of Bavarians, Suevians, and others, by the Archbishop of Trevers: All these Forces by a sudden panick fear were dissipated; the like successe had that Army which was raised by Iulianus Caesarinus the Cardinal; di∣vers other attempts were made upon the Bohemian Hussits, but with ill successe. Upon this the Councel of Basil is called; the Emperour with great pro∣mises is invited into Italy by Philip Maria Viscount of Millan, against whom the Venetians and Florentines made war both by Sea and Land; being 1431. received at Millan, he is crowned with the iron Crown; thence he went to Parma where he wintered. In the Spring he comes to Rome, and upon the day of Penticost is crowned by Fugenius the 4. Thence returning through Perraria and Mantua, creates Iohn Francis Gonzaga Lord of Mantua, Mar∣quesse. Thence he returnes through Basil into Hungarie, and from thence into Bohemia which now was quieted by the Councel of Basil. Here ha∣ving obtained of the Peers that Albertus Austriacus his sonne in law  should succeed him to the Crowne, he retires to his daughter in Moravia, 1437. where he sickned and died the twentieth year of his Empire, the seven∣teenth of his Reign over Bohemia, and one and fifty over Hungary, the seventy seventh year of his age: He was buried at Varadinum or Varasin: He was a good Prince, a lover of Learning; He caused the History of
Arrianus to be  translated for him out of the Greek into the Latine. He hated flatterers, therefore one day he beat one of his Courtiers for flattering him to his face; at which the man repining cried out, Why dost thou beat me, said the flatterer? Why dost thou bite me, said the Emperour? He was very muni∣ficent; but one day riding through a water, his horse stopt and pissed in it, to which one of his Courtiers said, This horse is like his master; the Em∣perour dered to know his meaning, the Courtier tells him, That as his horse pissed there where there was too much already, so he bestowed his bounty on those that needed it not, and neglected those that were in want: The Emperour shortly after fills two boxes of the same bignesse, the one  with silver, the other with lead, which he presents to this Courtier, willing him to take his choice of either; he chose the leaden box, which when the Emperour saw, he told him that it was not for want of good will in the Emperour, but of good luck in the Courtier that he was not richer. Sigismund is commended for divers Apothegmes, and for his clemencie, saying, That others killed their enemies with swords, but he used to kill his enemies with favours. His first wife Mary King Ludovic's daughter of Hungary, died a year after their marriage: His other wife Barbara a la∣scivious woman, bare him one daughter Elizabeth heir of the King∣dome whom hee betroathed to Albert of Austria, he imprisoned his  wife Barbara for treason against him, for she plotted with the Peers of Bohemia to seise on the Kingdome; but after his death shee was let free; her life after this she led infamously, and died miserably of the Venereal plague. There was nothing more commendable in this Emperour, then the paines he took with the Christian Princes in calling the Synod of Constance, to settle the distracted estate of the Christians caused by the three Antipopes: The Cardinals at Pisa had conferred their Papacie on Iohn 23. Gregory and Benedict being excluded, who slighted this act of the Cardinals; there∣fore to take all quarrels off, the Pontificat is conferred on Otto Columnius,  and is named Martin 5. the other three being forced to yeeld; in this Synod Petrus de Aliaco Cardinal, and Gerson Chancellour of Paris laboured for a reformation of the Clergy and Court of Rome, but to no purpose: here Wickliffs doctrine is condemned; so are Iohn Husse and Hierome of Prague; Husse was first degraded, and then delivered up to the Secular power; upon his head was put a paper-Miter, with the picture of three Divils, and this Inscription, [This is the Arch-heretick:] Some write, that he should say before his death, That out of his ashes should arise a Swan which they should not burne as they did the Goose, and that a hundred years after they should an∣swer 1415. to God and him. Which words the Pohemians stamped upon some  of their coin: he was burned in Iuly, and Hierome of Prague the next September after. In this Synod was renewed the decree of Communicating under one kinde: It was also ordered, that the fifth year after the end of this Synod should be the beginning of another, and afterward every tenth year a Councel should be held; by virtue of this constitution a Synod was held at Papia, which from thence, because of the plague, was translated to Sena. This was dissolved by Pope Martin 5. because Alphonsus King of Arragon, who hated Martin, endeavoured to restore Petrus Lunensus to the Pontificat, which at Constance hee had lost: therefore Basil is designed for the next Synod. Iulianus the Cardi∣nal  is sent into Germany to promote the Bohemian war, and to call the Synod. In this Councel of Basil, at which divers learned Bohemians were 1431. present, it is decreed that the Synods authority was above the Popes: but Eugenius 4. successour to Martin, fearing lest the Synods power should crush the Papacie,
commanded it to be translated to Bononia:  This was so distasteful to Sigismund the Emperour, and the rest there, that they cite Eugenius to appear at Basil, or else to lose his Pontificat; here∣upon Eugenius was forced to ratifie the acts of the Synod, but taking ad∣vantage of the arrival of Iohn Palaeologus Emperour of Constantinople, who came for aid against the Turks, he enjoyned the Synod to be translated to Ferraria, and from thence to Florence; this displeased the Fathers of Basil, who desired the Greeks to repair thither, if they meant to do any good to∣wards their union with the Latine Church; but Eugenius hindred their com∣ming, and now Sigismund being dead, he stirs up the Dolphin of France, who afterward was called Lewis the 11. to raise the Synod with a great Army; these committed great insolencies in Alsatia, but in their journey to Basil  were worsted by the Switzers, who also lost their lives there. This tumult drove away from Basil the Princes Legats; the Greeks were perswaded in this assembly at Florence to assent to the Procession of the Holy Ghost, 1439. to celebrate the Eucharist in unleavened bread, to acknowledge Purgatory, and the Popes power, which was so displeasing to the Greek Churches; upon the return of the Emperour and Patriarch, that they denied Christian burial to all such as should assent to these Articles: In the mean while the Synod of Basil deposeth Pope Eugenius, and substitutes in his place Amadeus Duke of Savoy who stiled himself Felix 5. whence sprung up a new schisme, which was ended by the death of Eugenius, and the voluntary act of Felix, who surrendred again the Pontificat. CHAP. II. The History of Swethland and Denmark, from the year 1412. till the year 1587. Of Denmark and of Swethland, till 1590. IN Swethland (as we have said) to Margaret succeeded her nephew Ericus 1412. Duke of Pomerania, he was a great hater of the Nobility, whom he much weakned in forreign wars both by sea and land; his government was op∣posed by Engilbert Prince of Darcarlia whom the Danes slew, and by Charles son of Canutus governour of the Kingdome, who drove Ericus into Denmark, where finding no help or security, strives to make his peace with his own sub∣jects, and to return home, they upon his submission were contented to re∣ceive him again; but as he was returning home, he seiseth upon Gothland, intending to exercise Pyracie there upon all the Northern ships; but being  beset round by Charles Canutus, and fearing the Danish forces, surrenders himself to his people, amongst whom afterward he reigned peaceably fourteen years from his Coronation: To him succeeded Christopher Palatin, Duke of Bavaria nephew to Ericus by his sister; he had wars with England, but re∣turning victoriously home fell upon Sabec without any successe; he lost his Fleet by shipwrack upon the coast of Suecia, as he was striving to sur∣prise the Vandalic Cities: In his time the Kingdome was ruined with plague and famine. At last having lost in the sea all his wealth dieth in Denmark childless. Swethland being governed some years without a King, at length by  the consent of the Peers who were weary to be ruled any longer by 1458. Forreigners elected Charles Canutus for their King: He subdueth Nor∣way, and layeth heavy Fines upon the Danes for making war against him; the people being irritated by the tyranny of their Governours, and animated by the Archbishop of Upsalen, a rebellion is raised, which to suppress, Charles removes to Gedanum, where he expected aide from Poland; in
the interim the  people obtrudes the Kingdome upon Christiern King of Denmark and crownes him. Catillus Bishop of Lincopen, and the Archbishops Nephew having raised an Army, drives out of the kingdome all that sided with Christiern; and in a memorable battel defeats Christiern; upon this Charles is called home out of Prussia, and by the popular breath re-established; he placed milder Governors over them; at last, being full of years and peace, died, to whom succeeded 1470: Steno Sture, Nephew to Charles by the sister; he defeated the Fleet which Chri∣stiern had sent against Stockholm, and overthrew his Army which had set down before the walls, so that after this he never made any attempt against Sweden; but his son Iohn, by the assistance of the Russians, and taking occasion by the factions between Steno and Suanto, a great man, invaded Swethland, where by a Faction he was crowned; but shortly after suppressed by Steno, who brought back to Smalanda the Queen of Denmark, whom Iohn had carried away and married; but shortly after at a feast he sickned and died the 30 year of his government; he was well beloved for his excellent parts, but chiefly for re∣fusing 1503. the Crown when it was proffered him. Suanto Prince of the Ostrogoths, and Chancellor of the Kingdome, is elected Prince of Swethland. Gaddus Bishop of Lincopen conveyed privately the body of Steno to Stockholm. Suanto having entred into a confederacy with the Lu∣bikers, 1512: made war upon Christiern the 2. against whom whilst he was making  preparations, he died the 8. year of his government, Steno Sture the younger Suantons son succeeded, who whilst he was fighting stoutly against Christiern which had invaded Swethland with a new Army, was killed by a cannon bul∣let; he being dead, and the Swedish Army defeated, Christiern was invited by the Danish faction, & is crowned, but the Peers whom he suspected on that very day of his Coronation are treacherously by him murthered at a feast, having caused first the Town gates of Stockholm to be shut, that none might escape, a∣bout 94 were massacred, whose bodies were left unburied three dayes on the ground, to the horror of the spectators; the body of Steno but lately buried, by the command of this new Tyrant is digged up, and burned with the rest; at length he plundred the widows and sons of the murthered Nobility; but hea∣ring 1520: that thirty thousand of the people were up in arms against him, he stole out of Stocholm, and through woods and by-ways escaped to Denmark, the same moneth that he was crowned; neither was he quiet at home, for having embrewed his hands in the blood of his own people, was extreamly hated, so that Frederick his Uncle, Prince of Holstatia, with the Lubikers, raised an Army against him; whereupon being terrified in conscience he flies into Zeland with Isabel his wife, Caesars sister, and his children, the third year after the massacre 1523: of Stockholm. In the mean time Gustavus the son of Ericus who had escaped out of the  hands of the Dane, under pretence of negotiating for Christina the widow of Steno, marrieth with Steno's daughter, and by the consent of the Peers, and wealth of the Lubikers, enters upon the possession of the vacant kingdome; after this he abolisheth the old religion; and embraceth the doctrine of the Augustine confession; at last having governed the kingdome prudently eight and thirty years, he departs this life, leaving for his successor Ericus whom he begot of his wife Katharine the Duke of Saxons daughter; after he was crowned at Stockholm, he made wars upon the Danes and Lubikers; by which 1560: he encurred the hatred of his friends and neighbours; his brother Iohn Duke of Finland, was much displeased with his conditions; he having married Ka∣tharine a widow, and sister to Sigismund King of Poland, lent him a great sum of money, for which he received in mortgage from the King divers Castles and Garrison towns in Livonia; Ericus being suspitious, thought his brother had entred into league with the Polonian and Dane against him, therefore makes war upon him, and having apprehended him with his wife and whole family at Abo a Town in Finland, causeth him to be brought to Holmia, where
being  publikely condemned, was imprisoned, and most of his chief friends put to death; after four years imprisonment he was set free; about a year after he seiseth on his brother Ericus, devests him of his kingdome, and commits him to perpetual imprisonment: hereupon Iohn is made king of Swethland by ge∣neral 1568. consent; he had war with the Dane and Muscovite which lasted many years; he died and left one son, Sigismund, who was elected king of Poland; Iohn was of his fathers religion, consonant to the Augustine confession, but he suffered his son Sigismund to be instructed privately by his mother Katherine in the Catholick faith, yet would not suffer any other profession but Lutheran∣isme publikely in his own kingdom; therefore he left his brother Charles Duke  of Finland, a rigid Lutheran, as an hostage with his people, that no innovation should be in their Religion, and withall in his sons absence appointed him ex∣ecutor 1590. of his will, and titular King of Swethland. In Denmark, Margaret, as is already said, being dead, Ericus reigned alone, 1412. he was the Duke of Pomerania's son, and great grandchild of. Waldemar; he learned his cruelty and perfidiousness of Margaret, by whom he was educated. In his time the Alemans made irruptions into Denmark, but to their loss, for they were defeated and repulsed by the Queen and Nobility, whose overthrow in these wars, Ericus that hated the Peers, did chiefly aime at; he being slight∣ed for his perfidiousness and injustice, is expelled out of both his Kingdoms into Gothland, an Island fit for his safety, and for exercising of pyracie; during his abode here, he much infested the Swedish ships, but was favourable to the Danes, to whom he left all Gothland to be possessed and kept for him in his ab∣sence; for not finding himself secure enough in that Island, he returns to Po∣merania. This Ericus is infamous in the Histories of Swethland and Denmark, for his adulteries, perjuries, plundrings, treacheries, injustice, and seven and twenty several treasons; when he fled to Gothland, he carried with him the whole trea∣sures of his kingdome, and Caecil his Concubine, who was the chief cause both of his wickedness and miseries. To him succeeded Christopher Duke of Bava∣ria, 1438. the great Grandchild also of Waldemar, he was chosen by the consent of King Ericus; he was much offended with the insolencies of the Hans-towns,  which were grown so wealthy and strong, that they slighted their neighbour Princes, chiefly Lubec which the Danes had built, and was hitherto subject to the Danish Kings, but now by treachery and cunning had shaken off their yoke, and aimed at the government of their Governours; therefore to reduce them to their former obedience, he raiseth out of all parts of his kingdome great sums of money, which so displeased the Northern Juitlanders that they rebelled, but were quickly suppressed by the King, and grievously fined: his wife was Dorothy daughter to Iohn Marquess of Brandeburg; he died child∣less, the seventh year of his reign in the Castle of Helsingor; he was a Prince well beloved of the Danes, but hated of the Swedes, over whom notwithstand∣ing he reigned till his dying day. To him succeeded Christianus the first, son of Theodoricus Earl of Adenburg, 1447. he was elected by the advise of Adolphus Duke of Holsatia his kinsman; he married Dorothy the widow of Christopher his predecessor, of whom he begot a daughter, Margaret by name, (who was afterward married to the King of Scotland) and two sons, Iohn and Frederick; in his time the Swedes fell off to∣tally from the Covenant of the three Kingdomes; having chosen and crowned a King of their own, to wit, Charles son of Canutus, and Lord Marshal of that Kingdome, but he at last was expulsed for his tyranny and perfidiousness, and Christianus was by them accepted as their king, to whom they were not long  subject, for divers of the Swedes rebelled against him, and called home again Charles from Gaunt, where he had lived in exile seven years; this Christianus was a clement and bountiful Prince, whose government had been without blood, if his simplicity had not been abused by some sycophants, to the great prejudice of Swethland, for Iohn Archbishop of Upsalia, by the
malice of some  false informers (by whom often-times Princes are abused) was apprehen∣ded by Christianus, and highly wronged, being sent into Denmark, where he lived in great misery, and yet it was by his means that the King obtained this Kingdome, for this Archbishop was the main man that opposed the tyranny, perfidiousness and cruelty of King Charles, that stood most for the peoples li∣berty, but King Christianus having found out the knavery of these mis-infor∣mers, sends the Archbishop home again to Sweden with much honour, and re∣stores him to his former power and dignity; in requital of which favours, he remained faithful ever after to Christianus, forgetting the injury of his capti∣vity: this King having redeemed Holsatia with a great sum of money, raised  by way of taxes from his subjects; Swethland also being subdued by his Arms, and Gothland regained, having married his son Iohn, and visited Rome for Reli∣gions 1481. sake; at last after three and thirty years reign he died, and was buried at Roschild in a Chappel which he had built and richly endowed, on the South side of the Cathedral Church of Saint Lucius the Martyr; this place he had inriched with divers ornaments and Reliques from Rome. To him succeeded his son Iohn the first; he married Christina daughter of Ernestus Duke of Mysnia, who bare him two sons Christiernus and Frederick, and one daughter, Elizabeth, who was married to Ioachim Marquess of Bran∣deburg; this Iohn almost reigned two and thirty years over Denmark; in the  beginning of his reign, some of the prophane Peers stirred him up against the Clergy, but when he perceived that it was out of malice and covetousness these profane men desired the overthrow of the Church, which is still expo∣sed to the hatred of the Laity, he took all Ecclesiastick persons into his pro∣tection ever after; but what these covetous wretches could not effect by this King against the Church, they afterward did perform by Christiern and Frederick the first. Iohn intended war against Steno Stura Governour of Swede, which his mother Dorothy kept off whilst she lived, but after her death he fought and subdued the Swedes, yet scarce injoyed he that kingdome three years, for Steno and Suanto rebelled, to the hurt of both kingdomes. 1501.  Queen Christina was besieged and taken in the Castle of Holme; he was unfor∣tunate in the battel of Ditmarse which he lost, but had better success by Sea against the Lubekers, who were alwayes enemies to the kingdom of Denmark; he died of the Plague in the town of Olburg, and was buried at Ottonia; he was a Prince both prudent and religious, much lamented after his death even by 1513. those that hated him in his life, foreseeing the tyrannical government of his son Christiern the second, whom the Histories call worse then any Phalaris, Nero, or Scylla, for having found a peaceable and plentiful kingdom, he left it most calamitous, by his sacriledge, impieties, cruelties and perfidiousness, spa∣ring neither ecclesiastick nor secular persons, but raging on the dead as well as  on the living, for which his Nobility were so offended, that by the help of his Uncle and Lubekers, they drove him out of his kingdome, the 9. yeare of his 1522. reign; ten years he lived an exiled man in Germany; afterward returning with an Army into his countrey, hoping to recover his kingdome, was taken pri∣soner, and detained in captivity till his death, which befell him at Callenburg having lived 77 years and some moneths, he was buried at Ottonia neer his fa∣ther; 1559. his Concubine was the cause of all the miseries that fell on him and his kingdome; he married with Isabel daughter to Philip King of Spain and Arch-Duke of Austria, who lived ten years, and was buried at Gaunt, a most chaste and religious Lady, who bare him three sons, two of which died in their in∣fancy, the third departed in the Hungarian warre under his Uncle Charles the fifth, Emperour, the same day that his father was taken prisoner; she  bare him also two Daughters, Dorothy married to Frederick Count Palatine, and Christina the wife of Francis Sfortia Duke of Millan, and after him of Francis Duke of Loraine.
Frederick the first succeeds King of Denmark and Norway; by his fathers last will he was made Duke of Slesvic, Holsatia, Stormaria, Wagria, and Ditmars∣chia; but being a child of nine years, his brother the king divides these Coun∣tries with him; when he came to mans estate, he demanded of his brother the Legacies his father left him, and complained for detaining his Dominions from him, but receiving an unpleasing answer, he was contented to sit quiet so long as his brother lived, whom he aided also in his wars against the Ditmar∣shians; at last entring into a confederacie with the Danish Nobility, drives him out of his kingdome for his tyranny, and undertakes the Government of Denmark and Norway; Hafnia surrendred to him, whither calling the Nobili∣ty  together, he held a Parliament, in which Christiern for his tyranny and trea∣chery is deposed, and Frederick elected, who presently confirmed the privi∣ledges 1524. of the Nobility as soon as he was crowned; he commanded that the Lutheran doctrine should be publikely taught in the Churches; he died at Gottorp, and was buried at Sleswig in the Quier of the Cathedral Church, where he was honoured with a Monument of Alabaster; he lived six and fifty years and reigned ten; he had two wives, the first was Anna daughter to Iohn Elector and Marquess of Brandeburg, who lived fourteen years with him, he had by her Christian the third, king of Denmark, and Dorothy 1. the wife of Albert Duke of Borussia, his other daughter was Sophia wife to Bugislaus the Tenth, Duke of Stetin in Pomerania; she had three sons, Iohn, Adolphus, and Frederick,  and three daughters, Elizabeth mother to Sophia, who was wife to Frederick the second, King of Denmark, Anna that died of the Plague, and Dorothy the second. Christianus the third succeeded; he first of all took care to settle the Chur∣ches of his kingdom, committing the charge of a general visitation of Ecclesi∣astick persons to Widenscius Doctor in Divinity, whom he sent for out of Mag∣deburg, and to Hermannus Tastius Pastor of Flensburg, with whom were joyn∣ed some of the Nobility; he was crowned by Iohn Bugenhagius of Pomerania, 1537. and reigned four and twenty years in great moderation and prudence; at last the six and fiftieth year of his age he died; his Son honoured him with a mag∣nificent  Monument of Alabaster and Marble at Roschild, whither his body was transported with great solemnity; his wife Dorothy the Duke of Lower Saxony's Daughter lieth buried by him, she died twelve years after her hus∣band, 1559. she bare to him Frederick the second King of Denmark, Anna wife to Au∣gustus Elector of Saxony and Marquess of Mysnia, Magnus Duke of Holsatia, Dorothy wife to William Duke of Brunswick, and Iohn the younger Duke of 1571. Holsatia. Frederick the second succeeded; he had wars 7 years together with Ericus the 14. King of Swethland, till the year 1570. at length by the mediation of some Princes, peace is concluded between him and Iohn brother to Ericus 14.  all the rest of his reign he lived peaceably; at last he fell sick of a lingring dis∣ease, Octob. 3. and died the 4. of April following, having first received the Sa∣crament, 1587. and prepared himself with confession of his faith and prayer; he reigned 29 years, and lived 54. he died in Sitland in his Princely house of An∣derschow; he was much bewailed by the whole kingdome, chiefly by the Church and Schools, for he was a great friend to Schollers; by his wife Sophia he had Elizabeth, Anna, Christianus, Ulricus, Augusta, Hedewiges, and Iohn; his Successor was Christianus the Fourth, of whom we will speak hereafter.
CHAP. III. The History of Holland; and the neighbouring places, from the year 1404. till 1514. with some passages of Utricht till 1580. IN Holland, Earl Albert being dead, his son William succeeded, commended for a good souldier, a just Prince, and a munificent benefactor to the poore; 1504.  his first wife was Mary daughter to Charles the seventh of France, by whom he had no children; but of his second wife Margaret, the Prince of Burgundies daughter, he begot Iacoba his onely daughter and heir: He had some diffe∣rence with Arkelius a Lord of that Country, who had seised upon the City Worchom, or Gorcum. The Bishop of Utricht assisted the Earl against this Ar∣kelius, from whom he took some towns; Gaspera was burned to ashes, and the same fortune was like to fall upon Gorcum, if the Duke of Gelder, and Iohn of Bavaria elected Prince of Liege had not mediated a Peace between them: There were also great troubles between this Iohn the Bavarian and the Citi∣zens of Liege, who despising the government of this Prince, elected another; but Earl William by the aide of Iohn of Burgundy his kinsman, Antony of Bra∣bant, and Theodoricus of Namurs, overthrew these rebellious Citizens in a bloody battel, and withall abolished all the priviledges of that City, impo∣sing a heavy Tribute on it: This William also had some quarrels with Renald Duke of Gelder, but they were at last composed by the addition of Arkelius his dominions to Williams. After he had settled all at home, he made a journey 1417. to Hannonia, and shortly after dyed. To him succeeded his onely daughter Iacoba, whose whole life was nothing else but a wrestling with bad fortune: for her first husband the Dolphin of France, Iohn by name, son to Charles the sixth, shortly after her hasty marriage  with him, died of poyson; she was then about sixteen years old, in the prime of her youth, when she gave her consent to marry with Iohn of Brabant, though she was retarded from that by Religion and propinquity of blood; yet Pope Martin the sifth gave her a dispensation, which was revoked again by the authority of Sigismund the Emperour. This being unknown to Iacoba, she consummates the matrimony at the Hague: In the interim, Iohn of Bavaria aiming at higher matters, resignes his Episcopal seat to the Pope, and mar∣rieth with the widow of Anthony Duke of Brabant; besides, Sigismund the Emperour confers upon Iohn of Bavaria the Arms of Holland, to whom that Earldome seemed to appertain, he being the next heir male, to whom the fe∣male  sex was to give place: Upon this, he enters Holland with an Army, not∣withstanding the Grandees resisted his claim, affirming that the woman was ca∣pable by their antient laws of the government of that Earledome: But Iohn of Burgundy made peace between them upon these terms; that what the Ba∣varian did possesse, he should enjoy by the right of Fee: yet the next year, the war was renewed by the City of Leyden, which sided with Iacoba; but the inhabitants being pinched with a strait siege, were forced to yeeld, and sub∣mit their necks to a new Lord. Iohn of Brabant was forced, though without his wives knowledge, to deliver up the whole government of the Country to the Bavarian; hereupon arose divers jealousies and quarrels between the mar∣ried  couple, so that she grew carelesse, out of indignation, both of her husband and of the government; besides, the sinistrous wales used in making up of this match stuck in her stomack, and so using this for a pretence, she marrieth the D. of Glocester, without the Popes dispensation; this exasperated her former hus∣band, so that he having undertaken the government of Holland upon
the death  of Iohn of Bavaria, goeth into Hannonia, and being assisted by the Forces of Philip Duke of Burgundy, overthrew in several skirmishes the Army of Iacoba, whom he took prisoner and delivered her to the Burgundian, till the Popes opinion or judgement was known concerning this match; but she escaped to Holland in a mans habit, where she was joyfully received by those Cities of the Hoecks that sided with her, but many other Townes adhered to Philip the Bur∣gundian: Hence followed a cruel war, the Duke of Gloucester assisted Iacoba, but Philip at last got the better; After this the Popes sentence followed, ma∣king her divorce from her former husband unlawful, with a command that she should commit her self to the custody of Amadeus the Duke of Savoy, till things were peaceably composed. Hunfred of Gloucester having repudiated his wife, marrieth with another: After this Iacoba laid siege to Harlem, which she was forced to raise again, and fight with Philip of Burgundy, whom at last in a long battel she overcame, and drove him into Leyden. In the mean while as she was making greater preparations, Iohn of Brabant, from whom she had di∣vorced her self, died, which now put her in great hopes of obtaining Holland again; but these hopes were quickly blasted by her overthrow she received neer Wiringa in a battel against Philip, with whom she Articles, that he should be Protector of Holland, but the dominion should remain in her, besides, she should never marry without the consent of Philip; and withall, if she died childless, he should be her sole Heir: so the Countrey enjoyed peace a while, which afterward broke out into new discords; for Iacoba being of a li∣bidinous nature, fell in love with Francon Borsalius, which when Philip under∣stood, suddenly he seiseth on him, and sends him prisoner to Rupelmond, with command that he should have his head cut off; but the Governour of the Castle being loath to meddle with the blood of so great a man, gave out that Borsalius was beheaded; Philip repenting of his rash sentence, when he heard of this, was much grieved, and wept, for he delighted not in blood; but when he heard that Borsalius was alive, he rejoyced exceedingly, and withall, ratifi∣ed the marriage between him and Iacoba, on these conditions, that she should  totally resign her right, that Borsalius should lay claim to the Earldome of Osterband; if they had children, they should enjoy their ancient Dominions, if they had none, that then all these Countries should devolve to the Heirs of Philip the Burgundian; and so she dying childless, the House of Burgundy be∣came Lords of Hannonia, Holland, Zeland, and West-Friesland; and thus Philip became a most potent Prince, his first Marriage with Michaelia the daughter of Charles the sixth of France was sterile, and so was his second Matrimony; but by the third match with Elizabeth of Portugal he had three sons, one of whom, Martin by name (the rest being dead) succeeded him. Philip after this had long wars with the French, at last a peace is concluded upon this condition,  that Philip should endeavour to recover amongst other territories the Earle∣dome of Gisen, but from this he was hindred by the English out of Calice, which was then under them. At this time, the tumults of Gaunt and Bruges filled the whole Country with disorders: One day as Philip was passing through Bruges, the Citizens fell upon his Company, killed the chiefest of his Nobility, and if he had not broken open the gates, he had been murthered there himself, so that he narrowly escaped. This high indignity he could not digest, till he had besieged the town so closely, that it was pinched both with poverty and hun∣ger, for want of trading and provision: whereupon the town is surrendred, eighteen of the chief plotters were put to death, and the rest forced to redeem their lives, and the Princes favour with a great sum of money: after this he suppresseth the Gantois, and other factions thereabout; he made his natural sonne David Bishop of Utricht, though the Citizens withstood him; he also assisted by his power Lewis to the Crown of France, at which time the solemnity and ceremonies of the golden Fleece were
performed  at the Hague; this Order was first instituted at the Nuptials of Philip and Isabel. In the mean time those of Liege offered divers wrongs to the Earls heredi∣tary countries, and drove Lewis Burbon out of his Bishoprick. The Earls son Charles, sirnamed Bellicous, or Hardy, was sent with an Army to suppress them, which he did, but they presently rebelled again, whereupon the City Dinan∣um, a famous place then, is made the object of the Souldiers fury, who kil∣led many of them with the sword, and drowned multitudes in the Mose; they overthrow the Towers and Walls of the City, and burned down the houses with fire; so at last the Citizens of Liege were forced by this exemplary  punishment to submit, and beg the Princes favour. After these wars, this good Earl died with age and sickness at Brugis the 73 year of his age, to whom succeeded Charles Mortin, called the Bellicous; he was three times 1468. married, first with Katherine daughter to Charles the seventh, King of France; secondly, with Elizabeth of Burbon, by whom he had Mary the Heir of his Do∣minions; thirdly, with Margaret daughter to the Duke of York, and sister to Edward the 4. King of England; he fought divers battels with good success; he suppressed Liege, as we said; he began a war with Lewis the eleventh, King of France, which was upon agreement suppressed; he had some Sea∣fights with the Duke of Warwick, against whom he aided King Edward, when  he was driven out of his Kingdome into Holland, he had wars also with Ar∣nold Duke of Geldre, who had sold Geldre and Zutphania to Charles; all this Countrey he added to his Dominion, and received it in fee from the Empe∣rour; but Caesar afterward gave aide to the Earls enemies at Colen and Nove∣sium, a Town belonging to Colen, and there was like to be great trouble, if the Popes Legat had not taken up the quarrel: he had long wars also with the French, and was twice defeated by Reinold of Lorain the French General. After Nancy was taken by the French, Charles layes siege to it; a long and bloody battel was fought; at last the Earl being betrayed by Campobassus an Italian, was drowned with his horse in a Lake the 43 year of his age; he was a wise 1476.  man, a just Prince, and a good Souldier; he set up a high Court of Justice at Mechlin, and in the great Hall at the Hague he used to administer Justice him∣self, sometimes every week; he beheaded the President of Zeland who had put to death an innocent man, that he might abuse his wife; this President having had his desire of the woman, sent her the dead body of her husband, which the Earl understanding, sent to the woman the dead body of this Presi∣dent or Governour, and made her heir to all his goods: This Earl was too greedy of glory and dominion. To him succeeded his onely daughter Mary, the last of the house of Bur∣gundy, from which the right of those Countries were translated to the House  of Austria, and so to Spain; her tuition Iohn of Clive undertook, till she was married to Maximilian son to Frederick the third, Emperour, which was the originall of the House of Austria's greatness. Lewis the French King sought her for his son, but was rejected, for which he was highly incensed. The troubles arose again between the Hoecks who took Leyden, & the Cabillans who seised upon Dort. The Princess in hunting was flung from her horse, with which fall she broke a rib, and died of an Imposthume, she was buried at Bruges, to the great grief of her husband, to whom she bare Philip of Austria, Francis who died an infant, and Margaret. Philip the second, Heir of these Do∣minions, being scarce as yet four years old, had Maximilian his father for his Governour, by whose prudence the factions of the Hoecks and Cabillans were quieted, the rebellion of the Geldrians suppressed, the Townes of Ruremund and Vnloa having submitted; he extinguished also the differences with France, by betrothing his daughter Margaret to the Dolphin, who was deluded by him, affecting rather the D. of Britanies onely daughter, whom he married. Maximilian had also wars with Gaunt and Brugis,
whose stout stomack he at last  suppressed; but after he was called to the Empire, he left the care of Belgium to his son Philip, now almost sixteen years of age; he by Iohanna daughter to Ferdinand King of Spain begot Charles the fifth, Ferdinand King of 1506. Hungary and Bohemia, and some daughters afterward married to the chief Princes of Europe, and by the death of Iohn of Castile he became Heir of di∣vers Kingdomes; he was a vertuous and peaceable Prince; at length being full of wealth and happiness, died at Burgis a City of Granado, not without suspition of poison; his heart, as he desired, was buried at Ierusalem: To him succeeded Charles the 5. scarce six years old, whose Aunt Margaret in the mean while governed the Netherlands; but after Charles attained the years of pu∣berty,  the whole countrey of Belgium solemnly acknowledged him for their Lord. After this, at Valedolid the chief City of old Castile, sometime the resi∣dence of the kings of Spain, with great magnificence, Charles takes possession of his fathers kingdomes. Charles, by the death of Maximilian Emperour, his Grandfather, is cho∣sen by the general suffrage of the Electors, Emperour of the Romanes; who was no sooner gone into Germany, but the Spaniards rebelled, by meanes of the insolent Government of William Croijus Chierius, whom Charles had left as Viceroy of Spain; the Nobility envied the government of a stranger. Peter Gironius, being aided by the Peers, under colour of vindicating the liberty of  Spaine, goeth to Valledolid, where he seiseth upon Ioan Mother of Charles, and carried her away as his prisoner; but suddenly an Army of Imperialists being levied, they regained the Queen, set her at liberty, and put to death the chief rebels, Charles finding how requisite his presence was, to extinguish the fire of intestine seditions, makes a journey to Spain, where he stayed eight years; but whilst his presence quieted Spaine, his absence occasioned troubles in the Netherlands, raised by the Geldrians, and Zutphanians, who being at last subdued, were forced to submit to the pleasure of the Conquerour, which was, that Gelderland and Zutphania being escheated to the Emperour, they should be held in fee from him; this Zutphan is a town in Gelderland, and hath 1514. been an ancient Earldome, and is seated on the River Ysle. Groyning also a Towne of West-Friesland, which had been wrested from the Duke of Sa∣xony by the Earle of East-Friesland, and sold to Charles Duke of Gelders, was to be surrendred to Charles the Empe; to whom also Henry of Bavaria, the last Bishop of Utricht, being expelled by the Citizens thereof and Duke of Gelders, resigned his jurisdiction; the first temporal Lord of it was Charles, who built a fair strong Castle here; yet I finde in Bell-Forest upon Guicciardin, that William Enckewort Cardinal, and Bishop of Tortona in Spain, 1529. took possession of this Bishoprick by a Deputy, he himself remaining then at Rome, whose Successour was George of Egmont son to Iohn the first Count of  Egmont; he ruled this Bishoprick five and twenty years, whose Successor Frederick of Tautenburg was Bishop of the place twenty yeares, after whom succeeded none but Titular Bishops; Episcopacy with the Roman Religion being both driven out at the same time, not without great tumults, and almost 1580. the overthrow of that City.
CHAP. IV. The History of Savoy, and the neighbouring parts, from the year 1397. till the year 1452. IN Savoy, Amadeus the 8. succeeded to his father Amadeus the 7. There was 1397. great strife who should have the tuition of the childe; for Bona Biturica his mother, Bona Borbonia his grandmother, Lewis of Savoy Prince of Mo∣rea (who had married his sister) the Earl of Geneva, and Philip Duke of Bur∣gundy,  did all claim an interest in this childs tuition, and government of his Earldome: this gave occasion of great differences, which were not ended till Amadeus himself being now of age, and having married Mary of Burgundy (according to the desire of both parents whilst they lived) undertook the go∣vernment: He was a Prince of great hopes, and on whose prudence and power his neighbours did much relie. Italy at this time was grievously afflicted with plagues, sudden deaths, Civil wars, and schismes in the Church, all which were portended by a direful Comet, and other fearful meteors. For mitigating of Gods wrath, and removing of these judgements, supplication and processions were made through all Towns and Villages, multitudes of people going  about in white garments, and such as did not wear this colour and go about with them, were counted prophane; this garment was of white linnen; which covered them all over head and foot: All ages, sexes and conditions of people, from the meanest sort to the Princes, undertook this Penance freely, chiefly the Clergy of all degrees, so that for three whole months there was no other publike exercise performed; neither during that time, were there any quar∣rels or Law-suits. This Amadeus bestowed upon the Celestine Order all that building called the Savoy at Lions, which heretofore had belonged to the Knights Templers, but after their abolition to the Knights of S. Iohn of Ierusalem, which buildings these Knights had bestowed upon Amadeus 4. for his good service in reco∣vering the Isle of Rhodes to the Christians: The same Amadeus 8. gave order to his son Lewis to build a Chappel in that place, and to increase the revenew of those few Monks which he had invited thither, having as yet no more but seventy five crowns per annum allowed them, which was performed by Lewis accordingly, who also enlarged the bounds of the Monastery; this was in ho∣nour of Peter Celestin not long before canonized. About this time Iohn Bishop of Liege was expelled his Bishopprick by the Inhabitants, and pursued also in a hostile manner: this wrong William Earle of Henault did highly resent (for this Iohn was his brother) and presently implores aid from the Duke of Bur∣gundy  who had married their sister, against the Liegers; the Burgundian assents, and withall invites to the confederacie Amadeus, who had married his sister: these raised a great Army, a cruel battel is fought, in which Pierweisius the chief author of the Bishops expulsion, and his son, who assumed the title of Bishop of Liege, with eight and twenty thousand Liegers were slain, and Iohn the Bavarian restored again to his Bishopprick: Virius General of the Savoyan forces, with the Gentry of Savoy that were with him, behaved themselves so gallantly in this conflict, that the Burgundian invited three hundred of them allowing large stipends to be of his Life-guard, setting Virius over them as Captain; but not long after, some differences falling out between Amadeus and Lewis Duke of Burbon about the Principality of Dumbar, which the  Savoyan claimed as a part of his dominon, Virius boldly by a Herauld de∣nounces war against Lewis of Burbon, at which the Duke wondred that a pri∣vate man durst be so bold, therefore he suspected that Amadeus had autho∣rized him to do so, and the rather, because Virius had seised upon some Castles in the Country of Dumbar: Some think that he was
encouraged by Iohn  Duke of Burbon; however it was, the Burbonian with an Army before Virius was aware, regained all the Castles which he had taken, and withall threatens to proclaim war against the Savoyan, if Virius be not delivered up to him: the Savoyan who disclaimed altogether this rashness and boldness of Virius, de∣livers him up to the Burbonian, conditionally that he should be used as a pri∣soner of war, and dismissed again after he had received satisfaction from him for the losses sustained; this was agreed upon, and the difference about the right of homage which the Savoyan demanded of the Burbonian, was com∣posed by the Duke of Berry; but this accord was not long-lived, for Charles 6. King of France being offended with the Dukes of Orleans and Burbon upon suspicions and jealousies, invites Iohn Duke of Burgundy, and Amadeus to fall upon the lands of Orleans and Burbon with fire and sword, which was done ac∣cordingly: Amadeus employes Virius, giving him the charge of five hundred Curisers, Fierbourgius is sent by the Burgundian, these make havock of all whither they went: Berry, Burbon and Orleans being highly incensed at these wrongs, enter into a league both against the Burgundian, whose greatness they hated, and the rather because his power was greater with the French King then all the other Princes; and likewise against the Savoyan, who had mar∣ried the Burgundians sister. What miseries and desolation fell upon France by this confederacie, may be seen at large in the French Histories. This Amadeus waited upon Sigismund the Emperour, as the second Earle  of the Empire, when he went to France about a Synod for removing of the Papal schisme; the Emperours Ambassadours could do no good, therefore he was fain to go himself, being attended upon (according to the ancient custome when the Emperour travels out of the Imperial bounds) by the Princes Electors, four Dukes, four Lantgraves, four Marquesses, and four Earles of the Empire: Amadeus in his journey fell sick; some think truly, some think fainedly, as being unwilling to meet or converse with Orleans, the Burgundi∣ans 1415. great enemy, and so returns home, where understanding that Genua was much distracted with intestine broils, he sends one thither under colour of some other business to try some of the Citizens under-hand, if the Emperour  by their help might obtain the City, which would be to him of great conse∣quence for entring into Italy upon all occasions: this messenger not carrying his business close enough was discovered, and by Barnabas Guanon the new elected governour of Genua (George Adurinus the ancient governour having freely laid down his office in these tumults) is apprehended and condemned of treason; but before the expiration of one year, this Barnabas was by Thomas Fregosius thrust out of his office, and banished from Genua. Though 1417. this plot of Amadeus succeeded not, yet his good will was seen to the Emperour Sigismund, which he rewarded by making him of an Earle a Duke; and because he doubted lest Geneva and Lausanna. would unite themselves with the confederated Switzers, as the Cities of the Valtelin had done, two years after he obtains of the Emperour full and sole dominion over these Cities, which grant was approved by Pope Martin. After this Amadeus made peace between Charles the 7. of France, and Philip the Good Duke of Burgundy, whose father Iohn was killed by the faction of Orleans, and procured that all who had a hand in that murther should be expelled France. After this Philip D. of Millan made war upon Savoy, and seised upon Novaria and Verselli, because Amadeus had made a league with the Venetians the D. of Millans enemies, so that the Army which the Millanois had raised against the Venetians and Florentines, was emploied against the Savoyans; but Amadeus to  be revenged, raiseth a great Army, and by the assistance of the Burgundian, enters Lombardy with fire and sword, spoiling all the Territories of Millan: but Sigismund the Emperour, who was now preparing to go for Italy to receive the Imperial Crown, obtains free passage through the Duke of Millans Country, and withall procures a peace
between Philip and Amadeus, in which Novaria and Vercelli are restored by the Duke of Millan, who took to wife Mary daughter of Amadeus. In the mean while the French King had lost a great part of his Country, in his wars with England and Burgundy. The Prince of Orange intending to invade the Delphinat, sends to Savoy for help, which was promised on this condition, that the Savoyan if he obtained the victory should have that part of the Delphinat in which Gratianopolis was seated, and Vienna: but the event of this war proved otherwaies then they expected; for scarce had Orange entred the Delphinat, when Gaucourtius the Governour of that Country under the French King set upon him, and overthrew his Army, so that he was forced to save himself by flight, a great many Gentlemen were taken prisoners, and above three hundred slain. After this a great battel was 1431.  fought between Renatus of Anjou, and Anthony the Loranger Earle of Vaude∣mentium; this was of the French faction, the other of the Burgundian; the Savoyan assisted Anthony, who got the victory, and took Renatus pri∣soner. Now Amadeus being sixty five years old, and growing weary of the world, reputing with himself the hazard, vanity, and uncertainty of humane affairs, resolves to change his course of life, and to perswade some of those Knights on whom he had alwayes most relied, to do the like; but first he picks out two of them, whom he took aside into a private place, and acquainted them  [That he alwayes truly loved them, so that he still rejoyced in their company and presence when he was in all his glory; and now desirous to live a private and retired life from the tumults of the world, he was in good hope they would not forsake him, promising that he would never forget their kindnesse in this, and that for diet and cloathing they should do no worse then he.] These two Gentlemen wondring much at this resolution of the Duke, [gave him humble thanks for his good opinion of them, and his affection to them; but with all they wished him to consider, that God had inlarged his Domi∣nions and Titles also, that now he was at peace with all his neighbours, that he had dutiful and obedient subjects, and a fair issue of children, and that no∣thing was wanting to make him truly happy; therefore humbly desired that  he would not prefer a private life to the welfare of his people committed to his charge, whom he ought to rule and keep in peace, to advance the good, and punish the bad, to chuse out such men as might administer justice without partiality, that this was the high way to eternal happiness; This they thought good, out of their duty, to put him in minde of, yet no wayes willing to crosse his designs.] To this the Duke replied, [That they were mistaken in placing true happiness in outward splendor and dominion; for (saith he) There is no felicity but where is liberty, which is onely to be found in the private life, being secluded from the tumults and disquietness, cares and  fears, the unseparable companions of greatness; for a private man enjoyes more happiness in a day, then a Prince doth in a year; for the one can travel up and down the world securely, and satisfie his eyes and minde with those delights, which the other cannot without much fear and danger both to his own person and subjects; for how many Princes have been taken travelling out of their own dominions, imprisoned, and shamefully murthered, even to the hazarding of their people, who by this means have been exposed as a prey to their enemies; besides, Princes ears are still abused by flattering Parasites, so that they seldome hear the truth, and are made believe they are adorned with most vertues, and blessed with greater happiness then all other men, which is most false, and meer mockery: Again, private men are for the most part longer-lived and healthier then Princes, as being contented with more  simple fare, having better stomacks by reason of exercise, and the fresh air which they still enjoy; whereas we are cloyed with variety of dishes, sauces, and drinks, so that many times we loath our meat, and are oppressed with sur∣feitting and drunkenness,
and those bad effects which ensue from thence. Now  if you will look upon the actions of Princes, whatsoever good successe they have in wars and government, is ascribed to fortune, or to their Counsellours, or the courage of their souldiers; but if any thing falls out amisse, if a battel or City be lost, the fault is presently imputed to the Prince, as being either careless, or treacherous, or timorous: I will say nothing of the continual jealousies and suspitions of Princes; in time of war they are still fearful lest their counsels may be betraied, or their persons delivered up to the enemy, in time of peace they are afraid of insurrections; they are also still molested with the unbridled desire of domination, preferring that to all rights of affinity and consanguinity: it is also madness to count them happy be∣cause they possess much, for the greater their possessions are, the greater are their molestations, and the more they have, the more they covet; whereas private men are content with little, and their desires are comprehended with∣in a narrow circumference. I will not deny, but there is some happiness in those Princes that can by their milde and just government procure the good will of their subjects, but this holds not long, for they are forced often∣times to punish Delinquents, and to impose heavy taxes and payments on their subjects, by which they forfeit the love and good opinion they should have of their people, and so they live still in fears and jealousies, though they have about them strong guards; therefore if you duely consider the con∣dition  of Princes, you will finde much more felicity in rejecting then ac∣cepting of a Crown, which is stuft with so many cares and fears, that if you should finde it on the ground, you would scare stoop to take it up. These are the reasons (my friends) why I desire to withdraw my self out of the tem∣pestuous sea of publike employments, into the safe and quiet harbour of a private life, hoping to injoy more happiness then heretofore, and the rather if I can have the fruition of your society: I will therefore commit the burthen of government to my son Lewis, yet reserving to my self the chiefest power and command.] The two Knights hoping that the Duke would not continue long in this  resolution, but that it was a sudden conceit, which upon more serious thoughts he would change, assented to his desires, professing they would never forsake, but follow him withersoever he went, humbly thanking him for counting them worthy of so great honour as to impart to them his resoluti∣ons, and to chuse them as his companions. Upon this, the Duke about mid∣night accompanied onely with these two, and a few more of his domesticks, removes to Ripallium, where about a mile from the Town stood a large and pleasant building upon the bank of the lake Lausanna, which Amadeus in his younger years had built there for pleasure; there stood also a Monastery de∣dicated to S. Maurice, whom Amadeus his ancestours highly honoured as  their titular Saint: Hither the Duke having entred, puts on the same Mona∣stical habit which the Monks of that place wore; the garment was long, of an ash-colour, which was girt with a rich girdle, over this a cloak with a golden cross on it; the garment had a long hood, which when the Monks let fall on their shouldiers, they wore on their heads red hats like Cardinals; they used also to bear in their hand a writhed and knobbed staffe: Aeneas Sylvius, afterward Pope Pius the 2. saw this Duke in this habit, attended upon by ten Knights in the same habit, and of the same order. But this sudden departure and resolution of the Duke did much amaze his Nobility, being no wayes ac∣quainted with his counsels in this; all his subjects also were much troubled that he should forsake his glory and dominions to imbrace such a life, who sent to acquaint him how unpleasing this act of his was to his people of all sorts, and how unbeseeming his own greatness and wisdome; but he returns answer, That by this departure he had neither diminished his greatness nor judgement, nor his care of them, but would provide that the State of Savoy should receive no damage thereby, therefore wished them to
persevere in  their wonted allegiance; In the interim he sends for all the chief men of his dominions, desiring his two sons might be brought to him; then he declares Lewis his eldest son Prince of Piemont, and his younger Earl of Geneva, and so delivers over to Lewis the government of all his Provinces on both sides of the Alpes, but reserving to himself the supreme power, neither did he lay aside the title of Duke, nor would he have any thing of concernment acted without his knowledge and approbation. At last he dismisses the Assem∣bly or Parliament, wishing them to retire to their homes, and to be obedient to his Sons; twenty of his domestick servants he retained with him, the rest departed with great sorrow. The Duke took great pleasure in conferring with the Prior of that Covent,  telling him, That now his life did much resemble the condition of those who having escaped shipwrack, sate securely on the shore, beholding those ships that were strugling with the winds and waves, fearing every hour to be swal∣lowed up by the impetuous billows of that angry element. To whom the Prior replied gravely; [There is nothing (saith he) Excellent Prince, that more resembles the wretched life of man then Navigation; for we see that they who are not accustomed to the sea-life, nauseate and grow sick with the agitati∣on of the ship, who thinking to aleviate and ease themselves, get into the Cock∣boat, as if the cause of their nauseating proceeded from the greatness of the  ship, not the agitation thereof: just so are we, who being troubled and disquie∣ted in minde as it were with the assiduous waves and storms of the tumultuous sea of this world, think that the laying aside our greatness, dignities, wealth and publike imployments will ease us, and that we shall live happily and securely in solitudes, cloysters, and retirements; but we delude our selves with shews and appearances, for storms may as well attend on him who lives in a cottage, as in a Palace. Pardon me, most Illustrious Prince, if I speak freely, for I am bound by my Allegiance and Order, to speak truth without flattery, which is the bane of Princes, and doth more mischiefe to them, then open enemies: It is no great matter to forsake your Palace, State and  Honours, if you forsake not your selfe, for he that follows Christ must deny himselfe; he that retires into a desart, and carries with him his unsetled thoughts, and unruly affections, what benefit hath he more then they who remove out of one place or air into another? We must therefore above all things clear and purifie our mindes from all grosse and terrene thoughts, before we can be fit for heavenly meditations: Christs souldiers must not be intangled with the affairs of the world, saith the Apostle; for as the eye can∣not at the same time look upward and downward, neither can the soul elevate it self to Heaven, whilst it is depressed with the weight of earthly thoughts, as they are whom the delights, honours, and riches of this world  have wholly possessed, whom the world forsakes before they forsake it. Married men are still perplexed with cares for their family and children; single men have a continual conflict with their unbridled lusts: some are in∣cessantly troubled with desire of wealth, others of revenge, some of ho∣nours, others are never satisfied with pleasures; how many do we see expose their lives to the dangers of the sea in their long Navigations to remote Countries, for a little gain? few dayes passe in which the serenity of our souls is not obnubilated with the clouds and fogs of terrene affections, so that sometimes we are deprived of our nights rest; our best course therefore is to bid adieu to the world, to despise her flatterings, to divorce the body from the  soul, and not to suffer any commerce in spiritual things between them, and withal to account the storms (which sometimes seise on us, and which we canno avoid in our Navigation through this tempestuous Ocean) sent by God to drive us home the sooner to the wished for haven of happiness: Let us so use the world as if we used it not; let us not so set our affections on friends, country, wealth, honours, and other mundane emoluments,
as to grieve or to be troubled when we are separated from them; let us part without repining with our wealth, lands and possessions, by which often∣times the minde is clogged, Gods anger provoked, and much mischief pro∣cured; so shall we finde a new light shine in our souls; and we shall become new creatures, having put off the skin of our old natures, so shall our souls be fitted like wax to receive new impressions of grace, when the old characters of our froward and perverse dispositions are obliterated, which is effected by the benefit of a retired life, by which our exorbitant and boyling affections are cooled, and the unruly motions of our mindes, like so many wilde beasts are tamed; by this means the venomous weeds of pride, lust, hatred, cove∣tousness,  and such like will be eradicated, that the tender plants of grace and piety may prosper and flourish in us; our tongues shall be accustomed to praise God, our ears to hear his will, our eyes to behold his glory, wisdome and power in the Creation and Government of the Universe; our whole senses, faculties and imployments will be totally taken up in spiritual delights and comfortable fruition of our God, whose sweetness will make us account all things else bitter and unpleasant; to attain which happiness, the readiest way is to devote our selves to prayer, reading, and meditation on the writings and holy lives of those blessed souls, who by fighting the good fight, have now attained the Crown of righteousness: For as Painters who take the  copy of a choice picture, look stedfastly on it, and take notice of the least lineament; so must we diligently observe and follow exactly the lives and be∣haviour of those holy men, conforming our selves as near as may be to their strictness of life; this course if we take, we shall doubtless obtain our desires, but if we give off and faint, our labours will be lost, and our end miserable. This was the summe of the Priors speech, with which the Duke was much delighted. The Councel of Basil (a Town in Helvetia upon the Rhine) being called first by Pope Martin, then by Pope Eugenius, for setling the controversies of Husse, as we have already said; after the controverted points were de∣termined by Iulian the Cardinal, Pope Eugenius his Apostolical Legat, a reformation of the Hierarchie was urged: Philip Duke of Millan a great enemy to Eugenius, stirred up the Princes and Cardinals against him, ac∣cusing him of divers crimes; being cited, he refuseth to come, but sends his Legats, whereupon the Cardinals, with the rest of the Synod, depose Eugenius, and substitute in his place this Amadeus, who for his sanctity and piety was now grown famous; Eugenius in vain goeth about to dissolve the Synod, and calls another at Ferraria, which because of the plague was translated to Florence. Amadens, now called Felix the 5. is sent unto by his son in law the Duke of Millan, and the Fathers of the Synod to acquaint him with his  election; he modestly desired to be excused, in regard he was unfit for so great a burthen and honour, having now renounced the world, and being bred a souldier, he was altogethet ignorant of Ecclesiastick affairs; that office is fittest for one (saith he) who hath spent his whole time in Church matters, otherwise it may prove as unfortunate as it did to Peter Moravius, an. 1294. who though a professed Anachorite of the Celestine Order, yet accepted of the Pontificat, being altogether ignorant what belonged to that high imploy∣ment, and so having sat six months, was deposed, and ended his life in prison; prosperity is more dangerous then adversity; this is oftentimes mastered, that is harder to be overcome: Thus he excused himself; but at last by the impor∣tunity  of the Legats sent by Duke Philip of Millan, and the earnest intreaty of his other friends, and chiefly his sons, who thought this dignity con∣ferred on the father for his worth, redounded to the childrens honour, he submitted himself to the pleasure of the Synod: so, the election being ratified, he is honoured by the Pontificial habits which the Legats cloathed him with. Shortly after hee takes his journey for Basil,
being accompanied with all his Nobility; when he came, all the Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, with the rest of the Clergy, Lawyers, and all that were there in the City flock in great multitudes to meet him, so that many were killed in the presse; he receiveth his sacred Orders by degrees and intervals of time; then being by the accustomed ceremonies made Bishop, he is brought between two Cardinal Deacons to a Theatre erected over against the Town-hall; after he was set down, the Cardinal on his left hand takes off his Episcopal Mitre, and the other Cardinal on his right hand sets upon his head the Pontificial; the rest of the Cardinals and Clergy in their Ecclesiastick habits stood round about him, the multitude in the interim with joyful shouts and acclamations wishing all happiness to the new Pope; then the two  Cardinals that crowned him published the Popes indulgences, the one in Latine, the other in the vulgar tongue; thence he is conveyed to the Black-friars Monastery, after this manner: First, the Cardinals domestick servants and officers went on horseback, after them went the Popes servants, among which his Chamberlains carried each one a red bag like a shepherds pouch: after these went the Cardinals kindred, whom twelve grooms of the horse followed, every one holding his red banner, bearing in them the Popes Arms: after these the City Magistrates followed, with one of the Teutonic Knights carrying a banner with a black crosse in a silver field upon it, which are the Arms of that Order: after him went a Nobleman of Savoy carrying a  banner, in which were the Pontifical and Savoyan Arms conjoyned: after him rode one who carried a banner, and in it the Arms of the Knights of Ierusalem: the horses of these Standard-bearers were in rich trapings, and themselves in compleat Armour (except their heads) covered with copes or rich robes of silk, on which were imbroidered their Arms: after these twelve milk-white horses richly traped with silk and gold were led, then four Gentle∣men with Targets, every one carrying a red hat on a spear, these were fol∣lowed by the Popes Chamberlains, after whom went the Princes Ambassa∣dours, and Roman Nobility, whom the Apostolical Sub-deacon carrying the crosse followed, he was ushered by two Apparitors with their Maces; then  went twelve of the Popes intimate friends in scarlet, each one bearing a white Taper, two others bore before the Host two silver candlesticks or lamps, with the lights burning, the Host it self was carried on a white horse under a Canopy, encompassed with rich Tapestry of silk and gold, with the Popes Arms on them: after the Host came the Sacrist, and after him the Scribes or Secretaries of the Synod, among whom was Aenaeas Sylvius, afterward Pope: after these followed the Advocates of the Consistory, the singing men, &c. and after them two Sub-deacons, a Greek and a Latine; then rode the Arch∣bishops, Bishops, Abbots, &c. next to them the Cardinals, and last of all, the Pope on a white horse richly adorned with gold and scarlet, eight Noblemen  carrying a Canopy over him, with a numerous guard of Gentlemen in Arms: after these the Marshal flings money among the people to keep them off from pressing on the Popes guard. As soon as the Pope had entred the Black-friars Church, he blessed the people, and presented his foot to be kissed by the Car∣dinals and Nobility: after this he entertains them all with a most sumptuous feast in the Episcopal palace of Basil; then having named who should be the Officers and Ministers of his Court, he createth some eminent and learned men Cardinals, among the rest was Panormitan the great Doctor of the De∣crees, who was imployed by Pope Eugenius to plead for his right in the Coun∣cel of Basil, but when he came thither he pleaded against him; he afterward was fain to lay down his Cardinalship, and live obscurely at home. Amadeus by accepting of the Pontificate, gave occasion to a new schisme, which is reckoned the 27. The French, Switzers, Millanois, Neapolitans, and those of Piemont sided with Felix and the Savoyans; but the Venetians favored Eugenius, being born there, so did the Florentines and
Thuscians. Hence ensued  a long war between Eugenius, the King of Spain, and the Duke of Millan. Philip Duke of Burgundy adhered to Eugenius, though he was the son of Felix his wife. Frederick the Emperor first held with Felix, but afterward he sided with Eugenius, who was now become a new man, and by his elemency and bounty had got most mens affections from Felix. Upon this the Italian Princes enter into a confederacie, with whom joyned also the Duke of Millan, that he might not seem to be singular. About this time, Balthasar Offida Governor of Bononia, for his cruclties and injustice is apprehended by Francis Sfortia, (author of the confederacie between the Venetians and Florentines) and sewed within a Bears skin raw as yet and bloody, so that he had no use of hands or  feet, whereby he was poysoned by the stench and vermine which that raw skin begot, and so dyed miserably. Philip Duke of Burgundy not only got most of the Princes to fall off from Felix, but likewise perswaded Charles the French king to do the same: hereupon Charles sends Ambassadors to Rome, Basil and Savoy, to mediate for an accord between the two Popes; in the mean 1446. time Eugenius fals sick and dieth, the 15. year of his Pontificate, and the 60. of his age, to whom succeeded Nicolaus the fifth. Lewis the sonne of Felix the Pope, labours much with the French king to stand for Pope Nicholas, that so peace may be established in Christendome; for he was sorry that the blame of this schisme should be laid on his father, who deserved it not, being as all his  progenitors ever were, a stout champion of the Roman faith. Charls upon this sends his Ambassadors to Lions, wishing Lewis of Savoy to do the like, and to procure some Legats from Basil, that meeting together they may consult how peace might be setled in Christendome. The next Iuly after, there arrived at Lions, besides the Kings Ambassadors, the Archbishop of Trevers, and Legats from Colen and Saxony; Pope Felix sent Lewis Alleman the Cardinal: these consulted till November; at last it was a∣greed, they should give Felix a meeting at Geneva; thither when they came, they met with other Legats sent from France, England, Sicily, and other parts. Felix, who against his will accepted of the pontificate by the perswasion of Panormitan the Abbot, and some Cardinals who were unwilling to be deposed, doth resolve willingly to devest himself of it; therefore openly in the Synod of Lausanna (for that of Basil was dissolved by the Dolphin) Felix aiming more at the general good, then his own honour and emolument, renounceth the papacie, transferring all his right he had to it upon Pope Nicholas; which fact was highly commended and admired by the Synod, as may be seen by the testimony they gave him, and which they left upon record to all posterity, the summe of which was this: Having blessed him, and wished him all happiness, they commend him for his piety, modesty, love of peace, and liberality to∣wards the Church, who in such a time of distraction would rather suffer him∣self then  she should suffer, who by his humility hath advanced her peace and dignity; therefore they thought good to nominate and create him Bishop of Sabinia, Cardinal of the Church of Rome, perpetual Vicar and Apostolical Legat over Savoy, Piemont, Montsferrat, Salusses, Asten, the province of Lions, Auspurgh, Lausanna, Basil, Strasburgh, Constance, and some other neighbouring cities and diocesses, and withall to appoint him in the Church of God the second place after the Pope, who was to rise whensoever Felix came into his presence, and to present his mouth (not his foot) to be kissed: And because he preferred peace to the greatest honour on earth, they decree therefore that he shall wear the Pontifical habits and arms, except the Fishers ring, the Crosse  on his Sandals, the Canopy, and the gestation of Corpus Christi must be left for the Pope; besides, whensoever he passeth beyond the borders of his own Legatship, he may use the Arms and power of a Legate; they exempt him also from his personal appearance in the Court of Rome, or at a General Councel. These honours and priviledges the Synod thought him worthy of, 1449. for his excellent parts, and
chiefly for removing the schisme and causing peace  by his vnluntary resignation of the highest place on earth. After this he re∣turns to his Cloyster, where he spent the rest of his life in devotion, and then resigned his soul to God, anno 1452. some write 1459. CHAP. V. A Prosecution of the Savoyan History, from the yeare 1452. till the  yeare 1503. TO Amadeus succeeded his son Lewis, a great follower of his fathers ver∣tues. He performed exemplary justice upon Bolomerius the Chancellor of Savoy, a wicked and covetous man, who had made himself extream rich by oppression, who for his own ends and gain kept Felix longer in the Pontificate then he was willing, for had it not been for this wretch he had re∣signed it long before. Lewis commands him to be apprehended, who being convicted of high crimes, is condemned to be drowned in the lake with a great stone at his neck, to the great content of the Nobility, to whom he had  been a main enemy. About this time, Philip Maria Duke of Millan died: He had beheaded his former wife, to marry with Mary the sister of this Lewis. But the people being weary of tyrannie, which they had suffered under him and his predecessors, resolve now to assert their liberty; therefore they choose a Government of twelve men in their city, overthrow the castle, and tear Philips last will in peeces; and withal they send to Frederick 3. Emperor a Cup of gold of great price, with promise to send him every year such another, that he would not suffer any to bear rule over them hereafter. The Venetians upon this took occasion with a great Army to seise upon Placentia, Cremona, and other cities belonging to the Dutchy of Millan. Francis Sfortia, Philips son in law, after  their example fals upon some other places in the same Dutchy; which Lewis of Savoy perceiving, he seiseth upon Valentia a city neer to him, and some other places. About this time also a war was raised by Charles 7. of France, against this Lewis of Savoy and Philip Duke of Burgundy, because Lewis had betrothed his daughter Carola without his knowledge to the Dolphin his sonne, and because Philip had received and entertained the Dolphin when he fled out of France; and withall the King sends him this message, That in entertaining his sonne, he cherished a Foxe in his bosome, which would hereafter devoure his Chickens, which proved a true prophesie. The Dolphin being impatient of delayes, deals with the Burgundian to send to Savoy, that he might at last  enjoy his wife, being now kept off from her full five yeares. When the Am∣bassador came to Savoy, Duke Lewis thought his message very just and rea∣sonable, therefore sends his Daughter with a great train to the Dolphin at Na∣murs, where she was presently married to him. The French king was much troubled at this match; therefore the Army which he had provided for taking in some Towns of Picardy, and some places from the Burgundian, he turns against the Savoyan; the rather, because he could do no good against the Burgundian, who had foreseen and prevented the French plots: besides, the King pretended that the Dutchy of Millan belonged to the French crown, therefore by a Herald demands from the Sa∣voyan  Valentia and other towns which he had taken there; he also accused the Savoyan for making incursions upon France, and some write that the Sa∣voyan Nobility under-hand stirred up the French against Lewis, because he used them roughly for advising his father to retain his right to the Papacie: but at last the controversie was taken up by the Popes Legate at Lions, who was sent to make peace between
France and England.  Lewis the second son of this Duke Lewis, married with Carola the onely daughter of Iohn King of Cyprus, by whom he obtained that Kingdome: but Iames the bastard brother of Carola, being assisted by the Sultan of Aegypt, thrust Lewis out of his kingdome, and overthrew his army, which Duke Lewis and the Knights of Rhodes had sent thither; and so this wicked bastard obtained the kingdome. Queen Carola fled to Rome, where she was entertained by Pope Pius the second, who said, that justly her husband had lost that kingdome, whose father Duke Lewis had been so averse, and slow in sending aide against the Turks and Sarazens. Amadeus the eldest son of this Duke Lewis, resembling much his father and grandfathers qualities, delighting more in peace then wars, in a retired and monastick life then in publique employments, was sligh∣ted by the people, whose eyes and hopes were fixed upon the youngest sonne Philip, a youth of a comely presence and stature, and of an active heroick spirit: Duke Lewis the father understanding how his peoples affections were set upon Philip, began to be jealous of him, the rather because he himself was grown infirm and unweildy, his son young active and lusty; therefore he un∣dertakes 1464. a journey to Lewis the eleventh of France his son in law, with his eldest son Amadeus, and being highly incensed complains grievously of his youngest son: King Lewis wished his father in law not to trouble himself, he would take a course to secure his son Philip, to whom presently the King sends a young  Noble-man, and one of his servants, upon pretence of imparting to him some matter of weight from the King, who was desirous to speak himself with him. Philip suspecting no hurt, goeth presently to the King, by whom (against his promise) he is detained, and sentto the Castle of Lothesia, where he was kept as a prisoner two years together, to the great grief of the Savoyan Nobility, who loved him and hated the father: About the end of these two years Duke Lewis died at Lions, whether he came to speak with the French King, the twen∣ty sixth year of his government; for he took not the stile of Duke till his fa∣ther was created Pope: His heart was buried in the Church of the Caelestines, which there he built by the command of his father; his body was transported  to Geneva, where he lieth entombed with his wise Anna. His son Amadeus the ninth, and third Duke of Savoy succeeded, a prince 1466. in goodnesse and integrity nothing inferiour to his Father and Grandfather, but of an infirm body, and oftentimes subject to the falling-sicknesse: He de∣lighted no way in war, but having settled all at home, he went to the French king with his Sister Bona, who was fled to him, being driven out of Millan by the tyranny of the Sfortii. The king entertained him courteously, and with so much respect, that his subjects of Savoy observing so great a king did thus honour him, were content to live quietly and obediently under him; he was so open-handed to the poore, and fed so many every day, that his Nobility complained of his prodigality, to whom he answered, that the prayers of the poore were the chief wals and bulwarks of his dominions: those poore men he used to call his fellow-souldiers, & to feed and cloth them sometimes with his own hand, to confer with them, and to sit among them. One day a certain Ambassadour asking him where his Hounds were, he caused all his poore men to be brought into a great Hall filled with tables and good meat, to which when they were set down, he brings in the Ambassadour, and told him, that these were his hounds with which he hunted after heaven, and that to feed these poore people was food to him more excellent then any Manna. He had a long and tedious sicknes which he bore patiently, comforting and confirm∣ing those Noble-men that came every day to comfort him, shewing them that God was never so neer to us as in afflictions, which were the safest remedies against our spirituall diseases; at length, after a long conflict with death, he delivered up his charitable soule to God. To him succeeded Philbert his Son, the first of that name, and fourth Duke of 1471. Savoy; he was but four years old when his father dyed: His mother Iolanda
a wise Matron, and Sister to Lewis the eleventh the French King, undertook his tuition; at which Lewis of France and Charles of Burgundy aimed, being potent Princes both, and both having an interest in Savoy by divers affinities; but they were of different mindes and dispositions: Iolanda prudently kept them both off, by making fair weather with both, till Charles was overthrown in the battell at Granson, where he lost above thirty hundred thousand crowns; then she changed her minde, which had been till now more inclined to Charls; and sides altogether with her brother of France: This being observed by Charls, who lost another battel about three weeks after the former, and con∣sidering with himself how much he was now weakned, and what prejudice it would be to him, if Iolanda should make the French King Protector of Sa∣voy; by the advice of the Bishop of Geneva, and of his brother the Earl of Rho∣montium, he seizeth upon Iolanda, and commands her to be brought with al her family into Burgundy, where she was kept as a prisoner. But when Charls thought he had been sure of Philbert and his mother, he found that their keepers had deluded him by conveying the Childe to Camerinum, a place out of all danger, whither the Bishop of Geneva came, a wavering and covetous man, and who upon the incitements of a Knight of Rhodes, imployed by the French King to work upon the Bishop, forsakes the Burgundian, and withall delivers up to the King both the Childe Philbert, and his little brother Charles,  with the Castles of Camerinum and Montmelian, then seiseth on the place where Iolanda's Treasure and Wardrobe were, which he reserves for himself: This highly discontented the Burgundian, considering what losse he had sustained in the war which he undertook for the Earl of Rhomontium brother to this Bishop, which war at last cost him his life at Nancy, by the treachery of one Campobchius; and so he found that the French King had truly prophesied of his son, that he would prove a Fox. In the mean while, Iolanda desirous of liberty, and to see her children, em∣ployes a Nobleman of Piemont in a message to her brother of France, for that purpose; who though he had no good correspondency with his Sister, yet  sends her word, that ere long he would send for her into France, who accor∣dingly sends Charls Amboise governour of Campagnie with some forces, who passing without resistance through the Burgundians country, enters the Castle of Roveretia which was carelesly kept, and brings away Iolanda with her fami∣ly into Savoy, neer to the French Territories. King Lewis goeth from Lions to Turou, there to receive his Sister, where having provided fair lodgings for her, sends divers of his Nobility to meet her, and he himself with all his train at the town gates receives and salutes her merrily by the title of Lady of Burgundy. After some complements, he brings her to her lodging, giving order that she should be used with all respect and accommodations: yet for all this, they  were jealous of each other, and she longed to be out of his claws; but a league at last was made between them, and confirmed by Oath; so after eight dayes entertainment, he dismisseth her with her children. After this he desires his Sister to permit her son Philbert to be instructed in the Delphinat by Luisius a Noble-man there, in the French tongue and manners, that so he might have the greater affection to France: To this the mother assented; but when the King perceived that the Savoyan Nobility intended to exclud Luisius, and to undertake the care of the Childe themselves, he causeth him to be removed from Turin (called of old Taurinum, a City in Piemont, and which anciently was the seat of the Longobards) to Grenoble or Gratianopolis, so called from the  Emperour Gratian that enlarged and beautified it; now it is the chief City of the Delphinat, and honoured by Lewis II with a Parliament. There Philbert was married to Blanca Maria daughter to Galeacius Duke of Millan, being both young and of the same age: therefore Galeacius undertook the tui∣tion of his young son in law, which he performed carefully, and with great commendations, in spight of Iohannes Ludovicus Bishop of
Geneva the Childs  Uncle, who by sinistrous ends endeavoured to get him into his custody; but Galeacius by a plot seized upon this turbulent Bishop at Vercellis, and sent him prisoner to Turin; so the Childe escaped this danger, which the year after he could not avoid: for having made a journey to see Charles the eighth of France, his Uncles son at Lions, he fell suddenly sick, not without suspition of Poyson given him by some of the Bishops friends, and so died the fourteenth year of his age, and the tenth of his Principality, to the great grief of his 1481. people; for he was a young Prince of great hopes, and of a sweet disposition. A blasing Star about that time presaged this fatality. To Philbert succeeded his brother Charles the first, the fifth Duke of  Savoy, a young Prince no lesse eminent in vertues and naturall endow∣ments then any of his predecessors; but in the flower of his age and fortunes, having scarce been Duke seven years, he was taken away by untimely death: It was suspected that Lewis Marquesse of Salusses had secret∣ly 1488. caused him to be poysoned, because he had got a great victory over him; for the Marquesse refused to doe the homage due from him according to the custome of his predecessors to the Dukes of Savoy, therefore Duke Charles made war upon him, overthrew his Army, and confiscated his whole estate as a Rebel; but three years after (Charles being now dead) he recovers by the Duke of Millans means his estate again. This young Prince also subdued the Gabiens, a people inhabiting the Alpes of Liguria: he left behinde him one son called Charles the second, or Iohannes Carolus, being yet scarce one year old; his mother Blanca, because of the Dukes infancy, retain∣ed the government of Savoy, to the great content of the people; for she was a vigilant, milde, and just Princesse, whose chief care was to breed her sonne in vertue and piety, therefore suffered none to converse with him in his minority, but such as were eminently pious and prudent, knowing how dangerous it is for young Princes, being yet but tender plants, apt to receive any impression, to be ill seasoned; and how prone they are by na∣ture to drink in the poyson of evill counsell. About this time Charles the  eighth of France undertook his Expedition into Apulia, against the king∣dome 1494. of Naples; as he was passing through Savoy, Blanca in her best equipage met him, and presented him with a goodly Horse, which did him great ser∣vice in that war, and carried him out of many dangers; she bestowed also upon him towards his charges great summes of gold and silver. The year after Duke Charles died, the seventh year of his Dukedome. To him succeeded Philip Earl of Bressa, and governour of the Delphinat un∣der King Charles; this was a wise man, whose counsell Blanca alwayes fol∣lowed. 1495. He was the son of Lewis, and grandchilde to Amadeus the eighth Duke of Savoy; being now aged, he accepts the government of the Dutchy; he  had been alwayes a great warriour and a wise counsellour, and very inward with the French King, who made him knight of the order of Saint Michael, and great Steward of France: having governed this Dutchy one year and six months, he died at Camerinum, and left for his successor his son Philbert the second, sirnamed the Faire; he was bred in the Court of King Lewis of France, 1497. with his son Charles the eighth, for Lewis had married his Aunt Carola: he waited on King Charles in the Neapolitan war; he ruled his people with great moderation and wisdome; he assisted King Lewis the twelfth in the wars of Millan with two hundred Courissers, whilest as yet he was but young. When Philip Arch-Duke of Austria returned out of Spain, and was come to  Lions, where peace is concluded between the French and Spainards, between Caesar and the Arch-Duke, and their confederates, He went to visit Margaret his Sister, wife to this Philbert, by them both he was entertained sumptuously 1503. as he was returning to the Netherlands. At last this Philbert died, the twenty fifth year of his age, about the sixth year of his government: this year where∣in he died was fatal to multitudes of people, by reason of the great infection
of the aire: this was a rich prince, for besides the dominions and revenues of his Predecessors, he added a yearly revenue of twelve thousand Ducats, paid him by the Millanois: His vertuous wife Margaret erected a Chappel after his death, in which she entomb'd him. His successor was Charles the third, bro∣ther to Philbert by the father, but not by the mother, which was the occasion of great wars afterward. CHAP. VI. The Helvetian History, from the beginning till the year 1481. THe Switzers in the Romans time were a warlike people, which they  shewed by the overthrow they gave to L. Cassius the Consul; they inten∣ded to have forsaken their country; and to seat themselves elswhere; but Caesar then being Proconsul of France, puts a stop to their proceedings, by hew∣ing down the Bridge of Geneva, and raising a Fort between the Lake and Mount Iura; first, by intreaties, then by their strength, they strove to move Caesar for a passage; but when they saw they were still defeated by the Romans, they cast themselves at Caesars feet, who upon delivery of Pledges, commanded them to return home, and rebuild their demolished Cities, which they did, and lived afterward in obedience, and within their own borders, till the comming of the Sarazens into Italy; then their aid was desired by the Pope (as we have already said) which was assented to, conditionally they might freely enjoy their laws and antient customes: To this the Pope willingly condescended, and withall sent them a red Banner with the Crucifix on it, in token of their valour and good service against the Sarazens. After this they lived quietly at home, im∣ploying themselves in Husbandry, untill such time as their Nobility began to tyrannize over them; then being conscious of their antient valour and conti∣nued liberty, made resistance. About the year 1300. the Counts of Auspurge (af∣terward Dukes) had placed a debauched Gentleman in one of their Castles of 1300. Urania in Valstreet, who having done divers insolencies, and ravished a young Lady, was by her two brothers slain. The Count offering to doe justice on the murtherers, was resisted by the people, who overthrew three of his Castles in one day, and slew divers of his Officers. The Valderwaldians by this example were animated to the like outrage, complaining also of their Nobility: Here∣upon the Suavi with those of Uro, Zurich and Underwald, entred into confede∣racy: the Nobility, to suppresse in time this increasing power, raise all the forces they can, but with ill successe; Leopold Duke of Austria was defeated by them, and so not long after was Charles Duke of Burgundy: Thus for their va∣lour they were courted by divers Princes, chiefly by the French, for whom they did good service against the Spaniard, both in Italy and France; since Lewis 11.  they have been pensioners to that Crown, receiving yearly thence forty thou∣sand Florens, twenty thousand to the Cities, and twenty thousand to particu∣lar persons. These Cantons are now so divided, that eight of them are of the Catholick Faith, and in pension with the King of Spain, the other five are of the Protestant Religion, and serve the French King; who when he demandeth any forces, they call a Diet at the kings charges, who also defraieth the souldiers wages. Albertus of Austria had many bickerings with the Switzers, after they had Cantonized themselves, and was preparing a great army against them, but being murthered by some assassinates, and his children busie in revenging his death, there was nothing acted against the Switzers, Henry the seventh  of Lutrelburg who succeeded, confirmedthe priviledges of the three Cantons, who were so vigilant to prevent the plots of Albertus his sons, that they could do them no hurt. These three had first made a league for ten years, but upon a 1315. great victory over their enemies, they made a perpetual league, with which they acquainted Lewis the Emperour by their Agents, and with their late victo∣ry: Upon this, in a Diet at Norinberg, the Princes of Austria are condemned of treason, & their whole estate had they in these Helvetian Cantons are
confiscated  to the Emperour, and the Cantons liberties confirmed, and then they swear homage to him; who sent Iohn Albergius to be their governour: he promised to defend them from the power & claim of Austria, and that they should have their own Courts of Judicature in their own Country, both in civil and crimi∣nal causes. The Austrians having received so great an overthrow by the Swit∣zers, and finding the Emperour raising war against them, they were forced to make a Truce with these Cantons, whom shortly after the Pope and Bishop of Constance excommunicated; and Frederick of Austria, who named himself Em∣perour, proscribed them: but by command from Ludovick the Emperour, they were absolved by the Arch-bishop of Mentz. The Pope having excommuni∣cated 1327. Ludovick, the Switzers make a league with those Cities of the Empire which stood for Ludovick against Frederick of Austria; and upon this, Lucerna an ancient City upon the river Rusa, entered into league with the three Cantons, which highly displeased the Austrians, under whose jurisdiction hitherto this City had been: In it were divers Citizens that favoured the Austrians, these had plotted to let in the Austrian horse by night, but the vigilancy of the other party discovered and prevented the plot: divers skirmishes the Lucernans had after this with the Austrians, in which these were still worsted; who seeing they could doe no good with open hostility, fall to perswade the Townsmen to break off their league with the three Cantons, shewing there was more help to be had from a Prince so potent and neer, then could be expected from these towns. But when this way they could doe no good, they resolve to murther the chief abettors of the Canton League; a solemn Oath is taken by the plotters, and they wore a badge of red upon their sleeves to be known by; the massacre was to be acted the 29 of Iune, but was discovered by a Boy that very night it should have been put in execution; for being assembled in the dark, the Boy passing by, over-heard their discourse, and that they were to kill the Watch, and open the Gates to an Army of Horse, that came to assist them: the Boy ac∣quaints some Butchers with this, who were making merry together; they in∣form the Magistrates, who sudenly with a strong guard seise upon the plotters:  a messenger is sent to the three Cantons for aid, who dispatch 300 souldiers for Lucerna, to guard the City; the plotters are brought to their tryal, but be∣cause divers men of quality were among them, the three towns interceded for them, who solemnly sware, never to stir against the Helvetian League: It was also ordered, no clandestin conventicles or private oaths should be hereafter in that City. About this time, the Austrians were reconciled to Frederick the Em∣perour, to whom they complain against the confederate Cantons; these excuse their revolt, as being thereto necessitated: at last, Caesar orders that the Cities of Tigurum, Berne, and Basil, should make peace between them; who by their Legats made a Truce of thirty moneths, which after this was renewed: some 1334. hostilities were acted during this time, but no open war, till Tigurum confede∣rated with these Cantons, and shortly after Bern, with some other towns. Tigurum at first adhered to Frederick of Austria, against Ludovick of Bavaria, but after fell off to Ludovick, when the other had resigned the Empire for a great sum of mony, for payment of which Tigurum with three other towns were pawned by Ludovick. The Tigurans to free themselves, promise to be no lesse faithfull to the Bavarian, then they were to the Austrian: this so offended the Austrians and the Pope, that the town was excommunicated, and continued so 18 years together, the Priests having forsaken it, with the Monks, onely the Franciscans went out at one gate, and entred at the other: In the mean while,  they take and demolish some Castles that annoyed them; and the year after they alter their form of government, choosing 12 chief men, and 12 inferiour Magistrates under them, to rule their City, which occasioned much trouble; for the Commons disliked their government, and accused them of oppression and briberies; wherefore some of them being guilty, fled out of the City; others laid down their offices; these were fined and banished for some time, and Magistrates
chosen out of each Tribe. And because the town Rapersvila who had a harbour for all Tigurin fugitives; who there being but twenty miles distant, did much annoy the Magistrates of Tigurum, therefore they raise an Army and lay siege to Rapersvila, which they were forced to raise again, because their provision failed, and hearing that the Earl of Habes∣purg a great Patron of the fugitives was gone to Grinovium a Castle at the head of the Tigurin lake, they hastened thither under the conduct of Earle Toggius; in the first encounter the Tigurins were worsted, and Toggius taken prisoner; but after they had better manned and fitted their ships, they fell again upon the enemy, and gave them a great defeat, in which Earle Habes∣purg was slain, with divers Gentlemen; in revenge of whose death, Toggius at Rapersvil is cut in peeces: the next year a peace was concludeded between 1337. the Tigurins and the enemy, that the banished Citizens should pay six hundred marks of silver, and should continue in exile five years; but this peace held not long, for the banished performed not the Articles, therefore by the Em∣perours leave, their houses and estates are confiscate; the year after, by the me∣diation of Agnes Queen of Hungary, daughter of Albert 1. of Austria, the peace is renewed, but soon after broken, because divers of the Nobility of Germany disliking the Tigurin popular government, assisted and encouraged the banished Citizens, therefore the Tigurins to make themselves the stronger made a league with the Citizens of Constantia and S. Gall, as likewise with the Bishop and City of Basil, they made also divers Knights of the Rhodes free of their City, to indeer the Nobility more to them, because most of that Order were Gentlemen; this much disheartned the exiles who despair∣ing now to recover the City by strength, plot with Earle Habespurg (his son whom the Tigurins slew not long before) and some other of the Nobility, and with those of their own faction within the Town, and such as were dis∣contented, and delighted in innovation, to surprise suddenly the Consul and his adherents in the night, and so to seise on the City, but the plot was disco∣vered the same night it should have been acted, by a servant which acquainted the Consul; whereupon presently the great Bell of the City is rung out, a  sign alwayes of danger, the people ran presently to Arms, great execution is made, partly with weapons, partly with stones and bricks upon the houses, the Butchers with their axes did good service, in memory of which a brazen Lion as a badge of their valour is bestowed on them; this they used afterward in their anual solemnity to carry about the streets. The Inhabitants of the lesser Town upon the left side of the River, fought stoutly against the enemy upon the bridge, which they had prepossessed by means of a Fisher-man who discovered the plot to them; this Fisher-man carried some of the plotters in his boat, and having overheard a whispering that they meant to kill him lest he should betray them, overturned the boat  and so left them in the River, he got on shore and alarms the people; the enemies after a hot dispute were worsted, fifteen of them were slain, 37. taken, among whom was Earle Habespurg, the rest by means of the darkness escaped, the dead bodies were kicked and trod upon three dayes together; the day after, seventeen of the prime plotters were broken on the wheel, some be∣headed, the Earl was imprisoned, and his Army without the Town in fear and confusion ran home. Shortly after the Consul Brunius with an Army be∣siegeth Rapersvil, the nest and harbour of the plotters, the Town on the third day yeelded, some of the plotters in it were killed, some escaped; the Towns∣men swear the same fealty to Tigurum, which they used to give to their Earl: after this they fall upon Marchia the Earls Country with fire and sword, so that the Inhabitants were forced to swear fealty to the Tigurins; but when they heard that Albert of Austria was raising forces to aid the Habespurgians, and to keep their Rendevouz at Rapersvil, they burn the Town to the ground. Some Towns of Alsatia made league with Frederick of Austria against the Tigurins, who had taken an hundred and seventy Townsmen of
that Country  prisoners, the Alsatians to recover their prisoners raised an Army by the help of their neighbours, the Tigurins wisely declined this war, being already exhausted, and therefore restored the prisoners: After this the Tigurins send a petition to Charles the 4. Emperour, complaining of the wrongs done them by Earl Habespurg and his confederates, excusing their own actions, shewing their innocency, and desiring his assistance for the maintenance of their liber∣ty, being willing to submit to his Imperial commands, if so be the Austrian would be quiet; the Emperour answers that he would endeavour to pacifie the Austrian, and their other enemies, but could not force them, being their power was greater then his, therefore wishes them to use some moderate transaction with their enemies; upon this the Tigurins send Legats with pre∣sents  to Albert of Austria, who at first gave them good words, but at the second meeting was rough with them, being incensed by the Nobility, accu∣sing them for destroying both the old and new Rapersvil, for wasting Marchia which belonged to him as supreme Lord, therefore wishes them to restore what they had taken, to rebuild what they had demolished, and to make pe∣cuniary satisfaction for what they had wasted, and so he would pardon them; the Legats replied, that their City had suffered much wrong by these places in harbouring and aiding the fugitives and rebels, therefore they humbly beseech him, that he would not urge them to such inconveniences; the Prince in  anger told them, that if the Tigurins did not make reparation for these wrongs willingly, they should be forced to do it. The Tigurins understanding by their Legats the Princes resolution; of his forces now raising, of their great danger and weakness, and that there was no hope of help from Caesar; they resolve to enter into a confederacy with the Helvetian Towns, seeing they all had the same common enemy the Austrian; and Tigurum, by reason of the Lake lay so fit for commerce with those 1351. Towns; upon this Legats are sent who are kindly entertained, and the league ratified, in which the first place in all publike actions is given to Tigurum, (though it was the fifth that entered into the Helvetian league) because of the dignity of that City: The report of this new league, hasteneth on the Au∣strian to besiege the Town, fearing lest by their example more Towns would combine against him, therefore with an Army of 2000. horse, and 20000. foot, he sits down before the City, which the four confederate Towns had suffici∣ently manned and filled with provision; after some light velitations, they came to a parly by the mediation of some friends, in which it was agreed they both should refer their cause to the Queen of Hungary, this was not liked by the four confederate Towns, because the Queen was the Austrians sister; yet the Tigurins confiding in her integrity, perswaded the four Towns to assent, which was done, and pledges given by the City; with the Queen are joyned  two Assessors or Judges, these gave sentence in behalf of the Austrian, wishing the Tigurins to give him satisfaction for his losses, they also laid fines upon the other confederate Towns for revolting from Austria: this sentence was rati∣fied by Queen Agnes, the Switzers promise to stand to the verdict, though it was unjust; but the Duke not content with this, demands Iohn of Habespurg of the Tigurins without ransome, which was denied by them, wherefore against his promise he imprisons the Tigurin hostages, and renews the war. The Switzers finding no hope of peace, resolve with joynt forces to seise upon Glarona a Town and valley of twelve miles in length, encompassed with the Alpes except in one place, which after this expedition was fortified with  a wall and trench: the people here being weary of the Austrian government, submit themselves without resistance to the confederate Towns, and swear to be firm in their league with them; mean while the Tigurins send an Army a∣gainst Bada a garrison of the Austrians, which had done them much hurt, they fire the Suburbs, and plunder the Country thereabout; but as they were re∣turning with the booty, they were encountred by 4000. Austrians, whom
they overthrew, being themselves not above 1300. strong, they slew 700. of the enemy. The next year the Austrian in hope to recover Glarona, is defeated by the Inhabitants, the like success he had in Suitia; divers places on both sides are spoiled: about this time also the City of Tugium made league with the Switzers: this Town stands between the Tigurins and Suitians, and used to do them much hurt; at last being weary of the Austrian government, after fifteen dayes siege surrendered, conditionally swearing that if the Austrian within so many dayes should send relief, they might return again to his obe∣dience, therefore they send to the Duke for help, but the Legats found him more careful in providing food for his hawks, then aid for his people; there∣fore  having obtained his good will to surrender the Town to the Switzers, they made league with them: presently upon this Tigurum is besieged again by the Austrian; but a month after by the Marquess of Brandeburgs means a peace is made on these Articles, That Iohn of Habespurg now three years a prisoner should be released without ransome, and that the Austrian should freely dismisse the imprisoned hostages; that Glarona and Tugium should be re∣leased from their oath, and return to the obedience of Austria, in other things the Switzers league should stand: Habespurgius is released without ransome, but so were not the hostages, who were forced to pay 1600. crowns; Rapersvil is fortified with a garrison which invaded the Tigurin Teritories, and killed  fifty of their men; this bred a new war, Tugium is again taken by the Switzers, and Bern sides with them. Bern built by Berchtold Duke of Zermgia, who meeting with a Bear in that place, called it Bern in Dutch; this City he bestowed upon the Empire, which Frederick the 2. Emperour endowed with divers priviledges; afterward it be∣ing oppressed by Earl Kyburgius, it took the Earl of Savoy for its protector; he restored to this City her former liberty for the good service the Bernats had done the Savoyan against the Burgundian: After this they had divers wars with Godofrid and Rodolph of Habespurg, with the Turks, Austrians, and others of their neighbours, they beat the Underwalds in a battel: afterward they both  made a league with the confederate Towns of Switzerland, upon which Ti∣gurum is the third time besieged by Charles the 4. Emperour, and Albert of Austria: the Tigurins petition Charles that he would not persecute them being an Imperial City, desiring nothing but the conservation of their liberties, and willing to yeeld to any reasonable demands; Charles upon this deals with the Austrian for an accord, which being by him refused, the siege was raised without doing any thing, and five years after peace was concluded between the Austrian and Tigurins, on these Articles: 1. That restitution be made on both sides. 2. That none of the Austrian subjects be made free of Tigurum. 3. That none meddle with the Fee-lands of others. 4. That the Tigurins hereafter make no leagues with the Austrian subjects. 5. That the Switzers injoy their own confederacies. Some controversies after this arose about Tugium whether that was the Austrians, or included within the Switzers confederacie: Charles his opinion was, that Tugium was not in the confede∣racie, the Suiti were of the contrary minde; the matter was long debated, at last a Truce of a 11. years was made, during which time, Tugium and Glarona ained in the Helvetian league, yet they yeelded subjection and fealty to the Austrian, who placed governours over them yearly; this Truce was con∣tinued for more years after: Albert being dead, his son Leopold who hated the Switzers, and durst not himself make war, set the English of Angles upon them;  these wasted both the Austrian and Helvetian Territories, but were at length beaten and driven home: After this Earl Kyburgius made war upon Berus, but being worsted, was glad to make his peace with him. Some years after 1376. the Austrian ell out with the Lucernat's, and hanged their Legats which they sent for reparation of wrongs done by the Governours; upon this they de∣sire the help of the
confederate Towns, who joyning their forces, seise  upon Rottenburg belonging to the Austrian, and demolish the walls and forts thereof. The Austrian Governours willing to fish in troubled waters, forced the 1385. confederate Switzers to rise again in Ams, for great massacres and outrages committed upon some neighbouring Towns and Castles of the Confederates; a great battel is fought, in which Duke Leopold son to Albert is slain, and with him 676. of his Gentry; the Helvetians elated with this victory, fall upon the enemies Forts and Castles, divers of which they demolish, and take some of their Towns; upon this a Truce is made for one year, which being ended, the Austrian with 8000. men falls upon the Helvetian Territories with fire and sword, but were by the Confederates again defeated, who slew 2000. of the enemy, besides 500. that were drowned in the River, the bridge over which they were flying being broke down with their weight; after this fight the Con∣federates took divers Towns and Forts from the Austrian: at last a Truce of seven years was concluded, which was afterwards continued for twenty years; and at last a peace of fifty years was agreed upon. The Abbot of S. Gall made wars upon Abbatiscella, a Town under his jurisdiction, now one of the con∣federate Towns of Switzerland: the controversies between the Abbot and 1401. the Town, were often debated, but at last tried by the sword; the Abbot was overthrown; upon this the Austrian takes his part, but still the Town pre∣vailed, and made a league with the Suitii, who took in divers Towns and Forts; at length the Abbot was fain to sue for peace, and leave the Towns∣men to enjoy their liberty. Seven years after this war, the Austrians and Helvetians renew their old quarrels, and withall the wars; for Frederick of Austria having conveyed Pope Iohn 22. from the Councel of Constance, he was prosoribed by the Emperour, and excommunicated by the Councel: hereupon the Confederates are by the Emperour and Councel absolved from their cath, and willed to break off the fifty years peace. Verbigenum, Bada, and some other places of Austria were taken by the Switzers. In the year 1422. the Switzers sent an Army over the Alpes to recover the 1425. Town Lepontium taken from them by the Duke of Millan; sothey did in the year 1425. and the year after, but could not recover the Town, yet they wasted the vallies belonging to the Duke. In the year 1436. a grie∣vous 1436. Civil war by the Austrians procurement arose among the Switzers, first between Tigurum and Suitium; this was assisted by the Confederates: but in the year 1444. that memorable battel was fought near Basil between the French under the Dolphin, afterward Lewis the 11. and the Switzers, who 1444. beat the French that came to raise the Councel of Basil, as we have said: after this a peace is made. Not long after, the Austrian war followed against 1450. Duke Sigismund, whom Pope Pius excommunicated, and stirred up the Switzers against him; but after many skirmishes, by the means of Ludovic of Bavaria, a peace is concluded, and six years after the Duke of Millan makes 1460. 1466. 1474. 1477. peace with the Switzers; two years after this, the Austrian war is renewed, and eight years after began the Burgundian war, which continued three years, and ended with the death of the Duke: this war was caused by the Austrian; for Sigismund Duke of Austria, being forced by bad success to make disho∣nourable peace with the Helvetians, morgageth the lands which he had near them, to Charles Duke of Burgundy, a proud and potent Prince in those dayes, purposely that occasion of quarrels might be given between him and the Switzers, who sent for a renovation of friendship, and the old league be∣tween  the Burgundian and Switzers; but Hagenbachus governour under the Burgundian of those morgaged Provinces, hindered the Helvetian Legats from having access to the Duke, besides many affronts were put by him and others of the Nobility upon the Helvetians; the people under his government, being wearied with oppression, petition Sigismund of Austria their ancient Lord, to redeem his lands again, which was obtained easily from the Duke, being of a
gentle and easie nature: but the Burgundian would not part with the hold he had of these lands, besides that Hagenbachius did still more and more oppresse his people, divers wrongs were done by the Burgundians to the Switzers. In the mean time Lewis 11. of France, who hated the Burgundian, under∣hand stirs them up against him, and furnisheth them with mony; to this end he makes a league with them, and by his means also Sigismund is reconciled to the Switzers; Renatus Duke of Lorain, the Cities of Strasburgh and Basil, with their Bishops, enter into a league with them, and so doe many other Towns. Mean while Hagenbachius is taken prisoner, and beheaded; The Austrian  having paid the mony he borrowed, recovers again his lands. In the interim Charles makes war upon the Bishop of Colen, claiming a title to that Bishoprick; against him Frederick the Emperor raiseth an army, and commands the Switzers to hold the Burgundian play at home; but no sooner had they entred Burgundy and defeated the Burgundians, but the Austrian makes peace with the Burgun∣dian, out of which the Helvetians were excepted. Upon this, Charles turns all his forces against the Confederates; in the first battel the Duke was beaten, who a little before had against his promise hanged the souldiers in the garison of Gramson, who upon quarter had surrendred to him: In a second battel the Duke was again defeated, having lost 26000 men: In the third conflict at Nancy in Lorain, which was then besieged by the Burgundian, (against whom Renatus D. of Lorain was assisted by the Helvetians) Charles was killed in the flight, and so by his death the war ended. The next year after this Burgundian war, the Duke of Millan and the Helvetians fell at odds, about some wrongs done by his subjects to the inhabitants of the Valley of Lepontium; in this bat∣tel the Millanois were defeated, but the next year by means of the French king were reconciled to the Switzers, with whom the same year Pope Sixtus made a league, and granted them large indulgences and priviledges. About three years after this, Tigurum, Bern, Lucerna, Friburgh, and Salodorum made a private league among themselves, because in the last Burgundian war they thought  they were partially dealt with by their fellows, who took an equal share in the booty, but were not at half the charges and trouble that these forenamed Towns were: At this league the other Towns were offended, shewing that the Lucernates and their fellowes had not power to make a league without the general consent of all the confederates: The matter after much debate is re∣ferred to Nicholas Underwald an Eremite of great esteem among them, who disannulled the new league, and perswaded them in a free Assembly or Parlia∣ment to end the controversie, and withal that Friburgh and Salodor should be 1481. received among the Canton towns; and so by this means there are now ten confederate towns of Switzerland, and so this Commonwealth of ten Cantons  continued for twenty years, till Basil & Scaphusium, and after these Abbatiscella were added; The former eight, called the old Cantons, had continued before this addition of Friburgh and Salodor, 125 years, so that all that time the Swit∣zers commonwealth consisted of eight Canton-towns only.
CHAP. VII. A prosecution of the Helvetian History, till the yeare 1521. FRiburg was built by Berchtold 4. Duke of Zeringium, some few years be∣fore Bern: after his death, Bern fell to the Empire, and Friburg to the Earls of Kyburg, by whom afterward this Town was sold to Ralph the Emperor, and since it hath continued under the house of Austria almost two hundred years: yet in the year 1403. being oppressed by the Austrian Nobi∣lity, they made a perpetual league with Bern, but yet continued under the Austrian dominion: for though the Helvetian Cantons made a league among  themselves for one anothers aid and supportation against their enemies, yet they did not abridge or abrogate the just and old rights of their ancient Lords: this league of Friburg with Bern lasted 45 years; but afterward in the wars be∣tween Savoy and Friburg, the Bernats adhered to the Savoyans, with whom they had been a long time in league; but a year after the war began, the Fri∣burgers being worsted, were reconciled to Savoy, by the mediation of the French, Burgundian, and Helvetians. The next year after this peace was made, the Austrian comes to Friburg, to see if he could perswade them to make war upon Bern; which when he could not do, but perceived that they began to  incline to the Helvetian league, and fearing he should not long-retain them in his obedience, he sends thither the High-Steward of his house, to acquaint them that he was to be there shortly himself; therefore all the gold and silver-Plate, with rich Hangings and other Ornaments, were borrowed of the Towns∣men, to adorn the State-house where the Prince was to be entertained: All this wealth privately the Steward conveyed out of the town, and on the day named for the Princes coming, he with his attendants and chiefest of the town went out on horseback to meet him; the Prince came not, but sent some horse-men, who having met the Steward and his train, a stop was made, and a speech by him to the Townsmen, shewing, That since their affections were  more inclined to the Bernan and Helvetian league then to their antient Lord, he thought good to reap some benefit by them; And so he departed to the Prince with his plunder. Upon this the Friburgers made a league with Bern, and the Switzers; therefore these in the Burgundian war sent a garrison of a thousand men to guard Friburg. After which, Salodor entred into a confede∣racie with the Cantons. Salodor, an antient City, as appears by the Roman monuments in it, was up∣on the incursions of the Huns and Francons into France demolished; but when the French grew great, this Town was rebuilt, and placed under the Bishop of Geneva; Under the German Emperors, this hath alwayes been one of the Imperial cities. When Ludovick the Bavarian, and Frederick the Austrian were in competition for the Empire, Salodor adhered to the Barbarian, whereupon they were excommunicate by the Pope, and besieged by the Austrian; in that war the Bernats sent them a garrison of four hundred souldiers: they had war also with Earl Kyburgius, and were by him defeated: at last in the year 1351. they made a perpetual league with Bern; there the Austrian war being ended, in which Leopold was slain, they were reconciled to the Austrians. Lastly, after the Burgunian war, they were with the Friburgers admitted into the Helvetian league; after which the Helvetian Army was overthrown by the Millanois upon the Alpes: the next year after they aided Sigismund Duke of 1487. Austria against the Venetians; after this they served the French King in his wars against the Duke of Britany, and in Italy against the Neapolitans and the confederate Italian Princes. About three years after this, a Civil war arose among the Switzers by means 1490. of the Abbot of S. Gall, who had begun to erect a new Covent; at which the subjects of the Abbot were offended, as fearing that the reliques of S. Gallus
would be removed from the place where they had continued so long, besides they doubted the trade of Linnen-cloath which was made there, would be trated to Rosacum where the new Covent was begun; therefore suddenly having conspired together, they fall upon the new building, and overthrow it; at this the Abbot being incensed, desires the aid of the four Towns which were in league with him, with whom some other Towns also joyned; but this war ended without blood, for the Abbatiscellans made peace with the Switzers; after this the City of S. Gall being besieged, they also made their peace with the Helvetians, a fine was laid upon the Abbots subjects, and so they were re∣ceived into favour. The last Austrian or Suevic war followed, begun by Frederick the Emperour, but pursued by his son Maximilian after his fathers death:  Frederick had caused a great league to be made among the Princes, Cities, and many of the chief Nobility, purposely to overthrow the Helvetian liberty, he was the head of this league himself: Lewis 12. of France, claiming title to the Dutchy of Millan, did earnestly desire to be in league with the Switzers, which they willingly imbraced. All means of accord being tried, but to no purpose, a battel is fought near Constantia, in which the Switzers were worsted, but the fight being renewed the same day they beat their enemies, and so they did afterward in eight several battels; the Austrians being broken with so many defeats, at length by the mediation of Lewis Sfortia Duke of Millan, a peace is made, in which the Helvetian  liberty, and possession of their places taken from the Austrian is confirmed. This was the last great war which they made against forreign Princes in de∣fence of their liberty, except that they made against Iames Medices Lord of Mussium. As soon as the peace was made, Galcacius Viscount of Millan raised five thousand Switzers against the Magistrates will, who told them they were bound by league to aid the French, but by the help of these Switzers Duke Lewis recovered Millan; yet afterward the Switzers not being able to resist the great forces of the French before Novaria a Town of no strength, they made their peace and went home; Duke Lewis thought to escape in the habit of an  Helvetian common souldier, but he was discovered, taken, and carried away prisoner into France: the same year Ulricus, Duke of Wirtenberg, makes a league of twelve years with the Switzers: Maximilian also the Emperour makes an hereditary peace, or renews rather that which was made before by his father Duke Sigismund, with the four Cantons of Tigurum, Bern, Urania, and Underwald. The next year after, Basil and Scaphusa were taken into the 1501. Helvetian confederacie, both these Cities are upon the Rhene; Basil is the biggest of all the confederate Towns, and very ancient, for we read of it in Ammianus Marcellinus; it was honoured with divers priviledges by the German Emperours, also with a Bishoprick and University; it first was in league with Tigur, Bern, and the three first Cantons, in the German troubles when Ludovic the Bavarian was excommunicated by the Pope 1327. then afterward with the Tigurins particularly, 1347. When the English plundered Alsatia under Leopold of Austria, and were preparing to besiege Basil, the Can∣tons sent a strong garrison to defend it, so that the English were fain to leave off their enterprise, and the rather because Charles 4. was marching with his Army against them. In the Austrian war, which Katherine of Burgundy the wife of Leopold made against them, they received aid from Bern and Salodor, an. 1409. (in the Councel of Basil) with sixteen hundred men they defeated the whole French Army; they assisted also the Switzers against Charles of Bur∣gundy; but in the war between Maximilian and the Switzers, Basil stood neuter, in which City at last peace was concluded between the Emperor and Switzers by the mediation of Lewis Maria Duke of Mantua; in fine, being hated and wronged by the Austrian, and the Nobility, they made a perpetual league with the Switzers, anno 1501. Scaphusa so
called from Scapha a boat,  because the boats that come from the lake of Constance along the Rhene, do unload here, by reason of the great precipice of the River fm high rocks; the Town receiveth by this means great customes: at first the Abbot that place was the chief governour, afterward obtaining divers priviledges from the Emperours, they shook off the Abbots power, but it was sold afterward by Lewis of Bavaria to the Austrian, under whom it remained eighty five years, till the Councel of Constance, where Frederick of Austria for conveying away pope Iohn 22. was proscribed by Sigismund the Emperour, and his estate con∣fiscated, and so this Town was added to the Empire: afterward Frederick 3. of the Austrian family, being Emperour, bestowed it upon Duke Sigismund  of Austria, who sent his Legats to take the oath of Allegiance to the Austrian, which they refused, except they might retain their priviledges; this would not be granted; whereupon they made a league with the Switzers, an. 1454. which they constantly observed after, wherefore they were divers times as∣saulted and molested by the Austrian, and at last proscribed for assisting the Helvetians against Sigismund of Austria, by the command of Pope Pius, but they were afterward released from this proscription at the Austrians charges: About the year 1479. the league between the Switzers and Scaphusia was re∣newed for 25. years, in which the Urii and Underwaldins were comprehen∣ded: At last having assisted the Helvetians both in the Burgundian and Suevian  war, a league between them and the 11. Cantons is concluded for ever, an. 1501. After the Switzers had made a league with France, they assisted Charles 8. and Lewis in the Neapolitan wars, which proved unfortunate to Helvetia; for in the first war they lost their health, being infected with the Neapolitan disease or French pox, and in the second they lost their lives by the sword of the enemy, who in two great battels overthrew them. An. 1507. they assisted the French against the Ligurians, and refused to aid the Emperour Maximilian against the French. An. 1509. they aided the French in the confederacy they made with Spain, Pope Iulius and the Emperor, against the Venetians. The next year after, Pope Iulius 2. made a league with the Switzers, who sent him 6000. men into Italy against the Duke of Ferraria, who had seised on some Church∣lands, but indeed his aim was to drive the French out of Millan, which the Switzers perceiving forsook the Pope, and returned home without their pay: next year 1511. a perpetual league is made between the Switzers, and the houses of Austria and Burgundy; the French upon the expiration of their league de∣sired to renew it again with the Switzers, who were unwilling because they feared the Popes anger, for the French then were his enemies; besides, the French had refused to continue the Switzers pay, after the league was ex∣pired; they drowned also the Suitens Post with his letters, and sold in open Market the Cantons Badge, which the Posts use to wear. The French having beaten Pope Iulius at Ravenna, the Switzers send into Italy for his aid twenty thousand men, who joyning with the Venetians (then reconciled to the Pope) took Cremona and Ticinum, and drove the French quite out of Millan, so that they had nothing left them but the Castle; upon this, Pope Iulius honours the Switzers with the title of [Defenders of the Church:] Then sent to them Banners adorned with certain Images, with a sword and Cap of maintenance, the Ensigns of liberty: Maximilian Sfortia by them being restored to his fathers dominion, makes a league with them, and with∣all bestows on them Lugano, Locarne, Mendrise, and the valley of Madie; he gave also to the Confederate Rheti or Grisons the Val-Telin, or Volurene.  Charles also Duke of Savoy, whose Ancestors had made a private league with some of the Cantons, makes now a new league for five and twenty years, with the twelve Cantons: The French also desired their amity, which was refused, because they kept still the Castle of Millan, and were found to corrupt some of them with bribes; wherefore the French Legats are commanded to depart out of their Territories: Hence the war is
renewed, the French besiege Sfortia in Novaria with a great Army, in which Town were four thousand Switzers, and eight thousand more were sent to them; these obtained a great victory over the French, whom they drove out of Italy; in this battel fourteen hundred Switzers were lost: after this victory Maximilian Emperour falling off from the French Covenant, raised an Army of sixteen thousand Switzers, with whom as many more voluntaries joyned, these were conducted into Bur∣gundy against the French, to them Caesar added some Regiments of horse under the Prince of Wirtenberge; these besieged Divio or Diion, the capital City of Burgundy; Trimonil the Governour not being able to hold out, made his peace with the Switzers on these conditions, that the King should quit his claim to  the Dutchy of Millan, and should at certain times pay them six hundred thousand crowns; for performance of this four Noblemen are given for Hostages, yet the King would not ratifie this agreement, because he would not part with his claim to Millan; whereupon the Switzers resolve to put the Hostages to death, if the King did not the sooner confirm the agreement, and withall intended the next winter to invade France; the King upon this sends Legats to conclude a perpetual peace with the Switzers, but the Kings con∣ditions were so unreasonable that nothing was done, save onely that he gained time, and hindred the invasion of France: in these meetings Abbatiscella or Appenzel was added as the thirteenth Canton. Abbatiscella is the name of the Country, and chief Town thereof; the Country is seated above the Town of S. Gall, among high mountains upon the frontiers of the Grisons, it hath eight principal Towns or Parishes, the chief is Abbatiscella, that is the Abbots Cel or Chamber; for the Abbots of S. Gall, Lords of this Country, made their chief residence in this Town: these of Appenzel made themselves free first by the sword, then by their money to the Abbot; they had seven years war with Cuno Abbot of S. Gall, who was aided by the Inhabitants about the lake Acronium or of Constance, as also by Frederick Duke of Austria, the Bishop of Constance, the Earl of Wirtenberg, with divers others of the Nobility: these were defeated by Appenzel, which  at last the Inhabitants of S. Gall assisted against the Abbot; they took five Towns, and above sixty Castles, some of which they demolished; in this war the Abbatiscellans joyned league with the Helvetians: at last Rupert the Em∣perour made peace between the Abbatiscillans and their enemies, at Constance, an. 1408. after which they became a Commonwealth, the form whereof they retain till this day; before this every Town had their peculiar Ensign, and Assembly or Parliament, now they have but one Ensign, and one Assembly for all. Three years after this peace, the Abbot of S. Gall began to trouble the Appenzellians with new process, whereupon they make a league with six of the Cantons; therefore upon complaint made by the Abbot, they are pro∣scribed by the Emperour, and excommunicated by the Pope, for which they cared not, being naturally fenced with mountains, and having little commerce with strangers; the Priests that refused to do their office, in obedience to the Popes command, were some banished, and some put to death by them. The Abbot complains again to the Imperial Electors, who wrote letters to the German Princes, and Helvetian Cantons, to force the Appenzellians to their duty: the Switzers utterly refused to make war upon their confederates, but they me∣diated for a peace, which was concluded the fourth year of their excommuni∣cation, after the Earl of Toggenburg had defeated them in two several battels: this peace held not long, for the Gentry that were their neighbours about the  lake Acronium, or of Constance, intended to invade the Abbatiscellians with their Cavalry, but they could do no good this way, for the Abbatiscellians seised upon Rineck, and the valley of Regusce, an. 1445. the Lords of these 1445. places got them again to be proscribed, but gaining nothing by this, they sold them their rights for six thousand Crowns: after this an. 1452. they made a 1452. league with the seven Helvetian Cantons against the Austrians, Burgundians, and
the Suevians or Suaubeans: At last an. 1513. they were received in the number of the Cantons. Now the five last Cantons, except Basil, were long before their admission into this rank, confederate with the old Cantons; and this priviledge the Cantons have above their confederates, that they can give their advice and suffrages in all publike assemblies, they govern with equal authority those that are under them, and are equal sharers in all booties got in the wars. Francis of Valois son-in-law to Lewis 12. of France, having succeeded to that crown, resolves to prosecute the war against Millan, begun by Lewis. Against him Maximilian the Emperor, Ferdinand King of Spain, Sfortia Duke of Millan,  with the Switzers, enter into a league, to whom was joyned Pope Leo 10. The Switzers Army consisted of 30000 foot; the French unwilling to en∣counter 1515. with them, labour to draw them to a peace, which was easily obtain∣ed, because they doubted the confederate Princes were not sincere to them, seeing they received not their promised pay, besides the Emperor sent not the horse to guard the foot, as he was bound to doe, he suffered also divers of the German foot to serve the French king; the Popes and Spanish armies would not passe over Po, nor joyn themselves with the Switzers: therefore being destitute of help and pay, they made peace with the French, upon which twelve thousand went home, the rest prepared to follow the next day: but  Sfortia disliked the conditions of peace, therefore with the Switzers that were of his guard and some others he fals upon the French about the evening, and withall the Switzers send to call back their fellows that were marching home∣ward, shewing them in what danger they were; upon this they return, a cruel encounter ensues, in which divers of the French Nobility lost their lives; at the first the Switzers had the better, but in the next encounter were defeat∣ed, and so retreated to Millan, where they left for the Duke a garrison of 1500 in the castle, and then return home. Upon this defeat of the Switzers, the French seise upon the Dutchy of Millan, which the Emperor sought by force to recover the year following, but could not. In the interim, the French make  peace with the Switzers for ever, which was confirmed, an. 1521. All the Cantons joyned in this league, except the Tigurins, who could never be in∣duced 1521. to assent to it: for Matthew Cardinal of Sedun or Sion had diverted their minds from the French: Zuinglius also their Preacher told them, how base it was for them to be mercenary souldiers, and for pay to shed innocent blood; how far this was against the mind of Christ, and the practise of their ancestors, and that this mercenary way was an exposing of their liberty to sale; besides, that this new league abridged them of their power, for not they, but the King was to choose his officers, and these to raise the souldiers at their pleasure; again, this league was in divers things destructive of former leagues;  moreover they had no reason to assist the French with souldiers, having re∣fused to assist Maximilian the Emperor; and for any benefit which by this league would accrue the State, they could find none, only some private per∣sons might be enriched by the French pensions, the love of which, and the wickednesse which attends upon a military life, might occasion much mischief in their country, as effeminateness, covetousness, dissoluteness, neglect of hus∣bandry & good arts, idleness, luxury, drunkenness, whoredoms, blasphemies, which are the fruits of wars, and weeds that grow in military camps; it was urged also, that the French assistance could do them little good, that the re∣lying upon pay and pensions was a distrusting of Gods providence, and that  most of the former leagues they had made with foraign Princes did turn to their prejudice, losse of their men, and intestine discords. For these and other reasons the Tigurins could not be drawn into this league: But the other con∣federates were of a contrary mind, affirming, that all war is not condemned in Scripture, for divers holy men have been souldiers, and have assisted their friends; that the Helvetian souldiery is not mercenary, seeing they are to
serve but one King, and that by covenant; if the King enjoin an unlawful war, it was in the Magistrates power to deny him aid; if the cause was doubtful, the common souldier was not to enquire into it; besides, the Switzers Country is populous and barren, and obnoxious to many enemies haters of their liberty, therefore they stand in need of forreign employments and assistants; neither was it a rejection of divine providence to make use of secundary means; their youth also by this employment should be trained up in military discipline, so needful for defence of the Country; and though some forreign leagues have not proved successeful, yet their leagues with Lewis 11. Charles 8. and Lewis 12. of France, have been advantagious to them. Upon these reasons the Cantons  grounded their perpetual peace with France. CHAP. VIII. Of the Helvetian Confederates, till the year 1602. HAving spoken of the Helvetian Cantons, we will now briefly relate the Confederates and Allies of Switzerland: And 1. of the Abbot of S. Gall. Gallus was a Gentleman of Scotland, disciple to Columbanus the Abbot, with whom he travelled into France, and thence into Germany; he preached the Gospel, and converted many from Idolatry, at a place called Tuggen near the head of the Lake of Zurich, and then at Bregents at the head of the Lake of Constance, and in other places of Switzerland sixteen years: being invited to the Bishoprick of Constance, he refused it, recommending one of his disciples to it, and so he retired himself to an Hermitical life, an. 630. on the mountains above the Lake of Constance, where now is the Town and Co∣vent of S. Gall; there with some of his disciples, he built a Cell, and in holy meditations spent his dayes; there did his disciples remain, whose piety was re∣warded with rich gifts from the French Kings, and Dukes of Aleman or Suaube: at last the fraternity increasing in number and wealth, S. Galls Cell  is turned into a Monastery, eighty years after his death. Pipinus the son of Charles Martel made Othomar a Priest, the first Abbot of S. Gall, who with his brethren began to professe the rule of S. Benedict. The wealth and power of this Monastery did so increase, that the Abbot thereof was reckoned among the Princes, and was of old under the protection of the Emperors, who out of the Gentry of Suanbe or Aleman used to send governours of that Abbey; but after∣ward being neglected in the troubles between the Popes and Emperors, and quarrels arising between the Abbot and Appenzel, to which the Town of S. Gall was joyned, and some of the Abbots own vassals, and therefore stood in need of some powerful protector, Caspar Landenberg the 52. Abbot desired to be joyned in league with the four Helvetian Cantons of Tigurum or Zurich, Lucern Suits, and Glaris or Glarona, whom they chose for their protectors and defenders their liberties, rights, customes, and possessions: This power also is given to these Cantons, that all places in that seigniory belonging to the Abbot, shall give free accesse to the Cantons when they please, and that in all controversies the Abbot shall stand to their verdict: Abbot Ubricus, Landenbergs successour, ordered that each of the four Cantons in their order, should send one of their Councel to stay with the Abbot two years, and to be Captain of all his Coun∣try, and to be present at all pleadings, and that the half of all mulcts and fines should belong to the Switzers, likewise that all the Abbots subjects should  assist the Cantons in their wars; this league was renewed by Ulricus, when the Townsmen of S. Gall and Appenzel had pulled down the begun Monastery of Rosac, who by the Cantons were suppressed, and reduced to the Abbots obedience, this league continues yet; and though the Abbot and Cantons be of different Religions, yet they send according to their league a Captain to govern his subjects in civil affairs, and to maintain the Abbies rights.
The town of S. Gall oweth her original to the Abby, and her privileges to the Emperors her protectors, though the Abbots subjects, with whom some∣times the Townsmen use to quarrel about their privileges and liberties, which they were forced for sums of money to redeem of the Abbot. Afterward the town of S. Gall, in imitation of Abbot Landenberg, united themselves in league to six Cantons, namely Zurich, Bern, Lucerne, Suitz, Tugium or Zug, and Glaris. This league was made perpetual and confirmed by oath, an. 1454. They had made leagues before this time with some of these Cantons, which was only for some years. The Rheti or Grisons are antient: for before Christ, the Tuscans being driven  from their homes by the Gauls under the conduct of their Captain Rhetus, they possessed the Alpes, and from his name they called themselves Rhetians; in the Romans time there were two Countries called Rhetia, the first and second; and not onely the Alpes, but a great part of Suevia or Suaube and Ba∣varia were called Rhetia; the first and old Rhetia containing the springs of Rhene, a great part of the Alpes, with the neighbouring valleys on both sides, is called now Grisons, and of old Cani: there are three leagues of the Grisons, the first is called the High-league, and it contains nineteen Commonalties, ten of which are lost; the second is called the League or Covenant of Gods house, because of the Bishop of Curia or Coire who is comprehended within it, this contains nineteen Commonalties, two of which speak Dutch, the rest broken Italian; the third is called the League of the ten Jurisdictions, because of the ten Commonalties in it; these people have divers times made leagues with their neighbour Switzers; the two former have made a perpetual league with seven of the Cantons; the third entertains constant friendship, though not a solemn league with them: the upper League or Grison, entred into a confederacie with the seven old Cantons for ever; the next year after, the league of Gods house joyned themselves to the same Cantons; these had long 1497. controversies with those of the County of Tyrol, by whom they were much wronged, and finding no redress, though the Emperour Maximilian had ap∣pointed first the Bishop of Constance, then the Bishop of Auspurg to arbitrate the business, yet nothing was done, but were still put off with delayes till the Austrians had put themselves in Arms with intent to invade the Grisons un∣expectedly; whereupon they send Legats to Tigurum where the Switzers were then assembled, to have a perpetual league confirmed between them, which was gladly entertained by the Cantons and ratified: the next year after this followed the Suevian war, in which the Grisons stoutly defended their borders 1498. against the Austrians, whom they oftentimes defeated by the Switzers help; at last having got the better, both the Switzers and Grisons made their peace with Maxintilian; ever after the Grisons helped the Switzers in their wars in  Italy, when Iohn Iames of Medices, afterward Marquess of Marignan, had ta∣ken the Castle of Musse upon the lake Larius or Come, and Clavenne from the Grisons; the Switzers sent them aid, by which the enemy was driven out of their Territories: at this day the Grisons as well as the Cantons are in league with the French, and serve him in his wars, but they have their Commanders and Regiments apart from those of the Switzers. The Valesians are three distinct people, inclosed with high mountains, and inhabiting the valley between the springs of Rhene and lake Leman; these were called anciently Viberi or Iuberi, Seduni, and Veragri; the two former are now called the high Valesians, & are divided into seven Dioceses; the Veragri or lower  Valesians are subject to the other; but the Bishop of Sedun or Syon is their chief both in Church and State-affairs, he is called Count and Governor of Valais; they made their first league with the three Cantons of Uri, Lucerne and Underwald, an. 1417. when they had wars with William Raromus the Bishop, and his father Guiscard whom they had banished, Bern helped the Bishop; the other Cantons who were neuters, fearing lest this siding of Bern with the
Valesians might  cause a quarrel between Bern and the three above-named Cantons, they with much adoe made up a peace, in which the Raronii were restored: after this war the Valesians made a temporary league with Bern, which in the year 1475 was made perpetual; two years before this, they joyned themselves to the three above-named Cantons, ann. 1533. At Friburg a league is concluded be∣tween Adrian Bishop of Sion, and seven Diocesses of the Valetians, with seven Cantons, to wit Lucerne, Uri, Suits, Underwald, Zug, Friburg, and Salodor or Sa∣leurre, to defend the Roman Religion against all opposers. Rotvil is seated beyond Danube in Germany, on the left side of the river Nicre: It is an Imperial Chamber or place of judicature, whither the neighbour∣ring countries make their appeals; which if any contumaciously do resist, they are liable to the Imperial Ban or proscription. The first league these of Rotvil made with the Switzers, was for fifteen years, under Frederick the third Empe∣rour, ann. 1463. which afterward they renewed upon occasions: at last, the league is made perpetual with all the Cantons, ann. 1519. Now because Rot∣vil is seated far from the borders of Helvetia, so that an Army cannot be con∣ducted 1519. to them; they are tied not to make any war, but upon urgent necessity, and that not without the Switzers consent, without whom they are to make no league. Mulhouse a City in the County of Ferrat or Sequana, is thought to be the same  that Ariabinum of old; it was anciently an Imperial City, yet governed by the Bishop of Strasburg; but in the wars between Ralph of Habspurg and the Bi∣shop of Strasburg, Mulhouse was taken from the Bishop, and his Castle in the City demolished; since which time it hath been one of the Cities of the Em∣pire: Their first league they made with the Switzers, was in the year 1464. for this City being infested by the Nobility, to be freed of their tyranny, they make a league of fifteen years with Friburg, Bern, and Salodor; and by the me∣diation of Bern, the other seven Helvetian Cantons receive them into prote∣ction. This so incensed the Gentry thereabouts, that they took up arms against this City; but the Cantons so aided them with garrisons within, and forces a∣broad,  and so straitly besieged Waldshout a town of Austria, that the Gentry were glad to make their peace. Then in year 1506. the Mulhousians were united to Basil; nine years after they made a league with the whole thirteen Cantons. Bienna stands pleasantly, upon a Lake full of Fish, and beset with Vines, and is under the Bishop of Basils jurisdiction, but enjoys her own priviledges. In the year 1303. this City made league with Bern, Strasburg, Basil, Friburg, and Soluerre, to suppresse the highway-robbers which infested all that country; three years after, they made a particular confederacy with Bern; their third league was made ann. 1532. and fifteen years after they renewed it, when Iohn of Viana Bishop of Basil, a man of an unquiet spirit, made war upon his neigh∣bours, and being offended at this Union of Bienna with Bern, falls suddenly upon the Town, and imprisoneth the Bernois that were authors of this society; but the Bernois in revenge, fall upon the Bishps Castle in the Town, and freed their Citizens: then they made war upon the Bishop and his confederates the Salodorians, wasting many places of his bishoprick. Geneva the last City of the Allobroges, of which Caesar speaks, lieth neer the Switzers upon Lake Leman, at the head of Rhon; it hath been subject often times to Fire; in the time of Heliogabalus it was burnt down: Aurelian re∣paired it, and endowed it with divers priviledges, and called it by his name  Aurelian; it was wasted by the barbarous Nations that made irruption into France: About two hundred & seventy years ago, it was twice burned. The Bi∣shoprick had great immunities, and so had the City; yet they kept good cor∣respondency with the Bishop: The Earls of Geneva were great enemies to her liberty, who notwithstanding were the Bishops Vassals, and held their Earl∣dome from him in Fee: She was also often troubled by the Earls of Savoy, so
that ann. 1420. Amadeus Duke of Savoy strove to obtain of Pope Martin the right of superiority over Geneva by way of exchange; but Iohn who was then Bishop, agreed with the Citizens for himself and successors, that the liberties of Geneva should never be exchanged or alienated; if any should endeavour an exchange, that he be accounted a traitour. Afterward, when the Emperour Maximilian had made Philbert Duke of Savoy and his son in law, Lieutenant of the Empire in those parts, he and his brother Charls endeavoured upon this title, to subject Geneva to them, pretending that the priviledges of Lieute∣nantship were granted to the Princes of Savoy by Charls the fourth; who not∣withstanding had taken away from Amadeus their Earl, all power over Geneva:  These troubles made the City enter into league with Bern, and Friburg, which was renewed and made more firm ann. 1536. at which time, the Duke of Sa∣voy and Bishop of Geneva raised war against the Town, for changing their Re∣ligion. There hath been oftentimes intentions to confederate Geneva with the Cantons, which hath not yet been effected. Neocomum or Neufchastel is in the Country of Avanches, on the Lake bearing the towns name. In the war between Lewis the twelfth of France and the Swit∣zers, Bern in behalf of all the Cantons seised upon the town and the whole County, placing a governour there, which the other Cantons did in order, except those of Zurich; at last Ioan Hoochbergia Duke Longovils widow, upon  certain conditions procured the County to be restored to her (for it belonged anciently to the Earls of Hoochberg) which was done in the year 1529. before this time it was annexed to the Cantons of Bern, Lucerne, Friburg, and Solieurre, on certain articles, which upon this rendition were confirmed. At this day the Lords of this County are by a peculiar league allied to Bern. Besides these confederate Towns, there be others belonging to the Helvetian common-wealth, which may be called stipendiary, because they serve the Switzers in their wars upon their own charges; these have their own laws and Magistrates, but the soveraignty remains in the Cantons, whose publique E∣dicts they are bound to obey; these towns anciently belonged to the Austrian,  but the Switzers in their wars with Austria obtained them, upon certain con∣ditions, that they should enjoy under the Cantons the same priviledges they had under the Austrian; these are five in number, namely Bada, Bremgartan, Frauvenfeld, Mellingen, and Rapersvil. Bada on the river Limag is so called from the hot baths there, it is therefore named Thermopolis; this town is mentioned in Cor. Tacitus, it had anciently two castles, the one upon a high rock, demolished by the Switzers, the other is garrisoned by them; it had also Earls of old, who are now extinct, to whom succeeded the Lords of Habspurg, who joyned this and other things to the House of Austria; at last, it fell from them to the Switzers, in the council of Con∣stance,  because Frederick of Austria maintained Pope Iohn 22. against the Em∣perour and Council; therefore he is excommunicate, and proscribed. Sigis∣mund the Emperour with the Prince of Bavaria made war against him: the Switzers are commanded to war against him also, notwithstanding the fifty years peace they had lately made with him, because he was excommunicate and an enemy to the Church and state; if they refuse to break the peace, they should be excommunicated also with the Austrian: the breach of this peace was also warranted by the Princes Legats at the council, and the Jurisconsults, because the Emperours subjects, in all their actions, must except either expres∣ly or tacitly the Emperours Majesty and Rights. The copy of this Decree was  sent them, and withall is shewed them, that whatever they have pawned to the Austrian heretofore, doth now belong to the Empire, and that the Emperour will make no peace with the Austrian, except he confirm the Helvetian peace: to this war at last they assented; but withall they desired pay, because they were poor; the Emperour told them his money was short, but he would bestow on them whatever goods of the Austrians they possessed, or should obtain in
this  war till they had their pay; he exhorts also Zurich to take arms, promising them that Austrian Country beyond Mount Albius in perpetuall Fee: Upon this the Tigurins in the year 1415. besiege Mellinga, and the third day take it: thence they went to Brengarten, where the Cantons of Suits and Zug joyned with them, to whom this Town also surrendred it self, under the protection of the Empire; divers other Towns the Switzers took from the Austrian. Then the Tigurins by the help of the other Cantons, except Bern, besiege Bada the strongest place belonging to the Austrian, and which had often done them much hurt by excursions: after three weeks siege, the Town surrenders; the Castle held out some time after, till all necessaries  began to fail them: at last, they capitulate to surrender if the Austrian do not relieve them at such a time; mean while, the Austrian makes his peace with the Emperour, and command is sent to the Switzers to disband their Army, but they would not give off the siege of this Castle till they took and burned it, because of the much mischiefe they had heretofore suffered by it; the Gentry stormed at this, but could not now tell how to help it. Now the Emperour intending for Spain, to bring from thence Peter de Luna, otherwayes Benedict the ninth, to be Pope; and his treasure being exhausted both on the Council and on his wars, he ingaged Beda with some other Towns and Lands to them belonging, for a summe of mony to Zurich; like∣wise  to Bern he pawned the Country of Ergow, which they at this day doe solely possesse. The next year after, Zurich made the Cantons of Lucerne, Suits, Underwald, Zug, and Glaris, sharers of this Pawn or Mortgage: but those of Uri at first refused to share, thinking it a breach of the peace; but being bet∣ter informed of the lawfulnesse thereof, grounded on the Emperours and Councils authority, were content to pay their money and share with the rest, and so did Bern also. Bremgarten one of the mortgaged towns, is seated on the river Russe, two German miles below Lucern; it was first under the Empire, then it came to the Habspurgs, from them to the Austrian Princes, who derive their beginning from them. Mellingen another of these pawned Towns on the same river, one Ger∣man mile below Bremgarten, it belonged to the Earls of Habspurg; these two Towns with Bada were taken by the Switzers for the Emperour: Now they are under the eight Cantons, who suffer them to retain their ancient privi∣ledges. Rapersvil stands on the Lake of Zurich or Tigurum; it first belonged to the Earls of Rapersvil, then to the Habspurgs; it fell to the Switzers ann. 1458. Here were two factions, the one Austrian, the other Helvetian; of these Duke Sigismund carried away some prisoners to Oenipont or Inspruc, which made the other joyn with the Switzers; but the prisoners were restored by the Switzers threatnings and intercession: After, the Switzers war against Constance; those  of Uri, Suits, Underwald, and Glaris, obtained leave to march with their Army through Rapersvil; who when they came, seised on the Town; which by rea∣son of the Helvetian prevailing faction there, swore Allegiance to those foure Cantons, under whom they are yet, and enjoy their ancient priviledges which they had under the Austrian. Two years after the taking of Rapersvil, the seven Cantons seised on Frawenfield, the chief City of Turgea or Turgow, in their war against Sigismund of Austria; to this war the Cantons were inci∣ted by Pope Pius or Aeneas Silvius, who excommunicated Sigismund for im∣prisoning Cardinal Cusan, Bishop of Brixia or Bresse. Vitodurum or Winterdur, is a town in Kyburg belonging to the Canton of Zurich, it was then under the Au∣strian;  this town suspecting that the Tigurins would surprise them, shut their Gates on the Fare-day of S. Gall against the Country people, and would not open them upon any intreaties of the Governour of Zurich: Hereupon Zurich forbids all commerce with this Town, and the Austrian strengthens it with a garrison: The Tigurins with the other Cantons besiege Vitodurum; so at last the Switzers obtain, ann.
1460. the Country of Turgow with the Towns of Diessenhow on the Rhine, and Frawenfield: this war also of the Cantons with the Austrian was hastned on by two brothers, Vigil and Bernard Gradlers, who being oppressed by Sigismund, appealed for justice to the Cantons. There are also under the Switzers nine Bailiages or governments, to wit, the County of Bade, the free Provinces, Turgow, Sarunetes or Sargaris, Rhegusi or the Valley of Rhin, Lugano, Locarne, Mendrise, and the Valley of Madie; the last four are beyond the Alpes in Italy, and speak Italian, the rest speak Dutch. Bada is subject to the Cantons of Zurich, Lucern, Uri, Suits, Underwald, Zug, Glaris, and Bern; these are also Lords of Turgow, except Bern: the ju∣dicature of criminal causes was taken from Frederick of Austria in the  Council of Constance, and pawned by Sigismund the Emperour to the City of Constance; but ann. 1490. Maximilian Emperour bestowed it on the Switzers; the free Provinces are these Castles and Villages upon the left side of the river Russ, above and beneath Bregmarten; these are called free Provinces, because the three Villages of Megenberg, Richenfer, and Ergow or Villa Verbigena had their several jurisdictions and officers, as distinct provinces, but now are made one. This part anciently was called the County of Rore, it is now under the Cantons, namely Zurich, Lucerne, Uri, Suits, Underwald, Zug, and Glaris; it was taken by Lucern in the war between the Helvetian and Frederick of Austria; but the other Cantons claimed an equal share in the government with Lucerna, according to their ancient agreement, that all should be common, whatso∣ever was taken in that war; the matter was referred to Bern, whose verdict was for the equal sharing of the jurisdiction by the other Cantons: The Country is smal, therefore the governour who comes hither some times in the year hath his residence in the Abbey of Muren. Sarnuetes or Sargans, so called from the river Sara hard by them; this Town and Country belonged anciently to the Earls of Werdenberg, then to the Austrian; who sold it to the Earls of Tog, from whom the Earls of Sargans or Werdenberg redeemed it: At last, ann. 1483. George of Werdenberg sold it to the seven ancient Cantons, who send thither go∣vernours by turn, under whom the Town enjoys its old priviledges. Rhegu∣sci on the Rhene, are a part of the Grisons, they that dwell on the right side of the Rhene, are under the Austrian; but the inhabitants on the left side belong to the Switzers. Frederick Togg took all this Country from the Austrian by the Emperours command, at the Council of Constance. Afterward this country was divers times pawned and sold, till at last the Cantons of Zurich, Lucerne, Suits, Glaris, Uri, Underwald, Zug, having aided the Abbot of S. Gall against A∣penzel, obtained for their pay this country: afterward they admit the Abba∣tiscellans the ancient Lords thereof to a share in the government, so that now it is under eight Cantons. Beyond the Alpes, the Cantons have four Bailiages or Governments in Italy;  the first is Lugano, upon the Lake; the second is Locarne, where was a strong Castle, not inferiour to that of Millain; the third is Mendrisi; and the four is the Valley of Madia; Maximilian Sfortia Duke of Millain bestowed these upon 1513. the Cantons, for their service in beating the French out of Italy, by the com∣mand of Pope Iulius: he bestowed also on the Grisons the Val-Telin: but three years after, when Francis the French King had defeated the Switzers at Marig∣nan, and driven the Duke out of Millain, he confirmed this gift, and so have the succeeding Dukes of Millain done: All the Cantons send Governours thither, except Appenzel, because this was not then one of the Cantons, when the Switzers obtained this gift. Bilitonium is under the three Cantons of Uri,  Suits, and Underwald: this town belonged to the Earls of Misairk, till the Duke of Millain took it by force; but being retaken by the Earl, he sold it to Uri and Underwald; from whom the Duke recovered it by treachery: Since which time the Switzers have had many battels for regaining this place, the possession of which at last they obtained, almost eighty years after they had lost it: For whilest the French and Millainois were in continuall wars, the
1500.  Townsmen for quietnesse sake surrender themselves to the Cantons of Uri, from whom the French have often attempted to recover it, but in vain, it is now divided into three governments under the three Cantons. The Switzers have made divers leagues with their neighbours: with Millain ann. 1466. between Galeacius and Blanca Maria his wife, and the eight Cantons; then between Galeacius Maria Sfortia, and those of Uri about the Valley of Le∣pontia or Liviner: the Duke grants to Uri the civil jurisdiction of that Valley, who were for this to pay the Duke a yearly tribute, four Hawks and a cross-Bow. Ferdinand Gonzaga ann. 1552. governour of Millain, in the name of Charls the fifth Emperour, renews the league with the Switzers, which was to continue four years: after the death of Charls the fifth, this league hath not been renewed by the Kings of Spain, now Lords of Millain, with the Helvetian, though amity is carefully entertained between them; yet Philip the second of Spain made a confederacy with the six Catholick Cantons, to wit, Lucern, Ura∣nia, Suits, Silvania, Zug, and Friburg, for maintenance of the old Faith; this was confirmed at Millain, ann. 1588. the Catholicks of Appenzel were admit∣ted into the same society, ann. 1597. Sigismund of Austria made a perpetual league with the Switzers, which was confirmed by the Emperours Maximilian, Charles the fifth, and Ferdinand. This Sigismund was the son of Frederick, who carried away Pope Iohn from the council of Constance: he had many battles with the Switzers, by whom  being often beat, he labours to draw aid from King Lewis of France; but he who had felt the Switzers valour at the council of Basil, would not meddle in the busines: then he implores the Burgundian, to whom he mortgageth some countries neer Helvetia, that he might purposely quarrel with the Switzers; but the Burgundian governour was so tyrannical, that Sigismund was glad upon the earnest entreaty of his oppressed subjects to redeem again the mort∣gage, and to make a league, that was to be renewed every ten years with the Switzer against the Burgundian, whose power was too great for either of them apart. Ann. 1474. not onely Sigismund of Austria, but also Renatus of Lor∣rain, with the Bishops of Strasburg, Basil, and divers cities, entred into confe∣deracy  with Helvetia against the Burgundian: but after he was slain, Sigismund being childlesse, resignes his principality to Maximilian the Emperour, reser∣ving onely to himself an annual pension; this Emperour renews the Austrian league with Helvetia, ann. 1511. in which was comprehended the house of Bur∣gundy, and his Nephew Charles now under his tuition, with the twelve Can∣tons, Appenzel, the Abbot and Town of S. Gall. Maximilian also promiseth for his Nephew Charles, that he will yearly pay to each Canton two hundred crowns as a present in Zurich; to the Abbot and Town of S. Gall, and to Appen∣zel, to each of them 100. crowns, till Charls be of years that he can manage his Dominions himself, who was also to confirm this League, which he did, ann:  1543. o far as concerned the house of Burgundy, for Austria was then under the government of his brother Ferdinand. The Dukes of Savoy did anciently entertain amity with Bern, Friburg, and Soluerre; and Charls father to Philbert made a league of twenty five years with all the Cantons, ann. 1512. during which, the Duke was to pay yearly to each Canton at Bern two hundred crowns: about the end of this league, Duke Charls lost the greatest part of his Dutchie to King Francis of France; in this war Bern in defence of their confederats of Geneva, seised upon some part of the Dutchy: the renewing of this league was interrupted by the wars of Charls 5. now pro∣tector  of Savoy, against the French in Piemont; but afterward Philbert son to Duke Charles being restored to his Dominions by the French, made a perpe∣tual league with six Cantons of Lucern, Suits, Uri, Underwald, Zug, and Soluerre, and after this, the other Cantons joyned in this confederacy. Of the French kings, Lewis 11. was the first that made a league with, and paid to the Switzers an annual pension: this was
after he had tried their va∣lour  at Basil, where he lost 6000 men by 1600 Switzers; In hatred also of the Burgundian, by whom he had been lately beaten, he makes this league for ten years, promising to each Canton a stipend of 7000 Franks. Charles 8. sonne to this Lewis, renewed the league an. 1483. and imployed the Switzers in his war against the Duke of Britany, whom he overcame, and also in the Nea∣politan war. Lewis 12. his successor made a league of twelve years with them, that by their help he might again recover Millan. This war being ended, Lewis refuseth to pay any more the Switzers pension, wherefore they in anger make a league with Pope Iulius 2. an. 1510. by this means Sfortia is repossessed of Millan, and the French beat out. Francis Valois son-in-law to Lewis suc∣ceeded,  who beat the Switzers, and carried the Duke of Millan prisoner into France; but shortly after he made a stable league with the Cantons, consider∣ing how conducible their amity was to France, and promiseth to pay yearly to each Canton 2000 franks, and as much to the Valesians; to the Grisons as much as Lewis 12. paid them, and 2000 franks over and above; to the Abbot of S. Gall and to his subjects, and to those of Toggenburg, 600 franks; to the City of S. Gall, 400. to Mulhouse, 400. to those of the County of Gruer, 600. and it is agreed, that the places heretofore under the protection of Millan shall enjoy now under France their ancient privileges: many other articles were concluded between them, and ratified at Friburg, in the yeare 1516. It was further agreed five years after, That the French king might at his pleasure, when he was threatned with war, raise six thousand Switzers at least, and not above sixteen thousand without the Magistrates permission; these levies the Cantons must not hinder or call back, except they be in danger themselves of invasion; but the French king is not to imploy the Switzers in any sea-service, but on the land onely; if the Switzers be invaded, the French king is to furnish them on his own charges with two hundred men compleatly armed, or else two thousand crowns every three moneths, besides twelve peeces of ordance, and a thousand franks yearly to each Canton during this league, which was to continue three yeares after  the death of King Francis: his son Henry who succeeded made a new league with the Switzers, on the same articles which were agreed upon by his fa∣ther; this continued five yeares after his death; in this the Switzers were not to aid the French in recovering their lost dominions in Italy, but were to help him in regaining the town and province of Bolon in Picardy: this league was made at Salodor, an. 1549. in which all the Cantons were included except the Tigurins and Bernois. Lastly, Charles 9. sonne to King Henry, renewed the former league; so did Henry 4. who promised to pay the Switzers for their arrears due to them, a million of gold. The sixe Catholike Cantons are al∣lowed 1622. to continue their league with Millan and Savoy.
CHAP. IX. The Swedish History, from the year 1590. till the year 1631. SIgismund son to Iohn is declared King of Swethland, an. 1590. He returns from his kingdom of Poland, and is crowned at Upsalia king of Swethland. Francis Malaspina Bishop of Urbin and the Popes Legat, was earnest to inaugurate the King after the Pontifician manner, hoping thereby to reduce the Roman religion into that kingdome; but he was opposed by the Parlia∣ment, chiefly by Adam Andracan Archbishop of Upsalia, who told the Legat, that it was against the custome and lawes of that kingdom, for any except the  Archbishop of Upsalia to set the Crown on the Kings head, besides (saith he) the King must swear to maintain the Augustine Confession exhibited to Charls 5. sixty four years ago, and no other Religion in that kingdom but that which was established by Gustavus and Iohn 3. the Kings late predecessors; in the Parliament of Upsalia. The King perceiving that all the Assembly sided with Adam, he was content to receive his inauguration from him; his Coronation∣oath was given him by the Chancellor of Swethland, by which he promiseth to maintain justice and truth, to suppresse vice, to govern the kingdome with P. Charles and the Swedish parliament, to admit no strangers into his counsels or chief offices of his kingdom; that he will lay no taxes on his people except  he be thereto necessitated by wars, or the marriages of his children, or repa∣ration of decayed castles; that he will maintain the priviledges of the Nobi∣lity, Clergy and people, and their peace and welfare. Then in the Parliament some lawes were enacted for governing of the kingdom in the Kings absence, who the next Iune after returned to Poland. But within few years after, in the Parliament held at Stockholm he was deposed by the States of Swethland; and 1599: the next year 1600. in the Parliament at Lincophen, he with his children and posterity are totally excluded from the kingdom of Sweden, because contrary to the will and admonition of his Grandfather he fell off from the Protestant to the Roman religion, and invaded Sweden his native soile with an army of strangers, to the great danger of undoing his Uncle Charles, the Nobility, Clergy, and whole Kingdome, which is grieved for that his Majesty hath in this violated his promises and Coronation-oath, for which cause they were forced to renounce all fealty and allegiance to him: yet in regard of their love to him, they are content that his son shall sit upon his throne, if so be his Majesty will resolve within six moneths to send him hither to be instructed in the Protestant faith, under D. Charles his Majesties uncle, and the other Peers of Swethland; but if the King refuse to perform this within the prefixed time, they must disinherit him and his posterity; therefore they beseech his Ma∣jesty not to slight the humble petition of his Kingdom, nor welfare of his  posterity. The six moneths prefixed for the Kings resolution being past, and no an∣swer from him, a Parliament is called, in which Duke Charles is desired to un∣dertake the kingdom, which he refused, till the other six moneths were ex∣pired, in which the young Prince was to be sent to be instructed in the new religion and laws of the kingdome, that when he should attain the full age of 24 years, he might be crowned, and not before. In the mean time they desire Duke Charls to manage the State-affairs during the Princes minority, whether he come or not; and withall they are resolved, if D. Charls die before this time,  to choose three eminent men to govern the State, and to breed the young Princes in the Protestant faith; it is also enacted, that if Sigismunds son suc∣ceeds to the crown, he shall provide an honorable maintenance for his Uncle Duke Iohn, in his Dutchy of Ostrogoth, and that he shall permit D. Gustavus Adolphus son to D. Charles to inherit without molestation his fathers Duke∣dome in as ample manner as his father possessed
it; it is likewise ordered, that  if the King suffers himself to be dethroned, that Duke Charles shall succeed; and if he die before any of the young Princes be fit for government, he shall be governour whom Duke Charles shall name in his last will and testament; but if he neglect to name any, then the State will chuse two or three faithful governours, till the young Princes descended of Prince Iohn, or of Duke Gustavus Adolphus shall be of years, it being in the power of the State to chuse which of them they shall think fittest for government. In the mean while, because King Sigismund had falsified his oath, departed twice out of the Kingdome without leave, sent Armies of aliens against his native Country, and hath refused to give any answer to their petition, therefore they dis∣inherit  him and his posterity; they also order that Prince Iohn shall have for his maintenance the Dutchy in Othrogoth, which once was possessed by Duke Magnus, except such Territories as belong to Duke Charles by patent, instead of which Duke Iohn shall have other lands of the same value, so that Duke Iohn shall content himself with these, expecting nothing else in this King∣dome, except what he can claim by right of inheritance: It is also ordered that the Duke shall entertain none that goeth about to sow discord between the Regal and Ducal families, but such only as study the peace and welfare of both families so nearly linked in blood; withall they humbly beseech Duke Charles for the present to accept of the Crown, as being most worthy thereof  by reason of his many good offices he hath done to this Kingdome, especially in promoting the Protestant faith against all opposition, to the hazard of his life and estate; and this they make known by their Legats to foreign Princes, that Duke Charles used not any sinistrous means to attain this Crown, but was again and again urged and pressed by the joynt importunity of Peers and people to accept the same, and therefore they resolve to admit of none other for their King, but Duke Charles, to whom they swear allegiance, and resolve to give him all the rights and honours belonging to the Crown of Sweden, though he should refuse the ceremony of Coronation: They also enact, that after the death of Duke Charles, his sonne Gustavus Adolphus shall succeed to the Crown, and after him his lawful heirs male successively; but if Duke Charles his heirs male should fail, then Duke Iohn and his heirs shall succeed so long as that line shall remain; which Iohn and his successours shall swear never to make any league or union with King Sigismund, or his heirs, tending to their obtaining any foot again in the government of this Kingdome: Iohn also must take heed that he never go about to pro∣mote Papacie, except he with his whole progeny will lose their interest for ever in this Kingdome: They also advise Duke Charles, that during his sonnes minority, he would nominate a faithful and prudent Governour and Tutor, who after his death might wisely administer the Kingdome, till  his sonne attain the age of four and twenty, and that this governour shall be a Swede, and no alien. After the States had sworn fealty and allegiance to Duke Charles the son of Gustavus Duke of Suderman, Nericia, and Wermeland; he undertook the go∣vernment of the Kingdome, but without the name or title of King, and so continued till the year 1607. when by the joynt consent of the States, he was crowned King of Sweden, to whom, and to his son Gustavus after him, and to his successours the inheritance of the Crown is confirmed by a solemn oath of Parliament. He had before this taken from the Polonian a great part of Livo∣nia. Upon his second son Duke Charles Philip they confer his fathers Dutchy  of Suderman, Nericia and Wermeland, with other spiritual and secular juris∣dictions possessed by Duke Charles his father, before he attained the Crown; Duke Iohn shall inherit the Dutchy of Duke Magnus: If Duke Gustavus Adolphus dye without issue male, then his brother Duke Charles Philip, and the males of his body lawfully begotten, shall succeed to the Crown; if these fail, then Duke Iohn and his heirs male
shall inherit the Kingdome; in default  of these, he shall succeed that is next to them in blood: but if the whole Gustavian masculine race fail, then the females shall possesse the Crown in as ample manner as the males, and it shall be lawful for them to chuse their own husbands, so that they are not Papists, nor enemies to the State, nor strangers, but of some Noble family of Sweden, or some German Prince descended from Gustavus, of the Augustan faith; if the Queen shall do otherwise, she must look to be dethroned: they promise also to provide honourable maintenance for the other Royal or Ducal daughters, who must not marry without consent of Parliament; neither must any of the Kings or Dukes sons take to themselves wives of another Religion, or marry of their own head, without acquainting the States, and if any shall perswade or counsel them to do otherwise, or  to change his Religion, he shall be guilty of High-treason; and whosoever refuses to imbrace the Augustan confession, shall forfeit his estate to the next of blood, and shall be banished the Kingdome: It is also enacted, that none of the Blood-royal of Sweden shall inherit this Crown, if he accepts of any for∣reign Kingdome, except he make his perpetual residence in the Kingdome of Sweden; seeing Sigismunds accepting of the Kingdome of Poland, and residing out of this his native Kingdome, hath occasioned so much mischief, as hath almost ruined it. The Kingdome being established in King Charles and his heirs, he reigned four years, in which time he had war with the Danes; in this he fell into a 1611.  disease which killed him, the 61. year of his life; he left behinde him two sons, Gustavus Adolphus, and Carolus Philippus, with one daughter; he had wars with the Polonian in Livonia, where he was defeated: He had better success before he was King, when he killed two thousand of Sigismunds Army, seised on his camp and money, and caused him to deliver up the Chancellour, and other incendiaries to punishment: nor was he successeful in his wars against the Danes, for Christianus 9. of Denmark, having sent a Herauld to Charles for restoring of the Danish ships he took, was slighted, and no answer at all re∣turned; whereupon the Dane besiegeth Calmaria a strong Town in Swethland; and at last takes it by storm, in which men women and children were put to  the sword by the inraged souldier; though the Town was taken, yet the Castle held out. In the interim the Swedes took Christianopolis from the Danes by a stratagem: for this Town had sent letters to the King for some Auxili∣aries; these letters being intercepted by the Swede, a garrison is sent with Danish colours lately taken; so the Town is surprised, burnt, and most of the Inhabitants slain; the Dane takes divers ships from the Swede, and beats him again out of Calmaria, after he had retaken it: upon this the governour of the Castle surrenders that also to the Dane, where were a hundred and eight brasse Guns, and six war-ships, with all their furniture; divers other Castles also surrendred to the Dane, which so incensed Charles, that he sends a challenge to Christianus for a duel, which was rejected and laughed at by the Dane, wherefore King Charles with grief and age fell sick and died the next moneth; about the end of that year most of the Swedish ships were taken by the Danes at Elsburg, the other Key as it were of Sweden, and five months after the Castle is surrendred. To Charles succeeded his son Gustavus Adolphus, he was crowned at four and twenty years of age; three years after he married with Mary Eleonor sister 1617. to George William Elector of Brandenburg, she bare him a daughter Christiana by name, who died the same year she was born in; then she bare him another daughter called also Christiana, who now reigns, she was declared heir to the  Crown in the Diet at Stockholm; for Duke Charles Philip hereditary Prince of 1627. Swethland, and Duke of Suderman, died childlesse in Livonia. The Danes ha∣ving taken Calmaria and Elsburg, the two chief Forts of Sweden upon the Baltic, and Hesperian sea, divers cruel battels being also fought, and the plague raging among them, a peace is
concluded, in which the Swede was to  leave off the title and claim he had to Lapponia; he was also by Articles to pay to the Dane towards the charges of this war 12 Tuns of gold, till which be paid Elsburg shall be left in pawn. Gustavus after divers hot disputes with his uncle 1628. of Poland, whom many times he foiled, at last made an honourable Truce for six years; he took in Newburg and Strasburg, being aided by Leather-guns, inven∣ted then by one Elias Tripus; the Polander recovered again Newburg, who laid siege also to Strasburg, but was beaten off by Oxenstern the Chancellor; from Meva he was driven back by the King of Swede, notwithstanding the Polan∣der was assisted by the Imperial forces, therefore he was forced to make peace with Gustavus, who restored to him Strausburg, Dirsavia, and Fraeberg, but re∣tained what he took in Livonia and Borussia, some Towns were sequestred  into the hands of Brandenburg; the two Kings promise mutual assistance to each other against any third party that shall make war upon either of them. Gustavus being angry that the Emperour Ferdinand 2. had sent aid to the Polander against him in Borussia, and had rejected his Ambassadours at the Treaty of Lubec; he complains by his Legat to General Walstein, of the Army sent against him under Aruheim: Walstein answers the King scornfully, that be∣cause Caesar had so many Armies, he was forced for want of other employment to send this to his friend the King of Poland against the Swede; besides Gustavus was earnestly invited by the banished Princes of Germany, and chiefly by the Protestants who daily complained of the wrongs they suffered, to come to their assistance; he was also jealous of some plots intended against his King∣dome, when Duke Albert of Fridland, in the Emperours right, arrogated to himself the title of High-admiral of the Ocean and Baltick seas, which title never any Emperour had before usurped; the pyracies also exercised upon the Swedish ships did much afflict and grieve him, therefore he complains to the Imperial Electors (who in right of the Empire were to take notice of the differences between Princes) but when he saw no redresse, nor hopes of peace, he sends abroad his Declarations, that all might take notice how he was ne∣cessitated to take Arms; therefore having prepared a Navy, he enters the Isle of Rugia on Midsummer-day, where as soon as he came on shore, he fell on 1630. his knees, giving thanks to God for so happy a beginning of his expedition, praying for a happy successe in his counsels and actions; and then presently he falls upon Wolgast, which he took, having driven thence the Imperialists; they who were in Caminum and Iulinum, set fire on their Towns, and went their way; then he makes Stetinum the other Metropolis of Pomerania to side with him, shewing that he meant not to withdraw Pomerania from the Empire, or to bring it under the Scepter of Sweden, but rather to defend it against un∣just violence and tyranny; upon this Duke Bogislaus enters into a league with him: this Country at that time was in a woful condition, being worse  used by the souldiers that quartered amongst them, then by an open enemy. Stargand was seised upon by the Swedes in the night, who drove thence the Caesarians. Pasevalcum being exhausted with contributions, and robbed of all her prime men, receives gladly two troops of Swedish horse or Dragoons; upon this Gotzius sends thither such a multitude of Imperial souldiers, that the unarmed and fearful Town was not able to resist, and so the Swedes saved themselves by flight, the Townsmen were massacred, the women abused, their wealth plundered, and the Town with the Churches, notwithstanding the intreaties of the Clergy, were consumed to ashes; this was in September: the  Iuly before, Pecunum received the same measure from the Imperialists, though it was not tainted with rebellion. About this time a Diet is called at Ratisbone; the Protestant Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg refuse to be there in person, but send their Ambassa∣dours; the Popes Legats were there, by whom the league is renewed; and it is ordered that a great Army shall be raised
to force the Princes to make  restitution of the Church-goods; the Emperor by his Edict complaining of the wrongs done him by the Swede, whom he never offended, in making an hostile invasion upon Germany, threatneth proscription of all those who shall any wayes assist him; he commands also that all shall be ready with men, money and provision against the Swedes: The King on the other side protests, that he desires nothing more then the peace of the Church, and that the Empe∣ror would admit a Treaty to that purpose; but in the mean while he prosecutes the war, for he takes in the Castle of Wolgasten, and by that means got a great part of Pomerania to side with him; then he falls upon divers other places which made resistance, as Tratsund, Barth, and the Castle of Damgart, which he took by storm, and put the Garrison to the sword; upon this Ribbenitza a Town in the Dutchy of Megapolis on the confines of Pomerania, opened her gates to him: then the King by his Edict wisheth the Megapolitans to forsake the Fridlanders, and to receive again their lawful Dukes Adolphus Frederick, and Iohn Albert, unjustly driven out, otherwayes he will proceed against them as Rebels with fire and sword, this his demand being grounded on Justice, Consanguinity and Religion: The same Edict he sends to Rostoch three miles off, but there he was prevented by a thousand Imperial horse, who de∣siring leave to passe through the City staid there, and seised on it for the Duke of Fridland, and furnished it with all kinde of provision; but Francis Charles  Duke of Lavenberg, having raised some forces about Albis, took in Bousenburg, Winshem and other places for the Swede; but the sudden comming of Remacrus Colonel of a thousand Imperialists, made him retreat to Raceburg, where be∣ing denied entrance into the Castle, is taken prisoner by Count Pappenheim, who pursued him with some troops. Colberg mean while, a Sea-port in Pome∣rania, is besieged by the Swedes; Torquatus General of the Caesarian forces in those parts did what he could to raise the siege, which continued all that bit∣ter Winter till the end of February, during which time there was great exe∣cution on both sides, but at last the King took it by Gustavus Horn, and put to flight the Imperialists: in the interim the Diocesse of Magdeburg which Chri∣stian  William governour thereof had recovered, is again invaded by the Im∣perialists, who with their multitudes over-ran many places thereabouts, and at length laid siege to Magdeburg Metropolis of Saxony; thither the King sent Theodoricus Falkenberg to assist the governour; all the provision and Arms that were in Alensleb lately taken, were transported to Magdeburg; but being besieged by Pappenhem, he is forced to give up the Town, who with his souldiers swear never to bear Arms thenceforth against the Em∣peror. The ruine of this City was presaged by the fall of one of the Towers of S. Katharines Church, and shortly after, Novem. 26. by the overthrow of the  other Tower caused by a violent wind; about the same time the Tower of S. Iohns Church fell, and with its weight beat down the roof of the Church; the same ruine befel the Churches of S. Ann, Gertrudis, and Sudenburg; the arched Gallery or Cloyster from the Bishops Palace to the Cathedral Church fell down at the same time; five Wind-mils, and six Water-mils were over∣thrown by the winds, besides great hurt done to divers houses: Thus God doth use to shew his sword before he strikes, that he may excite us to repentance, prepare us with patience, or make us inexcusable if we slight his warnings. Germany at this time was in a sad condition, being torn in peeces by so many Armies. About the end of this year, the King of Swede had twelve  thousand horse, and four and thirty thousand foot, his Army then consisted of 1630. Germans, Swedes, Finlanders, besides three Troops of Laplanders who in the midst of Winter came to him in skins, these were all Archers; the Emperors Armies were far more numerous, but lesser disciplined, and more rapacious. George Elector of Brandeburg, being pressed on the one side
by the Emperor,  on the other by the King who married his sister, within his Provinces mo∣lested by theeves and robbers, without affrighted with the Northern guests who sought to quarter with him; to save his Country from ruine, he com∣mands his subjects to be in Arms, and to seise upon all high-way men, though in souldiers apparrel. On Christmasse-day the same year, the King takes by storm Griffenhage of Pomerania, so that this Country is now cleared from the Imperialists, who were all killed or fled, and forced to leave their plunderings behinde them: the King upon this giveth solemne thanks to God at Stetin, and causeth his Army in their camp to do the like, to whom he prescribed certain forms of prayer, all praising God for this former years  successe. About the beginning of the next year, Lewis 13. of France sends Hercules 1631. de Charnace Ambassador, to take up the difference between the Kings of Poland and Swede, and to make a league of five years between France and Swethland, for defence of the Ocean and Baltick-seas, for restitution of the afflicted and banished Princes of Germany, and for demolishing the Forts which have been built among the Grisons since the beginning of this German War; for this end the Swede shall maintain thirty thousand foot, and six thousand horse, towards the charges of which the French will pay him yearly forty thousand Imperials; that levies of men shall be permitted in  either Kingdome, and that the Religion in Germany shall be exercised as hitherto it was by the Imperial Edicts; King Charles also of Britain sends some Forces under the conduct of Marquesse Hamilton into Pomerania. About this time the charge of the Imperial Army is taken from Albert Duke of Fridland, because the Catholick Princes did suspect him, and is conferred upon Count Tilly, who is made Generalissimo of all, both Caesa∣rian and confederate Armies; he presently views the Armies, reforms the Military discipline now grown loose, buyes up all kinde of provision, and furnisheth such places as he found weak with Men and Arms: the King sends some Regiments to Gustavus Horne for taking in of Landsberg,  hee marcheth himself with sixteen thousand to Demmin, and in his way takes upon surrender New-Brandenburg, with some Castles: Treptovia is for∣saken by the Imperialists: Malchin is surrendred to the Swedes. About the midst of February, Demmin is besieged, seated in the confines of Merchlenberg; so is Colberg in Pomerania, and Landsberg in Merchia, all three at the same time by the Kings Forces: Demmin not being able to hold out, is surrendred by the Governour with the Castle, where was good store of ordnance and victuals; the Governour with the Garrison is permitted to march whither they will. About the end of February, Colberg yeeldeth, the Go∣vernour with nine companies of foot, and six of horse, have leave to  march away, but without their colours, to Landsberg; in Colberg was great store of Ammunition, but no victuals, so that the Garrison was forced by famine to yeeld; five dayes after the surrender, some Forces were com∣ming with provision to relieve the Towne, these narrowly escaped from being taken by the Swedes: Landsberg held out the siege till the end of April. A strange thing fell out at Rostoch; for one Varmeier a Townsman killed Hatzfield the Governour with a blow of an axe in the neck, affirming he was induced thereto by an Angel; neither would he acknowledge any fault he had done in this, though he was tortured with divers torments to death. Count Tilly, to retaliate these losses, takes New-Brandeburg by storm,  and puts the Garrison to the sword; he takes Kniphus the Governour with his wife and daughters prisoners; in the very Church was the Consul with the Townsmen murthered, nine Colours were taken, the Town expo∣sed to plunder, and then forsaken; he lost in this siege and storm about two thousand of his men: thence Tilly
returnes to Magdeburg, because hee  could not set upon the King being intrenched; in his march he lost some of his men by the Swedish horse, which took Liebenwald and New-Brandeburg dis∣armed by the Tillians; the Magdeburgers in Tillys absence had made some ex∣cursions, and furnished their City with Arms and Victuals; but when he re∣turned about the end of March, they were quickly driven out of their works which they had made without the Town, therefore finding they were not strong enough to oppose Tilly's forces, they set fire on Sudenburg, and the new City, which were their Suburbs; mean while the Swedish King be∣siegeth Francofurt upon the river Viadrus whose Suburbs also the Garrison burned down, but the King unexpectedly taketh the City by force upon  Palmsunday, where he found much provision and wealth, two thousand Im∣perialists were here killed, and eight hundred taken prisoners, Scaumburg, Tieffenbach, and Monticaculas the chief Commanders, with the common soul∣diers fled; the City was so miserably plundered, that the enemy was sorry to see it, who with much ado made the souldiers give off; seventeen dayes after, Landsberg is surrendred to the King, five and twenty companies of foot, and twelve of horse, went out with their colours flying: Silesia is now laid open to the Swedish souldiery; Old-Brandeburg about the end of April is forsaken by the Tillians, the Elector of Brandeburg is summoned by the King to deliver up the two chief holds of his Electorate Gustrinum and  Spandavia to the Swede, who promiseth to restore them as soon as he shall raise the siege from Magdeburg; to this the Elector would not assent till he saw Berlinum besieged, and then he was content to give up Spandavia, where the Garrison took the oath of Allegiance to both Princes; the Elector of Saxony Iohn George is desired by the King to let him have free passage through his Country, and to joyn his forces with him in raising the siege from Magdeburg; the Elector would yeeld to neith demand, fearing to make his Country the seat of warre, which hitherto had been quiet, nor did he think it either safe or warrantable to maintain the Magdeburgers against the Emperor, though they complained of the wrongs offered them by Caesar, notwithstand∣ing  they shewed all obedience to him; therefore now they were in hope to be assisted by their own Prince, and the Swedish victorious Army, but their security deceived them, for whilst the King was doubting whether he might safely relieve the Magdeburgers or not, Count Pappenhem comes with more forces to the siege; if the Town had foreseen this, they would have strengthened their Garrison with more men, for now they had not above two thousand foot that were sound, and two hundred and fifty horse, yet they made divers sallies out of the Town, even three in one day, to the losse of the besiegers: Tilly summons them to surrender, or else they should look for no mercy; their answer was that they would submit if so be they  could have liberty to send to the Electors and confederate Cities for their advice herein; mean while the Imperialists draw nearer with their works to the City, and prepare to storm; at the first the Townsmen and Garrison stoutly beat them off, but their power failing them, they could make no use of their great Guns: the Caesarians on the tenth of May, the fatal day of that City, perceiving the works towards the new Town, low, and the watch asleep, who did not think the enemy would have stormed so great a Town, that day being already past seven of the clock, resolve to fall first on there; then was the Bishop with Falkenberg and the Senate in the Councel-house, conferring about sending of a Trumpeter to Tilly, who proffered to save the Town, and procure their pardon, if they would deliver up their Bishop and Ministers to him, and receive thirty Roman Catholick Doctors, pay a hundred thousand Dollers, and admit a garrison; but this was rejected, where∣upon Pappenhem with his forces falls upon that part of the works which was weakest; his word was Iesus Maria, their mark or badge, a white-ribban about the arm; in the very first encounter, Falkenberg
who came to make  good that place which Pappenhem had assaulted, was slain, and so that part of the City is lost; the Garrison and Townsmen fought stoutly so long as they were able, till the Caesarians to quiet them set the City on fire, which proved as prejudicial to the besiegers, who thereby lost their plunder, as to the Townsmen who lost their habitations; for the fire was so violent by reason of the wind, that this great and stately City was in the space of four and twenty hours burnt down to the ground, in which six Parish Churches were consumed in the same fire, all the Churches, streets and high-wayes were covered with dead bodies, in the Cathedral of S. Catherine were found three and fifty mur∣thered, the Governour being wounded in his head and thigh is carried away  prisoner, with most of the chief men and Ministers; the barbarous souldier spares neither sex nor age, abusing even young girles to death; yet the High∣church, and the Monastery of S. Mary were saved from the fire, and so were 139. houses, but all the inhabitants were either slain or taken, the number of the slain is not certain, but it is reported that two and twenty thousand were flung into the river Albis which flows by the City; six hundred Townsmen were chained, though they were able to ransome themselves; some made an escape by a sudden fire in the enemies camp, a great many being stript of all were forced to beg, most of the Ministers were preserved and provided for by their Fellow-protestants; the destruction of this City (which had now stood, and been a Metropolitan about seven hundred years since Otho the  first, who fenced, adorned, and honoured it with this dignity) was presaged by a Throne set in Cassiopaea, by sounds in the air like the discharging of Ordnance, by strange obscurity in the air, by the fall of divers Towers, and by a monstrous birth which was taken out of the dead mother, the childs head was covered with a peece of flesh like a helmet which could be easily taken off, he was cloathed with a skin like a souldiers jacquet, with round kernels like bullets in it, he had also boots on his legs: God by this would let us see, that as the birth of this Monster was the death of the mother, so that Town or Country which breeds armed souldiers within them, are at last destroyed by them. CHAP. X. The prosecution of the Swedish History under Gustavus, from 1631. till the midst of 1633. THe same day that Magdeburg was buried in her own ashes, the Caesarians burnt down the bridge of Dessavia, with the Fort joyning to it, to hinder the Swedes passage that way, who were much perplexed for the  estate of that City which they neglected to relieve, the King being busie upon a Treaty with the two Electors of Saxony and Brandenburg, whose confede∣racie he desired; a great part of his Army took up their quarters about Crosna and Glogove in Silesia: Gustavus Horn was raising new forces in Marchia, there∣fore Spandavia is again demanded by the King, Custrinum is delivered up to him; upon Marchia is laid a monthly taxe of thirty Dollers towards the charges of the war. In Iune news was brought to the King that Ghryphiswald which he meant to take in, was already subdued by the Swedish horse who were riding up and down the Country, about the Town, for fodder: Perusius the governour, Knight of the Golden-fleece, hearing some Musquets shot off, runs out to know what the matter was, and was suddenly killed with a Mus∣quet bullet, not thinking he had been so near the enemy; upon this the Town is presently besieged by the Swedes, who send a summons to the Townsmen and Garrison to surrender; the Souldiers within, though they had lost their Captain, yet venture to sally out upon the enemy, but are beat
back again  into the Town, who despairing of any succour, resolve to preserve themselves; therefore Iune 16. they deliver up the Town to the Swedes, who found in it great store of military provision. So now the Imperialists are quite driven out of Pomerania. This Country being now secured, the Swedes march into Marchia, where they seise upon Werbena, a place fit for their encamping, and for all sorts of provision. The Imperialists under Gotzius invade the Town Cotbus in the dark which they take and plunder. Tilly's Army quarters at Mansfield, and plunders the neighbour country of Thuringia. The Elector of Saxony cals a Diet at Lipsick, of both the Saxonies, Marchia, Hassia, Franconia, & Suevia, where∣in  was proposed, what was the best and next expedient for restoring peace into Germany: There were present the Legats of the two Dukes of Megapolis, A∣dolphus Frederick, and Iohn Albertus, whom Caesar had driven out of their an∣cient possessions; these raised an Army, and being assisted by the Swedes, re∣solve to retake their possessions again. Albert took in Severin, Adolphus Frede∣rick Butzovium a Bishops seat being forsaken by the VVallenstenians who as they were going to Rostoch with their booty, were stript of all. The King himself did accompany the two Dukes his kinsmen, in great state to Gustrovia, where he gave them possession of their ancient inheritance: thence he marcheth to Magdenberg, and by the way seiseth on Tangermund; then he pitches his Camp  neer Werben, and gives charge to some Commanders to take in Haverberg, and resolves to be revenged for the losse of Magdenberg, with all the strength he hath; in the mean time, Queen Maria Elenor arrives at Wolgast with some young souldiers out of Swethland; Marquesse Hambleton, and Alexander Lesly bring eight hundred Scots and English into Pomerania. At Lipsick it is ordered that the Imperial Army, which made but a prey of Germany, should not be ad∣mitted within any of their Towns, Castles, or Towers; and withall, they re∣solve not to part with any of the Church-lands now in possession of the Evan∣gelical Princes, because the Pope claimed them not by way of justce and law, but by violence and the sword; besides, it was a businesse to be decided in a  full Diet of Princes, and not by the Emperour alone; therefore, VVilliam Lant∣grave of Hassia raiseth an forces for the defence of his borders: to hinder this levy, Tilly hastneth to Erford, which he so affrighted, that the town presently openeth the gates to him; then he draws neerer to the borders of Cattie to hin∣der the raising of the Hassians; but Pappenhem, who did yet remain about Mag∣deburg, got him to divert his army elsewhere, for the King had marched over old Marchia, where he took divers Towns, and was come to VVolmarstad to seise upon the strengths of Magdenburg, but that he was kept off by a greater power. Tilly perceiving there was no other way but with his whole Army to fall up∣on  the King, sends a part of his Horse before, he follows after with the body of his Army; Gustavus having intelligence of his march, and not being able to encounter with so vast an Army, intends to weaken some part of it; therefore he sends Rheingravius, with some other Cornets of Horse, who fell upon and discomfited three Imperial regiments, and return with rich booty; but Charls Ludovick the Palatine, who in this war served under the King, was shot, to the said Kings great grief. Tilly, to recover his losse, began to draw neer the Swe∣dish Camp, but could not draw the King to fight; yet for three dayes toge∣ther there was discharging of Ordinance, and divers sharp velitations: at last, Tilly recedes with some losse. In Mansfield, Eggo Furstenbergius with his Italian  forces joyns himself to Tilly: he compels Suevia, and Franconia, to renounce the League of Lipsic, and to pay tribute to the Emperour. The Swedish Kings army is increased by the addition of these forces under Horn and Tottus: He gives two regiments to William the Lantgrave for Hassia, which was courted by the Imperialists to side with them. But to my purpose: at Franckfort on the Main an assembly was held of both parties for an accommodation, which
proved fruitlesse. Tilly to incourage his drooping souldiers, fals upon the Duke of Saxony, whose assistance he demands, and requires also an abolition of the decrees of Lipsick; this being denied by the Duke, Tilly fals upon Meresburg, sets Frebrug on fire, and plunders Mistnia far and neer, to the undoing of the inha∣bitants. The Elector accuseth Tilly for these wrongs; shewing how he had violated the Imperial Laws: he commemorates also his good services to the Emperour, and manifest that he hath been faithfull to him hitherto in every thing that belonged to him as Emperor, who therefore ought not to do any thing contrary to justice and his oath, which if he doe, he shall not escape the hand of a revenging God; but when the Duke saw that this way he could not  prevaile, he makes a firm league with the King of Sweden, and lets him enter his provinces; he openeth the gates Witteberg for him about the beginning of September: The Elector of Brandeberg having his Country exhausted with ributions and plunders, promiseth to aid him with all the provision and money he can raise; in this interim Tilly loses no time, but encompasses Lipsick wasting all the Country about it, and summons the City to open the gates to him; which returned answer, they could not without the consent of their Prince; whereupon Tilly prepares to storm, the Townsmen burn down their Suburbs, and make all things ready for defence: but the fresh example of Magdeburgs destruction, which was threatned to Lipsick, so terrified them, that they yeelded; the publique Faith is given to preserve Religion and the Com∣mon wealth; new garrisons are put in the City and Castle, the Electoral gar∣rison is discharged: But Fortune which hitherto fawned upon Tilly, begins now to frown, for the Saxon perceiving that he had lost a great part of his ju∣risdiction, held it needfull for him to fight; for he thought with himself that if Saxony, Thuringia, and Misnia should maintain three Armies all the Winter, they should be undone; he knew his cause was just, and resolves to rely on Gods Providence. But the King thought it not safe to hazard upon one battel two electorats, nor to venture the new and raw souldiers of Saxony against the old and beaten Imperial Troops; therefore held it better to procrastinate: yet at last, being  overcome by the Dukes importunity, prepares to fight, and first having solemnly called upon God in his prayer, he exhorts his Souldiers to piety and fortitude; his word was (God with us) his bage or mark, a green bough fast∣ned in their Helmets; he undertakes the leading of the right wing himself, the charge of left, he commit to the Duke; neer Podelvitza a Village, foure miles from Lipsick, is the place designed for the Battle; the Imperialists took the advantage of the ground, sun and wind, which the Sweds by degrees gained of them by wheeling about; the King mingled his Horse and Mus∣ketiers so, that they galled the Cesarians and beat them off. The Swedish left  Wing, consisting most of the new levied forces of Saxony, began to give ground, and to put Tilly in hope of victory; but they were opportunely aided by Horns foot, which lay in ambush in a little wood, that upon the encourage∣ment of Aruheim the fight is reneued, and the Cesarian horse put to flight, so that in a short time, the whole Army was rooted: the night comming on, and the ayre being obscured with dust, and the smoak of powder, made the king forbear pursuing of the enemy, fearing least there might be some treachery or ambush, therefore resolves the next day to fight again; but when the morn∣ing came, they found the enemy was totally defeated, by his Ordinance, bag, and baggage left behinde, there were found about fifteen thousand slain bo∣dy's;  Tilly himself was wounded, both Armies were almost equall in number, in all sixty thousand; the most of Tilly's force were old souldiers. This victo∣ry was presaged by a white-Dove that lighted upon one of the Saxon colours: some report that before the fight, water was turned into blood at Hall and Mer∣seburg; above one hundred Imperial Colours were taken; Tilly shot with a Bullet, which onely bruised his skin, but could not
peirce it, being made im∣penitrable,  as the Chyrurgion thought, by diabolical art; he escaped, not with∣out great pain of his bruise, to Hamelia. The King seised presently after this upon divers towns, and the Duke upon Lipsick, who gave publique thanks to God for recovering so soon again his lost territories: then it was agreed, that the King should march into upper Germany, the Duke into Silesia and Bo∣hemia. The King in his march takes in divers Towns and Castles, as Sueinfurt, Her∣bipolis, forsaken by the Bishop, with the Tower well furnished with all things; the garrison were all killed for resisting so long, but the women by the Kings Proclamation were preserved both from death and abuse: the Bishop of Bam∣berg out off fear, shakes of his catholique confederacy, and bindes himself by  oath to the King, and to keep off plundring pays a great summe of money; divers other places also were taken by the Swedes and Hassians, most towns of Francony sware allegiance to the King, who permitted to the subjects liberty of Conscience. In November also Hanovia is taken in for the King by Christopher Haubaldus. The Cesarian forces of lowerSaxony are much dejected upon the re∣port of the Lipsick victory; Rostoch is delivered up to the Megapolitans; here were five hundred horse, and fourteen foot companies, which made their peace, and marched away: VVismaria held out a while, and made some sallies upon the Swedes; but at last, on St. Thomas day, Gramminus the governour was forced to surrender, who marched out with three thousand souldiers towards  Gryphiswald, divers of which swear allegiance to the Swede. The Imperialists every where take their flight, supposing Tilly had been dead of his wounds, of whom there was no news a long time; at length it is reported, that he was re∣covered, and had raised a new Army. At Rottenberg another battel is fought, in which the Imperialists are again worsted; hereupon divers other towns sub∣mit to the Swedes; even Frankfort, famous for its Mart, and the Emperours Inauguration, opened her gates for the Swedish Army to passe. Upon the u∣niting of the Hassian forces, divers other places surrender, the Bishops of Mentz and VVorms, with Anshelm, Casimire, retire to Colen. About the 7 of December the King sends his army over the Rhene; five hundred of the first that got over, set upon fourteen troops of Spanish horse and chased them, which made the King thank God for the danger his men had escaped: Having passed the Rhene, he takes in Oppenhem; Stenie is forsook by the Spaniards, and VVorms by the Lorrenois. Mentz after a fierce storm for divers dayes is surrendred to the King, with the Tower and Fortifications; December 23. where he kept his Christmasse with great solemnity, and heard a Sermon in the Castle-Church: many other towns also shortly after the surrender of Mentz, submitted to the King, whose victorious Army over-run almost all Germany from the Baltick Sea to Mentz in one year; in which also fell out a great Earthquake in the kingdome of Naples, the eruption of Vesuvius, flinging great stones twenty miles off, and the ruine of the towers on the Jesuits Church in Vienna by the wind, even in the Emperours presence. The next year, Ambassadours are sent to the Swedish king; from France, Eng∣land, and Ragotzius the new Prince of Transilvania; the French Embassie was for a truce between the Swede and Maximilian Duke of Bavaria, with the Ca∣tholick confederats; which was granted; for these made shew, as if they meant to stand neuters; but Pope Urban was against this neutrality, therefore he raiseth great sums of money upon the Clergy of Italy, which he sent to the Em∣perour, and makes a league between the Elector of Bavaria and the German  Prelats. What the English Embassie was, we know not; but shortly after Fre∣derick the fifth, Palsgrave, was furnished with Gold out of England, and Soul∣diers out of Holland for the recovering of his Patrimony; for which end, he joyns himself with Gustavus. Ragotzius had discovered a plot intended against him by the Cesarians, which made him fall off and to seek occasion of excur∣sion upon Hungary and Silesia, if he could
have found any aide from the con∣federate  Protestants. In Bohemia, the Saxon Army under Aruhem takes Prague and divers other Towns thereabout; the Elector himself repaires thither and sets up again the Protestant religion; the heads of those which were set upon the bridge at Prague, he caused to be taken down, and decently buried; the banished Bohemians return to their homes again, and great joy every where there was, but of short continuance; for Albert VVallensten Duke of Fridland, whom the Emperour had laid aside upon the Petition of the confederate Ca∣tholiques, is now made Generalissimo, and suddenly furnished with a great Ar∣my; Iacobus Gallas and Count Sultzen joyn their forces with him, waste and plunder all the Country about Prague, which caused great dearth and scarcity of Victuals: so sudden a fear seised on Bohemia and Silesia, that both Countries  became a prey to the Imperialists, who could not for the Snow doe any great hurt in Misnia: the cold winter could not refrigerate the souldiers courage; the Swedish forces brak in upon Alsatia; the Caesarians plunder the country about Strasburg, whom a party of Horse from the City defeated and plundered; the fear of the conquerour over-ran the Dukedome of VVirtenberg, and the Mar∣quisat of Bada: the Imperialists are killed and chased every where; Frankin∣dal in the Lower Palatinate is besieged, and sundry other places are taken by the Swedes. In lower Saxony, the people rise against the Romanists. Iohn Frederick storm∣ing  that he should have the title of Archbishop of Breme, and all the revenews of his Diocesse to be taken from him by the Caesarians, raiseth some forces, fals upon Verda and Burg which he took, and shortly after he lost, and again reco∣vered them; so miserably were those places tossed to and fro, like tennis∣bals. Pappenhem also raiseth new forces, and takes in divers places. The ruines of Magdeburg are left to the Swedes, who place a garrison there: many parts of Germany are laid waste by the rapacious souldiers on both sides, many towns taken and retaken; A peace in the mean while is in agitation at Torgave, but to no purpose: the Duke of Saxonies daughter is betrothed to Christianus 5. Prince of Denmark; her eldest sister was married to the Lantgrave of Hessen; and Mary the second, to the Duke of Holsatia: Ulricus brother to this Christi∣anus  the second, conducted a regiment to the assistance of the Electoral pro∣vinces. Tilly is now again recruited, and marcheth towards Bavaria. Noriberg had received within their gates five troopes of Protestants, Ulm also joyns with the Swede: at Ausburg Tilly is furnished with Ammunition, Victuals and Money, by which he is made able to rage with fire and sword upon Northga∣via, and the higher Palatinate. Horn takes Bamburg, the Bishop escapes to Ba∣varia, thither Tilly marcheth: whereupon Horn withdraws his forces in the night, but not without some losse to the Tillians, and marcheth to Sueinfuri; whither also the King comes with his whole Army, and is royally entertain∣ted  at Noriberg: His comming hither made Tilly remove back to the upper Palatinate, wasting all the Countryes and Towns through which he marched. The King goeth to the Danow, and taketh by storm Donaverd; Tilly follows him at the heels, and takes the strong Tower Raina on the river Lycus, over which the King makes a bridge: the Tillians took possession of a wood hard by, whence they discharged their great Ordnance on the Swedes, to hinder their making of the bridge; but they were so intrenched, that they did more hurt then received, for in letting play their Cannon against the wood, so tore the Trees, that the boughs and splinters of them spoiled many of the ene∣my; so that Tilly received a hurt in the thigh, and Altringer in the head; there∣fore  in the night, they flie to Newburg and Ingoldstad, having lost one thou∣sand men. The King having finished the bridge, and transported his Army, sent a party to take possession of Newburg, forsaken by Maximilian of Bavaria and Tilly. Then summons Auspurg to open their gates, where were eighteen Companies of foot, and two of horse, placed there by Caesar and the Bavarian, to
keep  under the Protestants, whom they had disarmed, and forced to leave off their publike exercises; the Citizens desire the King to propose honourable tearms to the Garrison, otherwayes it was not in their power to force them, nor to open their gates to him; four dayes after, Articles being concluded be∣tween the King and the Garrison, they march away with bag and baggage, with their Arms and Colours flying: As soon as the King had entred, he re∣moves all the Pontifician Magistrates, and commits the government of the City to the Protestants, having taken of them the oath of allegiance: from thence he marcheth towards Ingolstad, where Tilly lay sick, and by the way takes in some Towns: mean while the Danes and Swedes were like to break  out into an open war, by reason of some insolencies committed by some Swedish souldiers in Holsatia, as well upon the Kings as the Dukes subjects; but the Swedish Commanders making it appear, that these wrongs were of∣fered by some private souldiers without the knowledge of their Captains, or of the King, the former league between these two Crowns was renewed by their Ambassadors. In lower Saxony, Tottus the Kings Lieutenant there took in Buxtehud, and intended to fall upon Stada, but that he was hindred by Pappen∣hem, who with his flying Army over-runs all Saxony and Westphalia, with the Diocesse of Breme, wasting all with fire and sword, who having received some opposition and losse by Tottus, returns into higher Germany: Tottus is sent for by the King. Arnheim General of the Electoral Armies in higher Germany, was almost intrapped by Wallensten, under pretence of making peace; for he had recovered Prague about the beginning of May, whence he dis∣missed the garrison with their swords by their sides, being two and twenty companies of foot, and two troops of horse, they marched to Leutmeritz where the strength of the Saxon Army lay; but if Arnheim had not de∣parted the sooner thence, he had been encompassed by Duke Fridlands Army, therefore he escapes over the bridge of Leutmeritz in the night, and comes to Pirna. Whilst these doings were at Albis, there was much action upon the Danow between the Swedish King, and the Elector of Bavaria, who having left Tilly  at Ingolstad, cunningly encompasseth Ratisbone: he makes shew of mustering one of the Garrison troops without the gate; but whilst the Citizens were going to Church, that Garrison seised on the gate, and suddenly nine troops of horse enter the Town, who plundered the Townsmen of their best goods and money: the Bavarian afterward made this his chief seat; in the interim Count Tilly dieth at Ingolstad of the wound he received at Lycus: the King begins to lay siege to Ingolstad, but as he was viewing of the works, his white horse was shot under him; Christopher Durlacenus, a Marquesse, was killed with a bullet, and one of the Kings chief Commanders was mortally  wounded, wherefore the Swedes held it best to give off their enterprise, so they march from thence to Monachium, the Bavarians chief seat, which with some other Towns submitted to the Swede; in Monachium were found a hun∣dered and forty brasse Ordnance, and other great Guns, in one of which were hid thirty thousand Crowns; the Country people were so inraged against the Swedes, that they cut off the noses and ears of divers straglers, and killed many of them; the Boors rise in great numbers and kill divers garrisons, but they were quickly suppressed by the souldiers, and their chief incendiaries put to death: but when the King understood that the Ratisbonians made divers excursions, and had taken Weissenburg, he leaves Bavaria, and returns to Do∣naverd,  into which he puts a strong garrison, the like he did in Ausburg and Raina. And now the Imperialists being strong, all Germany is in a flame; Ossa the Emperors Lieutenant rageth with fire and sword through Alsatia, some Towns he burns down to the ground; Spire is taken, and plundered: Oxenstern at Newstad falls upon a party of the Caesarians, from whom he took three colours and some part of their plunder; Duke
Fridland having taken in Egra  and Ellenbog, prepares to unite his forces with the Bavarians; Pappenhem having wasted the borders of Hassia, threatens Thuringia; Strasburg which now sided with the Swede, sends to King Gustavus three troops of horse, and six hundred Musquetiers: the Bavarian having left a garrison in Ratisbone, marcheth with an hundred thirty four Cornets of horse, and eight and fifty companies of foot, which he joyned to the Walestine forces; this made the King, being now near Noriberg, to intrench, and to send for all his disper∣sed forces; in the mean time Tupatelius one of the Swedish Colonels was in∣tercepted by the Wallasten forces, who took him prisoner, and cut in peeces his whole Regiment, at which the King grieved exceedingly; at length in Iuly, upon the drawing near of both Armies, divers skirmishes and light encoun∣ters  were made, neither of the Commanders being willing to hazard the whole Army; Fridland endeavoured to keep off provision from the Swedes, but the Swedish Auxiliaries who were comming to joyn with their main body intercepted the Caesarian provisions. About the end of Iuly, the Caesarians had laid up great store of corn and other provision in Freistad, which when the King knew by a Captain whom he took prisoner, he sends Tupatelius lately dismissed by Wallestine with some Dragoons thither, he breaking open the gates with petards, enters the town in the night, burnt all the corn, and drove away the cattel; the King comming to aid Tupatelius with more forces, makes an ambush for the Caesarians who  were comming to revenge their losses, out of which he suddenly sallies, and put the enemy to flight, having killed divers. About the midst of August, the King of Sweden was fifty thousand strong, so that they dared the Caesarians who were entrenched; after the Armies had thundered three dayes together with their ordnance against each other, the Wallestenians began to march away; the King therefore August 24. falls upon the Imperialists, all that day they fought till the night parted them; of the Imperialists were slain a thousand, of the Swedes seven hundred: Fridlands own horse was shot under him: at last about the eight of September, Gustavus for want of victuals was forced to rise first and march away to Newstad; at Noriberg were left three hundred horse and  eight Regiments of foot: Fridland being out of hope to recover Noriberg, sets fire on the neighbouring villages, and marcheth to Forcheim, whose rear was set upon by the garrison of Noriberg. Out of the Diocesse of Trevers issueth a new Army, which Ossa and Monticu∣culus joyn to their own forces, with these they waste and spoil all the Country about, but they were resisted by Horne, who pursues them into upper Alsatia, where he took Benfeld and other places; the Duke of Saxonies forces had been sent away, some to Silesia, others to the Swedish camp: hereupon Holkius one of the Caesarian commanders, with 8000. resolute men, falls with fire and sword upon Saxony, Misnia and Naristi, burning and plundring as far as  Dresda the Dukes seat; he exacteth great sums of money from the Town of Anneberg, and puts a garrison in Zuiccavia; Walstein divides his Army, and sends the Bavarian forces into Bavaria, Gallas with a party is sent into Bohemia, and Franconia Walstein retains to himself; Gallas subdues all the places he went through to the Emperor, and wastes Noricum; Walstein takes in Columbac and Coburg, but the Castle held out for the Duke of Saxony: the King also divides his Army, a part whereof he sends to attend the motions of Fridland: Reina was delivered up to the Bavarians by Mutsefall the Swedish governour, wherefore by the Kings command he loseth his head, and the Town is re∣taken  by the Swedes in October; Bernhard of Vinaria falls suddenly on the Caesarian Croats, defeats them, and takes ten colours from them, which made Fridland change his resolution, who thought to break in upon Thu∣ringia; the King cuts off the Bavarian Auxiliaries that were going to relieve Lausena, which at length Kniphusius took for the Swede: in Saxony, Gallas and Holk waste all, who take in Freiberg for the Emperor, the
Citizens were forced  to pay 100000. Dollers to keep off the souldiers from plundering; and the Elector redeemed his Chappel and Tombs of his Ancestors from spoiling for eighty thousand Dollers. Arnhem subdues the lower Alsatia for the Swedes; Fridland doth the like in Saxony for the Emperor. Lipsic, Octob. 22. is sur∣rendred to Holk, the Inhabitants are disarmed and pay to the Emperor 50000. Dollers. Voppelius delivers up Pleissenburg to the Caesarians, for which after∣ward he lost his head. Many other Towns, to avoid present ruine, submitted to the Imperial yoke in Saxony; which Pappenhem also threatens with fire and sword, being now returned from his fruitlesse expedition to Utricht; the King perceiving that his confederate Duke of Saxony was in danger to lose all his Country, makes haste to relieve it before the two Armies of Walstein and Pap∣penhem were conjoyned. The fatal battel was fought at Lutzen the 6. of November; after some light skirmishes, the next day as soon as the Sunne had dispersed the clouds, the King having called upon God, and refusing to eat any thing, leads out his Army, which the enemy encounters with great fury; the heat of the battel was about ten of the clock; the left wing of the Caesarian Army began to give ground, which the King observing, presseth on them the more eagerly, and pursueth them so far in their flight, that he received divers wounds, of which he died immediately the eight and thirtieth year of his life, to  the great grief of his Army, but to the encouragement of the Croats, who wheeling about the Kings victorious wing, fell upon the Swedish carriage, but were beat back with losse: Bernehard who had the charge of the left wing, behaved himself so bravely, that he put the enemy to flight: and now the battel seemed to be at an end; but Pappenhem, to his owne ruine, makes haste from Hall, rallies again the disordered and run∣ning Caesarian Troops, with whom he joyns his owne forces, and be∣gins a more furious conflict in the darke, then that which was fought by day-light, in which he lost his life honourably; the fight continued till eight of the clock, and then the Caesarians gave ground, retreating to Lipsic, they left behinde them some part of their Ordnance and baggage; about nine thousand of both sides were killed, and two of the best souldiers of their time, King Gustavus and Pappenhem; the King presaged his own death, and wished his friends not to trust in him, whose breath was in his nostrils, but rather in Christ Iesus, who promised he would be with his Church to the end of the world. Duke Fridland the next day after the battel left Lipsic, and being highly displeased that some of his officers had forsaken their colours, and plundred their fellow-souldiers, he afterward at Prague condemned them to death by a Councel of war. Holk delivers up the City-keyes to the Senate  of Lipsic, of which the Saxons, Novem. 10. took possession, being sur∣rendred to them. The Kings Army, though their head was gone, yet re∣solve to prosecute the work, they take Chemnitz, Pleissenburg and Zuiccavia, under the command of Bernhard, Kniphus and Horne; the same Horne took also the Imperial City Colmaria, which had been taken five years before by the Imperialists, the Protestant Religion is there set up again, and their liberties confirmed by Articles. Haggenove admits a Swedish garrison. Frankendale is restored Novem. 26. to the Palsgrave, the Spanish garrison is thence transported to Lucemberg. Frederick the Palsgrave, having by the Swedish aid recovered a great part of his Patrimony, departeth  this life at Mentz, November 19. hee left tenne Children behinde him, begot of the Lady Elizabeth daughter to King Iames; his brother Ludovic Philip, who had also lost his estate undertakes the administra∣tion of the Electorate lands: Oxenstern Chancellour of Swethland, is made Protector of that Kingdome, and of Christiana the Kings only daughter and heir, being now seven years
old. About this time the Diocesse of Colen which had been the sanctuary of the exiled Prelates, is now much molested by William of Nassaw, and Henry Baudis, who took divers Towns there; a cer∣tain souldier being a prisoner in St. Urbans Church, sets fire to some barrels of Gunpowder there, which was the death of 300. persons; the Duke of Luneburg having an Army of 16000. falls suddenly upon the Imperialists, of which he takes 400. prisoners, the rest being above a 1000. he puts to flight, 1633. whom the Swede and Saxons pursue, killing and plundering many of them; Anderac is besieged by Count Isenburg, and his Caesarian forces, who were stoutly repulsed by Rantzovius the Holstatian governour, who sallied out three times upon them; at last Baudis comming with new supplies forced the Impe∣rialists to raise their siege after they had made breaches in the walls by their  ordnance, and were ready to enter the Town: Hamelia is besieged by Lune∣burg, but the Town had within it six foot companies, and two troops of horse, with all sort of provisions which made the siege longer then was ex∣pected; William Landgrave of Hassia defeats the Caesarians that were com∣ming to the relief of the Town, of these 7000. were killed, the rest fled, and Hamelia at length is taken. Horn this year did great service for the Crown of Swede by taking in divers Towns in Germany, but in Alsatia the Boors made another insurrection, in which divers souldiers were killed and tortured by them, but Rheingravius suppressed 4000. of them, and hanged up 130. At Bibrac were seen two swords in the Aire, the one was bloody, and the other  fiery; so the year before in Germany, the Lakes were seen all bloody; in their bread, and on their trees blood was seen; a two-headed calfe, and a two-headed childe were ingendered in March. Raina is by the treachery of the Townsmen delivered up to the Bavarians again. Horns and the Vinarian forces being joy∣ned make up 28. thousand foot, and 12000. horse, with these they fall upon Bavaria, they defeat Iohn de Werds horses, and take in divers Towns; mean while the Caesarian and Bavarian forces do joyn near Ratisbone: Fridland with a great Army enters Silesia; the Polonian forces are overthrown by the Swedes: Ulricus the Danish Prince defeats 2000. Caesarian horse, and takes Braura From them; the King of Denmark, and the new elected King of Poland  Uladislaus 4. son to Sigismund labour much for a general peace in Christen∣dome; fearing lest the Turk having defeated the Persian, should fall upon them; but the French and Protestant party in Germany would not hearken to any till the liberty of Germany should be restored; Oxenstern is made President of the Councel of war: the French renew their league with the Swedish party. Heidelberg with the Castle is retaken by the Protestants. In Swethland the act is renewed for dis-inheriting Sigismunds heirs from that Crown, and the Augustan confession is again confirmed; the care of the young Queen is com∣mitted to the chief officers of that Kingdome, and the war against the Caesa∣rians is continued till a firm peace be concluded, for this purpose the taxes on  the mills and houses are established; the Kings corps is sent home to be inter∣red in his Ancestors tombe. CHAP. XI. The Savoyan History from the year 1504. till the year 1580. CHarles the third, the ninth Duke of Savoy, succeeded to his brother Phil∣bert,  he was son to Duke Philip the second: the first year of his govern∣ment 1504. was accompained with such a plague through all Savoy, that there wanted men to bury the dead, and Till the ground: the first ten years of this Duke, Savoy enjoyed much peace; till he made use of the French army against the Switzers, which had made excursions upon Savoy, and plundred some parts of the Delphinat: this army Francis the French king and Nephew
to this  Charls by his sister, had raised for recovering of the Dukedome of Millan; the Switzers were angry with Charls for permitting the French Army to passe tho∣row his Territories, and assisting them with necessaries, which favour the Switzers had denied them by the Duke, though they were beaten, and Millan 1516. surrendered; yet they still hated the Duke, storming that their Cities in Sa∣voy and Piemont were open to the French, and shut against them; and that the Duke had furnished the French with Victuals and great Ordnance. Fran∣cis returning from Millan, walks on foot with all his train to Camerinum in per∣formance of his Vow, and is magnificently entertained by the Duke in his house divers daies together, after many complements and thanks given by  the king to his Uncle, he returns to Lions; but these courtesies were afterward forgotten by king Francis, when he sent against Savoy a great army, under Phi∣lip Chabot Admiral of France, who stript the Duke of a great part of his Dut∣chie, notwithstanding he had the help of the Emperour Charls 5. the cause of this quarrel proceeded from the claime which Francis laid to the Dutchie of Savoy by his mother, the daughter of Margaret of Burbon, first wife to Philip, father of this Duke Charls; to his said mother Francis alledged the Dutchy be∣longed, and not to Charls, because she was the eldest; and upon the Articles of marriage between Philip their father, and the friends of Margaret, it was agreed, that without difference of sex, the children of their bodies should succeed.  Whereupon, for ten years together, Ambassadours were sent to demand that Dutchy, which Francis said belonged to him in right of his mother, notwith∣standing the woman was excluded by the Salique law among the Savoyens: at last, he desired so much of it as lay in France, on this side of the river of Ro∣han, being given to his grandmother Margaret of Burbon, in right of her mar∣riage: He demands also Bressa, and forty years arrears, amounting to 180000 crowns with all the interest; besides, some part of Piemont as belonging to Province: he complains likewise that Taurinum and other towns beyond the Po, were annexed to the Dutchy of Savoy, during the heat of this war, and after the death of Robert king of Sicily, Count of Province, and Prince of Pie∣mont; besides, he saith, that the county of Nice, and Haven of Ville Franc, did alwaies appertain to the county of Province, but now by the treachery of the inhabitants, under the power of Savoy; that divers places also of the Marqui∣sat of Salusses were violently taken away from the Dolphin by the Savoyen: moreover, that the Duke had scornfully rejected the badge of St. Michael, sent to him by the French king, with the Captainship of 100 Courizers, and a pensi∣on of twelve thousand crowns; and lastly, that in hatred of the French D. Charls had assisted the Spainard and Burgundian, and had alwaies been league with the Emperour Charls 5. and at that time too when he was unfortunately taken prisoner by him, at the battel of Papia: For these reasons, Savoy is made a prey  to the French, who seise upon the high countries thereof; to the Bernois who invade the low and fruitfullest parts; and to Charls the Emperour, who takes possession of the chief Cities. Others doe give these reasons, why Francis was so offended with D. Charles. 1. Because he pawned his Plate to assist Charles of Burbon, then a Rebel and enemy to the crown of France. 2. Because he preferred the counsels of his wife, a Lusitanian, and sister to Charles the fifths wife, before Francis his uncle. 3. For sending gratulatory letters to Caesar, after his victory at Papia. 4. For endeavouring to break off the league between France and Helvetia. 5. Because he received the city of Asta, the French patrimony above a hundred years, in  Italy: this Caesar gave to the Duke, to keep out the French from ever entring again into Italy. 6. Because he would not part with the city Nicaea, a Colony of the Massilians in Province, which the French had pawned to him for a sum of mony, though the mony was tendred by the King, who was not willing to part with that wn, both because of its strength, harbour, and situation, as parting Italy from France. 7. Because upon intreaty he would not give way
that the Pope should give the French king a meeting there. 8. For denying passage through his country to the King, when he was hastening to Millan to be revenged on the Duke of that place, for causing his Ambassador to be put to death. For these causes the Duke so incensed the French king, that he rui∣ned his country. His policie had been better (say some) to have held in with France, both by reason of its vicinity, of its power, and also of the neer∣nesse of blood between the King and Duke, then to hearken so much to the Emperor, and to be led away by him, who was too far off to do him either hurt or good. The Switzers also, upon the request of Geneva, threaten war against Savoy, if the Duke offer to trouble that city, which was in league with  them. Charles having sent a crabbed answer to the Switzers, and perceiving what danger he was in, sends privately to Charles the Emperor, being then at Panormum after his victory at Tunis, for aid: but the matter was not carried so closely, as to conceale it from the French king, who was the more enraged against D. Charles, because he demanded of the Emperor some places in Italy, promising him in lieu thereof all that he possessed in France behind the Alps, with the city of Geneva, so that he might have easie accesse to the confederate countries. If this had succeeded, France had been undone, the Emperor having an entrance made for him: but the King a while took no notice of this, till he had answer from the Savoyan to his demands, which were▪ That he might  have a free passage to Millan. This being denied, he claimed the Dutchy of Savoy as his due; and the rather, because he could not trust the Duke with such places, as might let in his enemies upon him when he pleased. Mean while, because the King suspected he should receive no good answer from the Duke, he makes ready a strong army under Philip Chabotius his Admiral; he first seised on the trans-alpin towns, then having passed the Alps he takes in some of the sub-alpin places. But the French victories had a check given them by the Millanois, who staid his progresse, otherwise Vercelliz and a great part of the subalpin territories had been brought under the French yoke; besides, Philip was stopt by Iohn Cardinal of Lorain, whom the Emperor had sent  with propositions of peace, and therefore wished Philip to go no further then the river Duria, and that he should not offer any act of hostility to hinder the peace, left he incur the Emperors displeasure. Philip did as he was counselled, thinking the Emperor thereby would be the more tractable, and that he would not act any thing dishonorable to him: but a little while after, the war broke out again, and in a short time, by the valour of Count Fanus Paulinus, Francis obtained almost all Savoy. The French writers strive to excuse king Francis his invasion of Savoy, and to blame the Duke; but indeed, the kings reasons were but specious pretences,  and the true reason was his unbridled desire of domination; otherwayes he would have preferred that neernesse of blood with the Duke to any title; but indeed it seems he had none; for it's unlikely that either Duke Philip would have acted any thing against the Salique law, or that his people would have assented thereto, being carefully from the beginning observed by them; so that with much adoe would they suffer at any time the mother, during the nonage of the Duke, to rule that Dutchie: neither can Duke Charls be blamed for entertaining a league with the Emperor, considering his power and great∣nes, as also the many and long leagues between the Houses of Burgundy and Sa∣voy, and that faithfull correspondency between the Empire and Savoy; be∣sides,  Duke Charls thought there needed no other league with king Francis then that which nature had already made, to wit, consanguinity. The losse therefore of Savoy cannot be imputed to the Dukes want of policy, or any neg∣ligence, but rather to that all-ruling Providence which hath prescribed cer∣tain periods of time to all powers and principalities, which aro lesse subject to change and mortality then the men themselves of
which they are com∣posed.  And although King Francis was a good Prince, yet in this he was no good man, to invadeand challenge anothers right; and much lesse could he be a good Christian, who would make a league with that great Antichrist, and call in the Turk upon Christendome, because he could not otherwayes be re∣venged on the Emperor; this was an act ill-beseeming the most Christian King. Duke Charles made no resistance to the French forces, for indeed he could not, having exhausted all his treasury on the Genevan war; for that City took occasion to rebel upon this discord between France and Savoy, therefore the Duke did what he could to reduce them to obedience, which he could  not because of Berne which took the Genevans part; besides the Duke relied on the Emperors power and authority, thinking the French would have sub∣mitted to what agreement he should make: the Emperor indeed was much incensed against the French, of whom he complained to the Pope in the assembly of the Cardinals, that Francis had invaded the Territories of a Prince joyned so nearly to the Empire by affinity, and under the protection of the Empire, yea the Empires Lieutenant; the hainousnesse of which act he aggravates, in that it was against the Kings own Uncle: having complained, he marcheth towards France with his Army, whence ensued a long war between 1536. the two great Monarchs of Christendome, to the great destruction of  Piemont; the successe of this war was various; at last the French King having recruited his Army, and raised the siege from Taurinum and Pignerol, a truce for three moneths is concluded, and after them for three moneths longer, which being expired, and all hopes of peace blasted, the war is renewed. Charles the Emperor had called a Diet at Ratisbone (anciently Augusta Ti∣beria) 1541. for composing the differences of Religion; in this the Duke of Savoy complained of the wrongs done him by the French King without any ground: the French Ambassador there, answers by a writing, which caused great de∣bate and different opinions among the Princes, so that nothing was concluded, whereupon the war (as is said) was renewed; mean while the Turkish fleet of  150. Gallies which the French king sent for, arrives into the harbour of Mar∣siles, under the conduct of Hariaden Aenobarb a notorious Pyrat; these having spent most part of the Summer in that harbour, upon the French kings desire, for whom Solyman had sent them, besiege Nicaea a haven Town in Province both by sea and land; hither the Bishop of Geneva being driven out, translated his seat: this Town, after the great ordnance had battered down the walls and forts, fought stoutly against the Turks, whose standard they took, the standard∣bearer being killed; but at last the Town is taken, plundered and burned, yet the Castle standing on a high cliffe, held out by the valour of Paul Simeon the governour thereof, and one of the Knights of Rhodes. Alphonsus Gustavus  hearing that the Town was besieged, but not taken, (he was the Emperors Lieutenant in Italy, and Vice-roy of Millan) makes haste to relieve it, with him were joyned D. Charls his forces, these seeing the Town destroyed, relieve the Castle with all necessaries for a long siege, commending the valour of Si∣meon and the souldiers that held out, and preserved the Townsmen; Aenobarb now out of all hope to gain the Castle, returns to Marsiles: Guastius mean while layeth siege to Montevic one of the chief sub-alpin Cities, whose defection from the Empire had drawn many others after it; at last after a long siege the Town yeelds, and shortly after 85. Castles submitted to the Imperial yoke. Aenobarb sends out of the Port of Tholon (of old Tarenta, which is towards  Marsiles) two passage-Barks to Solyman at Constantinople laden with captives, among which were divers boyes and handsome maids, these had been perpetual slaves to the Turk and Devil, had not Garcias Toletanus the Vice-roy of Naples his son with some Gallies fallen upon the Turkish convoy, which he overcame, and so rescued the two Barks; these he sent home with a strong convoy, and so Solyman came short of this booty, as also
of the rich presents which Aenobarb had appointed for him, all which were taken by Garcias: About this time Luxen∣burg which Charles D. of Orleans, and son to King Francis had taken two years before, was retaken by the Caesarians, with divers other Towns. The French lay siege to Carigna which Guastus endeavoured to raise; a hot skirmish lasted an hour, in which the Marquess was worsted, and hardly escaped with his life; in this fight 9000. were slain, and almost 2000. were taken; the Town being tired out with continual duty and famine, at last surrenders. The same year 1544. Caesar calls a Diet at Spire, thither King Francis sends his Ambassadors with some instructions in Print, but they were not permitted to enter; and withall Francis is declared an enemy to the Empire, for invading the Duke of Savoy's  Country, and for calling in the Turks upon Christendome, who had taken from the Savoyan the Town and haven of Nicaea or Nissa, therefore they order that war be denounced against him, and that the Duke be restored to all his goods and estate; An act also passed for six months pay towards the maintenance of of Caesars Army, consisting of 24000. foot and 4000. horse; All French soul∣diers are banished out of Germany, and punishment threatned against those that shall harbour or relieve any: Thus a great Army being raised, the Emperor invades France on the one side, and the English on the other; many Towns are taken, much blood shed, and a great fear at Paris, but an unexpected peace is concluded; yet some years after the war was renewed, some Towns are taken  by the French in Piemont, but they are forced to forsake Vercellae after they had 1551. taken it, upon the report of Caesars Army that was marching thither: At last Duke Charles ended his troubles, which he bore with singular patience, by de∣parting out of this turbulent life into a more peaceable and calm, and was buried at Vercellae. 1554. To Duke Charls succeeded his son Emanuel Philbert: he was bred from his childhood in the Court of Charles 5. Emperor, who loved him exceedingly for his eminent parts, and made him Captain of his Life-guard, consisting of 4000. horse: afterward when the Emperor Charls transferred all his King∣domes and power upon his son Philip, the same Emanuel was by Philip made governour of the Low-countries, in which office he so behaved himself for the 1555. time he was in it, which was four years, till he returned to his own dominion, that he left behinde him a good name; he bare his fathers losses so patiently, that God at last restored him to his inheritance: King Philip made him Gene∣ralissimo of his whole forces, by whose valour he obtained that memorable victory over the French at S. Quintin, and withall took the City it self. Two years after, peace being made between king Philip and king Henry of France, Emanuel was restored to his full estate, and withall married with Margaret Henries sister; but the French retained a while in their hands Turin, Villanova, Aslen, Guierse and Chivali, which at last he demands by his Legats from King  Charls 9. of France, who succeeded his brother Francis; but the French loth to part with them, put off the Duke with long delayes and excuses, alleadging that Nicea and Villafranca, with their dependances, were anciently annexed to the County of Province, and subject alwayes to the Counts of Province, and that Queen Ioan Neece to Robert king of Naples and Earl of Province, and after her Lewis the first Duke of Amdes whom she had made her heir, did possesse these now when the houses of Amdes and Arragon fell at variance for the kingdome of Naples, the Savoyan upon this took occasion to seise on Nicea and Villafranca, having no title to them, and would never since that time be induced to part with them; but the French kings have right to them by the last will of Charles  Duke of Amdes, Earl of Province, and king of Naples, the last of that family: This Charles bequeaths his whole estate to Lewis 11. of France, and to his son Charles, whom with all the succeeding kings of France he makes his heirs; therefore the Savoyan must part with these places to the French, before he can have possession of the Towns which the king holds from him; so likewise the Principality of Piemont did of old belong to Province, and
was possessed by  the above named Q. Ioan. The French also prove the County of Asten belongs to them, because Iohn Galeacius Viscount of Millan gave it in Dowry with his daughter Valentine, when she married with Lewis D. of Orleans, great grand-fa∣ther to K. Charls; this County Charls 5. Emperor injuriously seised upon, and the Savoyen against all right hath hitherto enjoyed it; they shew also that there have been many debates between the French and Savoyen, about the Mar∣quisat of Salusses, that the Counties of Geneva and Foucignium depend upon the Delphinat, and are held in fee of the French, therefore the Savoyen ought to do homage to K. Charls for them, as his ancestors had done heretofore. Lastly, the French Ambassadors shew, that whereas Philip of Savoy having married with  Margaret of Burbon, and that Ludovica mother to K. Francis was the daughter of this Margaret, and that it was agreed upon articles of marriage, that the children of Philip and Margaret should have shares in their estate; that there∣fore the French king had reason to lay claim to some parts of Savoy. These and other reasons were alledged why the French king might retain these controverted towns; yet for quietnesse sake, because France then had many enmies, both intestine and forraign, King Francis the second brother to King Charls sends to Burdiloun Governour of Piemont to deliver these towns to the Savoyen, conditionally that he will part with Savillianum, and Pignerol with the adjacent Abbey Burdillonius; upon this he cals together the chief Captains  and Governours of those places, acquainting them with the kings pleasure, it was at last agreed, not to obey presently the kings command, but to stay for further order, seeing he was as yet under age, not fit to meddle with the af∣faires of the kingdom, and that this was a matter of great concernment, chief∣ly seeing it was agreed upon in the last meeting at Lions between the Kings and Dukes Ambassadors, that Nicea with the tower and subjacent places should be restored to the King, and that Fossanum with the adjacent places, as likewise the County of Austen, and whatsoever by right of inheritance belong∣ed to Francis the first's mother, likewise the Marquisat of Salusses, and all places appertaining thereto, which the Savoyen heretofore took away inju∣riously  from the Earls of Province, whilest they were imployed in the holy war; all these they held fit should be restored to the King. As for Turin, when the inhabitants saw themselves forsaken by D. Charls, they of their own accord submited to the French king Francis, petitioning earnestly they might here∣after be under the protection of France, which was assented to by king Fran∣cis: Upon these considerations, Burdillonus thought it fit to acquaint king Charls his mother, the king of Navar then Lieutenant over all France, the Princes of the Blood, the Constables, the Marshals, and Chancellor, and the kings Counsellours with these passages, And humbly beseecheth them that the kings Patent might be mended, and all their names added to it, that the  blame may not lie on him, if hereafter any thing should fall out amisse; with∣all he desires, that what shall be concluded by them concerning this businesse, may be confirmed also by all the Parliaments of France, chiefly that of Paris: This was the sum of his Petition, which to most of the kings Councel seemed 1562 unreasonable, seeing the restitution of those controverted Places to the Savoy∣en was agreed upon at the last meeting of the Spanish and French Ambassa∣dours at Lions: therefore the French king had sent an expresse Mandate for their restitution; and to this purpose, Margaret king Charls his Aunt was mar∣ried to Emanuel Philbert Duke of Savoy, by which marriage they have chil∣dren to inherit these lands. Therefore the opinion of the Councel was, that  restitution should be presently made to the Duke without any further delays; for this cause a new Order is sent, which confirmed the former, shewing with∣all that what was concluded by the Councel of State, alwayes attending on the king, was not to be ratified or questioned by any Parliament of France, see∣ing by the custom of that kingdom, the kings Councel is of greater dignity and authority then any French parliament.
The king to satisfie Burdillon, caused the king of Navar and the rest of the Senators to put their Hands and Seals to the kings order, though without pre∣sident or custome; he is commanded therefore presently to restore the contro∣verted places, conditionally that the king be put in possession by the Duke of the places, agreed on in the last conference at Lions, to wit, Savillan, Petrousie, Pyne∣roll, and Ginoll; but the two former were restored by Henry 3. at Turin, where he was magnificently entertained by the D. Emanuel in his journy from Poland, when he was comming to receive the Crown of France, his brother Charls be∣ing dead; this he gave as a gift to his Aunt, the Dukes wife, and her son Charls. About six years after, Emanuel Philbert departed this life at Turin, whose body was buried at Vercelles, in his fathers tomb. 1574. To him succeeded his son Charls 4. sirnamed Emanuel, he was born the 61. year of this Century, and in the 80. year succeeded. In the 8 year of his govern∣ment, he invades and takes the towns of Carmaniola and Salusium, which were 1580. injuriously detained by the French from him; for in the conference at Lions the French King promised the Spainard, that the Savoyen should have restitution of all places taken from him by the French in the last war between them, which lasted 23 years, except some towns, among which were these two now named; these the king would retain till Margaret should bring forth children to her husband, and then would restore them: But he did not, though often sollicited  after the birth of D. Charls; Wherefore he takes them by force, being there∣to animated by Philip 2. of Spain his father in law; and finding a fit opportu∣nity thereto by reason of the distraction of France, by their civil wars. CHAP. XII. The History of Hungary from the beginning till the year 1532. THe Huns a people of Scythia, transported themselves into this part of  Panonia, which from them is called Hungary; it was inhabited by the Goths, who by the Huns were driven out thence: Many of the Ostrogoths joyned with the Huns, and so made up one Nation: the Vestrogoths went into Mysia and Thracia, by the consent of Valence the Emperour, conditionally that they should defend the borders of the Empire from the Huns; but the cove∣tousnesse and negligence of the Roman Governours gave occasion both to Goths and Huns to invade the Empire, so that after divers battels, the Romans were forced to let the Huns enjoy all Panonia quietly, where as soon as they were setled, they chose themselves a King, Attila by name, who much mo∣lested the Romans: in his absence he left his brother Buda to govern his king∣dome,  whom after his return from the wars of Mysia, Thrace, Macedon, and Illy∣ricum, he caused to be strangled, upon suspicion that he affected the kingdom. After this, he invadeth Germany and France, with a numerous Army, spoiling all before him with fire and sword, but was met and overthrown by Aetius, in this battel 180000 Huns were slain, Attila fled by night into his Camp, com∣manding those that were about him to burn him, if the enemy should obtain the Camp, because he would not fall into their hands alive: But when he saw the enemy was retreated, he fals furiously upon all the neighbouring coun∣tries, sparing neither sex nor age; then he goeth to Sicambria, now called Bu∣da, where he gave himself to his delights; but he could not be long without action: therefore aiming at the Empire of the world, he invades Italy with a hugh Army, which struck such a terrour there, that after he had taken Aquileia after three years siege, many out of all parts of Italy fled to the Islands of the A∣driatick sea, where they built them a City, now the Queen of the Sea: many other Cities of Italy submitted to him; he abstained from Rome upon the
in∣treaty  of Pope Leo. Being returned to Panonia, he died of an Apoplexie, and sudden erruption of blood. After his death, his children striving for his Do∣minions, lost all: so that the Goths seised upon Panonia, whose power after this grew so great, that they had got almost the whole Empire of Italy. Odoa∣cer the Gothish king made Augustulus resigne the Empire; so that he, and eight Gothish kings that succeeded to him, enjoyed the Western Empire with Pano∣nia, whom the Lombards drove out of Panonia first, then out of Italy: These being wholly addicted to Italy, left Panonia to the remainder of the Huns, con∣ditionally, that if their affairs should not succeed in Italy, they might be recei∣ved again into Panonia; they under their King Albonius erected a kingdome in Italy. The Huns make eruptions upon divers parts of Germany, with great losse to both Countries. In this mean time, two hundred and sixteen thousand Scythians breake in upon Panonia through Muscovia and Sarmatia. In Dacia, Almus descended of Attila, did reign: to him being slain succeeded Arpadius, who sends to Suates then Prince of Sarmatia, a horse richly trapped, and a request, that he would spare some of his waste lands to his people, who wanted ground; Suates at first assented, but hearing of the rapacity and multitude of that people, refused; whereupon he raiseth an Army: but the strangers challenging that land as due to them, and bought by the horse that was sent, march out against Suates,  whom they defeated and drove into the Danow, where he was drowned. Ar∣padius seiseth on the Country, and divides it among his Captains: these being setled, and the Stythian yoke cast off, they call themselves Hungarians, and had divers wars with the Polonians, Bohemians, and Moravians. Charls the great being molested by the Hungarians invades their Country, and by his son Pipin drives them out of all the higher Hungary. Gaba their King, at Buda, in the midst of his jollity and pleasures is taken and imprisoned, where he killed him∣self. Charls causeth the idols of Mars and Hercules there to be destroyed, and Christ to be preached; he disarmed the people, dismantled the towns, and laid heavy taxes on them. When Charls was dead Lindentus a potent and factious man, endeavoured to shake off the yoke, and to restore Hungary to its ancient liberty; therefore Lewis the Pious, to whom Hungary and the adjacent Coun∣tries were bequeathed by his fathers Will, raiseth an Army against him; Lin∣dentus marcheth with his forces, having wasted Carinthia, Dalmatia, and Bava∣ria: but he was defeated and driven to the mountains by Lewis, to whom at last he submitted, and was pardoned. After this, the Hungarians were quiet for some years; but they break out again, invade Italy, and made Berengarius who came against them, to buy his peace. After them the Sarazens fall upon Italy, whom Albert Duke of Etruria defeated; but being slighted for his good service, he cals the Hungarians again into Italy, which they miserably afflicted, and made Berengarius tributary the second time; thence they fell upon Ger∣many, and having defeated the German forces, they plunder Bavaria and Franconia; the havock and waste they made in Germany, broke the heart of Lewis the Emperour: Conradus his successor became tributary to Hungary; Henry his successour denyed to pay this tribute, wherefore they lay waste many parts of Germany; but at last they are overthrown, and their Cap∣tain taken, whose life they would have redeemed, but could not. Then a peace of nine years is agreed on; but before these were expired, they demand their tribute of the Emperour, who instead thereof sent them a lame and mangie Dog: they to be revenged, send three hundred thousand men, whose cruelty in Germany was unspeakable; at length Henry defeats the, mone hund∣red & fifty thousand are slain, & fifty thousand of them taken prisoners: thus Germany rested a while; then they return into Italy, and are quieted by a silver sop from Berengarius 3. Toxis their K. not forgetful of their overthrow in Ger∣many, & hearing that Henry was dead, resolves to fall upon Saxony, but Otho the Emperor kept them out thence: some
years after, when Otho was distracted with civil wars, Toxis invades Germany in divers places; but when the Princes were reconciled, Otho raiseth a great army, and overtakes the Hungarians laden with spoile neer Auspurg, where a cruel battel is fought, and the Hungarian army quite routed, multitudes of them were drowned in the river, some that had escaped were burned in the houses where they hid themselves; king Toxis is taken with four other Princes, who all afterwards lost their heads. The kings of Hungary, after they received the Christian faith, were these: 969. Gaysca, who was baptized by Adolbert Bishop of Prague; Steven his son was baptized by the same Bishop, and afterward canonized; the Emperor Henry married his sister to this Steven, and so all Hungary became Christian. This king  lived a holy life; he built a fair Church on the hill Strigon, and endowed it he erected also the Monastery of S. Martin, and another goodly Church, the' burying place of the Polonian kings, with divers other monuments of his pie∣ty; he was buried in his temple at Strigon. To him succeeded his sisters son 1039. Peter, who for his tyranny is deposed. His successor was Abba, who having reign∣ed three years, was deposed for his tyranny, and Peter restored again; in his time Hungary began to fall off from Christianity; he reigned five years and six moneths. Andrew K. Stevens kinsman set up again the Christian faith; he 1047. had two sons, Solomon and David; he caused Solomon to be crowned at five years old, which occasioned a war between Andrew and his brother Bela, in  which Andrew is killed, and buried in the monastery of S. Amian, which he built himself. Bela his brother succeeded, who had 3 sons, Geicza, Ladislaus, 1062. and Lampertus: He was the first there that used silver-coyn, weights and mea∣sures, and set prices upon wares; he built a Monastery in Zewkzare, in which he was buried; he defeated Henry the Emperors forces, which were sent to aid his brother; he died in the year 1065. Solomon K. Andrews son succeeded, 1065. but is driven out of the kingdome by Geicza and Ladislaus the sons of Bela, therefore he lived an Eremitical life in Istria, where he died. Geicza Bela's eldest son succeeded; in his time Hungary was visited with a great famine. His 1077. successor was his brother Ladislaus, called the Saint, for his innocencie; he ad∣ded Dalmatia and Croatia to Hungary; he had many wars with the Scythians;  he died childlesse. Colomannus Geicza's son succeeded; he was first a Bishop, 1095. and while he was king a cruel tyrant, he put out the eyes both of his brother and his brothers son, his brother Almus afterward was by him murthered in the church; he had two sons, Ladislaus and Steven who succeeded to his fa∣ther, being as yet young; he was called the Lightning by his subjects, because 1114. his actions were sudden and rash; having no children, and weary of govern∣ment, he betook himself to a Monastery, where he died. 1131. Bela 2. called the blind, because Colmannus had blinded both him and his father Almus, succeeded; he was a good, though a blind King: he had four  sons: He overthrew and put to flight Colmannus his bastard, who had raised forces against him: He died an. 1141. and was buried at Alba regalis or Stulu∣neissenburg, 1141. the place where the Hungarian kings are usually crowned and buried. His son Geicza 2. succeeded: he suppressed the Saxons, Austrians, and Bavarians, who had invaded Hungary; he was a pious Prince, and built divers Churches, leaving four sons behind him; he died an. 1161. his eldest son Steven 3 1161. succeeded; he had wars with the Venetians in Dalmatia, with Emanuel the Greek Emperor, and with Ladislaus and Steven his kinsmen, by whom at last he was expelled the kingdom; he died childlesse, and is buried at Strigon. His throne was usurped by Ladislaus 2. son to blind Bela; he reigned 6 months, 1173. and after him his brother Ladislaus 5 moneths; him K. Steven 3. overthrew, they died both the same year. Bela 3. brother to Steven 3. succeeded, who cleared Hungary of Highway-men; his successor was Emericus the eldest of his two sons, who died shortly after his father; he left one son, Ladislaus 3. 1196. who reigned but 6 moneths. Andrew 2d son to Bela 3. succeeded: he made an expedition into the Holy-land, where for his good service against the Sultan
of Babylon, he was honored with the sirname of Ierusalem: his wife Gertruda, of whom he had four sons, was wounded mortally by the Palatine or Viceroy of Hungary, for solliciting the Palatines wise to uncleannesse with her brother. After K. Andrews return from Ierusalem, he married again; he bestowed on the Nobility of Hungary divers priviledges. His son Bela 4. succeeded; in his time 500000 Scythians waste all Russia and Podolia, thence they fall upon Hungary, where a battel was fought, and the King with much ado escaped in 1235. a servile habit, many prime men of Hungary were then slain; Great cruelties on all sexes and ages were exercised for three years together by these Barbari∣ans, who returning to Maeotis the Lake, imbrace Mahumetanisme. King Bela by the assistance of the Knights of Rhodes was restored to his kingdom; he was buried in the Gray-Friars at Strigon. To him succeeded Steven 5. his son; he 1275. overcame Othocar king of Bohemia, and the king of Bulgaria also, and made all Mysia tributary to him; he left a son behind him Ladislaus, and Mary who married with Charles king of Sicily, by whom he had Charles Martel father of that Charles who afterward was king of Hungary. Steven was buried in the Isle Buda; his son Ladislaus 4. succeeded; in his time the Scythians again invade Hungary, wasting all with fire and sword, and two years after returned home with great booty. This king was murthered by the Cumani. Andrew 4. suc∣ceeded; he was the son of Steven Venetus, and grandchild of Andrew 2. father 1291.  of this Steven; he subdued Austria, and died at Buda, where in the Church of S. Iohn the Evangelist he was buried. He being dead, the Pope declares the son 1301. of Charles Martel king of Hungary; but the Hungarians chose Wenceslaus or La∣dislaus the king of Bohemia's son for their King, whom afterward his father called home into Bohemia. Hungary at this time was divided into three facti∣ons; some were for Charls, some for Wenceslaus, and a third party for Otho D. of Bavaria, who was crowned at Alba regalis, and reigned almost three years; but Ladislaus Vayroda carried him away prisoner to Iazygum or Transilvania, and spoiled him of his kingdom. Charles Robert son of Charles Martel and Mary daughter of K. Steven 5. is crowned: He was a great souldier, and amplified 1310.  the kingdom of Hungary by addition of Bulgaria and divers other places; he married the sister of Casimir king of Poland, of whom he had Ludovic: He was in danger to be murthered by a Gentleman of his Court, on Easter-day, who ran at him with his sword; but he was saved, and the Courtier executed. Casimir king of Poland made a journey to visit this king Charles his kinsman, and because he was childlesse, he names Ludovic (son to K. Charles who married his sister) to the kingdom of Poland, so that this Ludovic became king of both kingdoms; He had two daughters only, to wit Mary who married with Sigis∣mund 1342. king of Bohemia, who by her obtained the kingdom of Hungary, and Hed∣wiga Queen of Poland. This Ludovic was a great warriour, he drove all the Iewes out of Hungary; he was buried at Alba Regalis, in the Chappel which he built. To Ludovic succeeded his daughter Mary, who married with Sigismund 1382. king of Bohemia, and afterward Emperor; she with her mother Elizabeth go∣verned the kingdom, because Sigismund was as yet too young, and suffered herself to be totally ruled by some Peers of the Empire; which being ill re∣sented by the Nobility of Hungary, they invite Charles king of Naples to the crown of Hungary: Not long after, this Charles was murthered by the two Queens, as he was at a conference with them; so the Italians were driven out of Hungary, and the Queen recovers her kingdom. Iohn governour of Croatia, to revenge k. Charles his death, seiseth on the Queen when she was in progress  with her mother and Peers; he cuts off the head of the Regicide, drags the Queen with her mother by their hair upon the ground, then drowns the mo∣ther, and imprisons the Queen, and withal abuses all her maids of honour; but afterward out of fear he sets the Queen at liberty, who having returned home is met by her husband Sigismund with a great army out of Bohemia, he without opposition is crowned king of
Hungary, the 20. year of his age; then he makes an expedition into Croatia, where he besets the governour, takes him, and cuts off his head. Charles 2. sirnamed the Lesse, King of Naples, son to Andrew brother of King Ludovic, is chosen King of Hungary, in opposition to Sigismund 1385. and Mary; but he was murthered at Buda in the Castle, at the instigation of Queen Elisabeth by one Blasius. Queen Mary dying childless, leaves the King∣dome wholly to Sigismund, which he enjoyeth, and marrieth with the Countess of Cilia, by whom he had one daughter Elisabeth. Not long after this, the Turks invade Bulgaria, a Province of Hungary, a part whereof Sigismund re∣covered, 1396. but not without much blood; in that cruel war there fell 20000. Christians, and 60000. Turks, the Christians were beaten, and the King escaped  by flight: after this overthrow the Hungarians imprisoned king Sigismund, who afterwards was restored to his liberty and kingdom; this king in a second battel is beaten by the Turks, and the next year after is chosen Emperor; twice in his time the Boors of Hungary rose up in Arms against him, and twice he 1409. suppressed them. He reigned with his wife in Hungary 51. years, and died the 71. year of his age. 1437. Albert Arch-duke of Austria, by marrying King Sigismunds onely daughter, obtained both the Crown of Hungaria and Bohemia, and besides is chosen Em∣peror; he had two daughters, Elisabeth wife to Casimir King of Poland, and Anna who married with William Duke of Saxony: The year after Sigismunds  death, Amurath the Turk invaded Hungary; Albert intending to give him battel, pitched his camp beyond Danubius, where being taken with a loosness, hasteneth for Vienna, but he died by the way thither; he left his wife with childe, who intended to marry with Uladislaus the King of Polands brother 1439. and Duke of Lituania; mean while she is delivered of a boy called Ladislaus heir of Hungary, whereupon she alters her minde concerning her intended marriage, and resolves (now having an heir) not to marry the Duke, which bred great quarrels and troubles in Hungary; the childe is crowned the fourth month after his birth; notwithstanding Uladislaus enters Hungary with an Army, and by some is saluted King, he besiegeth and taketh Strigon; the Queen  with her childe flies into Austria to his Protector Frederick the Emperor, and carried with her the Crown of Hungary, which 23. years after king Matthias was fain to redeem with a sum of money; mean while Uladislaus is crowned with some of the reliques taken from the head of S. Stephen. The Turk took oc∣casion by these jars to seise upon Rascia: four years after, Uladislaus is defeated in a great battel by Amurath, in which besides the king, there were slain many Princes and Prelates, and 30000. Christians. At this time king Ladislaus Alberts son was five years old, then at Vienna. Iohn Hunniades or Corvinus is made Vice∣roy, and by Ladislaus for his valour deputed Vayvod of Transilvania, for he had beaten Amurath; when the young king, being twelve years old, came to Hungary, he made the same Iohn, for his good service, Earl of Bistria. After this Iohn put again Mahumet to flight, took from him a hundred great field-pieces; 1455. but he died the next year after, to the great losse of Hungary, which by the facti∣ons of the Nobility was much afflicted. Ulricus Earl of Cilia is killed by Ladislaus and Matthias, the two sons of Hunniades; whereupon Ladislaus is beheaded, and Matthias who was King afterward, is imprisoned at Prague; King Ladislaus after this beat the Sultan, and kills many thousand Turks: In the nineteenth year of his age, at the very nuptial solemnities with Magdalen the daughter of King Charles of France, he died. Matthias Corvinus son to Iohn Hunniades is ransomed out of prison by the  Bishop of Waraden for 60000 Scrutati, and withall is elected King of Hungary. Frederick 3. Emperor layeth claim to the Kingdome, as being next heir to the defunct King: Matthias now was 17. years old, and capitulated with Frederick, that the house of Austria should by his last will inherit the Crown of Hungary if he died childless; his first marriage was with the King of Bohemia's daughter. 1462. This Matthias was
fortunate in his wars against the Turk, which lasted two after he had redeemed the Crown, it was put upon his head with great solem∣nity an. 1464. whilst he again is imployed in his wars against the Turk, the Bo∣hemians besiege Tyrnavia on the borders of Moravia, but were fain to raise the siege again. The next year after Matthias calls a Diet for aid against the Turk 1467. and Bohemian; then he marcheth to Posonia, and subdues almost all Moravia and Silesia. Not long after Casimir son of Casimir K. of Poland, is invited into Hungary by some of the Priests; but when he was come to Nitria, there Mathias besiegeth him; Casimir perceiving his danger escapes by night and returns to Poland, a∣gainst him and the Bohemian Matthias makes war, which at last was composed in the year 1476. Beatrix the k. of Sicilies daughter is crowned at Alba regalis,  the marriage is kept at Buda; in the interim the Turk subdues Dalmatia, makes 1476. inrodes upon Hungary, and carries away above 30000. captives, he wastes also with fire and sword Dacia, by which name Malachia, Moldavia, Bulgaria, or the lower Mysia, Servia or the higher Misia, and Transilvania were meant of old: when the nuptial solemnities were expired, Matthias invades Austria, because he was slighted by Frederick the Emperor when he was a Suiter to his daughter Kunegund; here he takes in some Towns and Forts: the Caesarians are over∣thrown at Haymburg by Matthias, which presently after he besiegeth; the Em∣peror Frederick sends 3000. horse to raise the siege, a battel is fought, in which the Caesarians had the better; Stephen Bathor one of Matthias his Captains being carried away prisoner by two souldiers, watching an opportunity, pulls out the sword which was hanging at one of his keepers side, with which he runs them both through, and so escapes to his fellows: Haymburg on the confines of Hungary and Austria is surrendred to Matthias, and so is the Castle for a sum of money: after this he takes Pruck a strong Town on the river of Leythe; having taken in many Towns and Forts about Vienna, he forceth it at last by famine to surren∣der; after 7. months siege he takes Neustad. At last betaking himself to his rest a while, and to be merry, upon Palmsunday at table after his mirth, he fell into 1490. such a passion of anger, because the figs which he called for were not so choise as he expected, that he fell suddenly into an Apoplexy, tumbling and roaring  like a beast on the ground speechless, and so died: He was buried at Alba regalis; he was both a good scholler, and a lover of schollers, with which he furnished his kingdome; he erected a great Library, and took much delight in the com∣pany of Regi-Montanus. Ladislaus 2. who was K. of Bohemia, marrieth with Matthias his widow, and so 1516. becomes K. of Hungary. About these times Maximilian 1. recovers Vienna, Neustad and Pruck, with almost all Austria; then he takes Alba, with some other Towns and Castles, which afterward he restored to Ladislaus, whose former wife being dead, he marrieth a French Lady, of whom he had Ludovic and Anna; it was agreed between Maximilian and him, that if the K. should die childless, Maxi∣milian  and his posterity should successively enjoy the Crowns of Hungary and Bohemia. After this a great sedition was raised in Hungary; for whilst the Cardi∣nal of Strigon was preaching the Cross for raising of Forces against the Turk, the Ambassador of Ladislaus at that time was making peace with Solyman: many had taken Arms against the Turk, which they would not lay down again, but elected for their King, Captain George Zeck, who had heretofore given some de∣feats to the Turk; these like mad men run through Hungary, demolishing divers Forts and Monasteries, murthering the Gentry with their wives and children, plundring their goods, and deflouring of virgins; they hale the Bishop of Chona, with which death they threaten the Archbish. of Strigon and others; but shortly after, this new K. George, with his Captains, were apprehended by Count Iohn the Vayvod, who used them with deserved rigor, he causeth a burning iron Crown to be set on his head, then two of his veins to be opened, the blood whereof he presents to his brother Luke to drink; besides he caused 30. Boors who had been kept from food three daies, to fall upon their yet living king with their teeth, whose flesh they tore and eat; but the king
seemed to be no waies dejected or  afraid, he only desired his brother might be excused, being by him compelled to this war; at length when all his limbs were torn, they bowelled him, and having cut his body in pieces, they rost some parts, and boil the rest, which they present to his souldiers to eat, who having filled themselves were tortured to death with Luke Zeck. King Ladislaus died at Buda, and was buried in Alba regalis. 1516. To hm succeeded his son Ludovic 2. in the Kingdoms of Hungary and Bo∣hemia; in his time Solyman the Turk invadeth Hungary with a great Army, wa∣sting all before him; the place that lay first open to his fury was the Arch∣bishoprick of Colonza, therefore the King by the Popes aid makes Paul Tomori (now a Franciscan, but heretofore a publike and stout Champion against the Turk) Archbishop of that place, for those times required such a man there. King Ludovic married with Mary, Maximilian the Emperors kins∣woman, who afterwards was governess in Belgium: King Ludovicks sister Anna was bestowed on Ferdinand, who afterward was King of Hungary. King 1526. Ludovic understanding that the Turk was again comming upon Hungary with another Army, he meets him in person with strong forces, being urged thereto by the Nobility, whose priviledge was, as they said, not to go to war without the Kings own prefence; in this unhappy encounter there fell on the Christian side nineteen thousand, besides divers Princes and Prelates, among which were the Archbishop of Strigon, Paul Tomori the Monk; the king having esca∣ped, fell with his horse into a bog, where he died miserably; two months after his body in armour, with his horse were found; he was carried and buried in Alba regalis: the Turk pursues his victory, raging with fire & sword till he came to Buda the Metropolis, which was quickly surrendred to him, the Queen with the chief of the City being fled to Vienna: the Castle held out, in which was a garrison of rmans, who perceiving that the Turks went about to spring mines, articuled they might depart with their baggage; this was assented to, but promise ept, for all of them were cut in peeces by the Turks cimiters, onely the Captain escaped, because the souldiers against his will, had delivered up the Castle to the enemy; into the woods were fled above 25 thousand Christians, besides women and children, against whom the Turks discharged  their great ordnance, and almost destroyed them all. After the Turk had wasted higher Panonia, he returns unto Constantinople. After the death of Ludovic, Iohn the Vayvod of Transilvania is by some elected king, against the will of the Palatine of Hungary, and the chief Prelates, who had called in Fer∣dinand brother to Charles 5. Emperor, so that now there were two kings ele∣cted: the Vayvod sent to the French king for aid against king Ferdinand, of whose injustice he complained by his letters to the Emperor Charles and the Electors, protesting that if he should be forced to seek for aid elsewhere, that he was not to be blamed; wherefore when he saw no help, he swore allegiance  to Solyman, desiring his protection, which he had long since proposed, if Ferdi∣nands power should be too great for him. Ferdinand Archduke of Austria and king of Bohemia is elected king of Hungary, he with a strong Army marcheth to Buda, which he taketh, with the greatest part of the kingdome; after this he is crowned at Alba. Casimir Mar∣quess of Brandeburg his General, in this expedition dieth at Buda, where he is honourably interred. The Vayvod invites Solyman the Turk into Hungary, 1529. who takes by storm the Town and Castle of Buda after eleven attempts: Iohn the Vayvod, whom the Turks call Erdelban, meets the Turk with rich presents, and kisseth his hand, by whom he is confirmed in the kingdome of Hungary, and receiveth from him Buda the royal seat, which he held till his death, an. 1540. After this Solyman takes in divers Towns upon the Danow: the 26. of Septemb. he sate down before Vienna in Austria with 200000. Turks, for twenty dayes together he playeth upon the City with his ordnance, and oftentimes assaulted it, but in vain; he lost in that siege above 80000. at last being forced with cold, he raiseth his siege, and returns by Buda to Byzantium.
CHAP. XIII. 1. A prosecution of the Hungarian Historie, from the year, 1532. till 1629. SOlyman being enraged for his great loss at Vienna, and that he was forced to raise his siege, returns with a great power, to wit, 300000 men, and 120 great Canon. He first be∣siegeth 1532. the little Fort and Castle of Gunta; which he assaul∣ted thirteen times, and thirteen times was beat off with  great losse At last perceiving the courage of Nicholas Iurith, an Hungarian, and Governour, who would not yeild, though the Town was almost battered to the ground with great Guns, invites him to a surrender upon fair tearms; That he should remain Governour as he was; and that all the Inhahitants shall stay and enjoy all that they ow without any hurt. The Hungarian accepts of the conditions: Then the Turk removes to the borders of Stiria: He permits his chief Bashai, with fifteen thousand, to wast and plunder the Countrey before him; but as he was returning to the Army with his spoiles, he was so circum∣vented between the Mountains by some Caesarian Horse going for Vienna, that scarse two hundred of fifteen thousand Turks escaped. The Empe∣ror in a short time raiseth an Army of thirty thousand Horse, and two hundred thousand foot, which when the Turk understood, he retreats with all speed to his own confines. About five years after, Ferdinand raiseth an other Army of eight thousand Horse, and sixteen thousand foot, under the conduct of Catrian, who perfidiously betrayed the Army to the Turk. Not long after, this Traytor labours to perswade Count Ni∣cholas of Serinum, with whom he was intimate, to side with the Turks; But Nicholas caused his head to be cut off, which he sent to King Ferdi∣nand  as a present, for which, he was rewarded with all Catrians E∣state. Iohn, the Vayvod of Transylvania, dyeth at Buda: he left behinde him a young son, in whose Non age, his Mother undertook the Govern∣ment. 1540. Ferdinand lieth Siedge to Buda, which the Turks understanding, they make hast thither with a great Army, under one of the Basha's. Fer∣dinand's Forces beat day and night against the City with their Ordnance, but to no end; for they were forced to raise the Seige, with great loss. The Turk enters Buda, and Pestha; the Government of both places he commits to the Bellerbeg, and sends away the Widdow and her son to  Transylvania About two years after, a numerous Army is sent by Fer∣dinand into Hungaria, under Ioachim Elector of Braudeburg; with whom the Pope joyns three thousand Horse; these besiege Pestha, playing continually with their Ordnance on it; but to no purpose, for the Plague so raged in the Army, that it swept away many thousands in a short time. That same year there died at Vienna eighteen thousand of the sickness. 1543. The next year Soliman takes in Hungaria, the City and Castle of Strigon, after many assaults. Then three months after, he takes Alba Regalis up∣on surrender: It was Articled, That the Inhabitants should be dismissed without hurt: but Soliman causeth them all to repair to the Castle, where he disarms them; then picks out the strongest bodied of them, the rest he commanded to be hewed in pieces: Then he makes Mahomet Zaoglis Governour of all Hungaria. Four years after, Anna, Queen of Hunga∣ria, King Ferdinand's wife▪ died in Child-bed. The next year after King Ferdinand took
Agria, and divers Forts: Shortly after, in upper  Panonia, by the Earl of Salm, Anno, 1550. Teufel, Ferdinands Gene∣ral is defeated by the Turk, who takes divers places this year from the King, and besiegeth Agria, an Episcopal Seat, with all the strength he 1550 could make: But the Inhabitants united themselves by a solemn Cove∣nant, subscribed with their own bloud: so that the Turks Army was forced with shame to raise the siege, having discharged against it twelve thousand bullets out of their Ordnance: Not long after a peace is made at Constantinople, between Ferdinand and the Turk. About six years after, the Transylvanians revolt from Ferdinand their King, to Iohn Sigismund, son of the above named Vayvod: and two years after, Ferdinand is chosen Emperor of the Romans. After the Turk had taken Felica, a strong Town in the higher Pa∣nonia: a eace is concluded between Ferdinand and Soliman. Four years 1560 after Ferdinand died at Vienna, and was buried at Prague. His son Max∣imilian the second, succeeded in Bohemia, and Hungaria, and likewise in the Empire. He was crowned King of Hungaria, with Mary his wife, before his Fathers death. The next year after, Sigismund the Vayvod, and Vassall of Solyman, violates the peace, and takes Zatwar, which shortly after was recovered by Maximilian, with divers other adjacent places. After this, the Vayvod sollicits Solyman to make an expedition  into Hungaria▪ upon this, a command is sent to the Bashai of Buda, to 1565 be in Arms, and to begin the War. Mean while the Vayvod, who called himself King of Hungaria, summons a Diet of his people, telling them that his most Clement Patron, Solyman, had enjoyned all the people of Hungaria to subject themselves to the Scepter of his Vassal, the Vayvod: and not long after, Solymon enters Hungaria, whom the Vayvod met with rich presents, in hope to obtain from him that Kingdom: but he was de∣ceiyed. The Bashai of Buda besiegeth Palota, which is stoutly defended by George Thurin, and relieved by George of Helfenstein. The Turks seeing new Forces comming, run all away, leaving behind them their  Ordnnce, and all their Provision, after they had full eight days together battered the walls, which are now again repaired. The Christians shortly after take Vesprin, and put all the Turks, except five, to the sword: they take also some Castles. The same year the Scythians upon Solymans invitation and the Vayvods, fall with fire and sword on the higher Pano∣nia, carrying thence many Christians; but Lazarus of Schwend with some small Forces defeated ten thousand of them, and then takes divers places from George Bebec▪ an Hungarian Peer, who had revolted to the Turk. Mean while the Emperor makes an expedition into Hungaria, to relieve the lower Panonia which the Turk was now wasting: he fortifi∣eth  some places which were in danger to be surprised at Taurinum, where the Emperor was: there happened such a fire, that the whole city was al∣most burned down; the souldiers instead of quenching the fire, carryed away the Merchants goods: but the Emperor raised a great summe to re∣build the town again. Anno 1567. At Constantinople, a peace for eight years is concluded between Maximilian the second, and Solymus Sultan. One of the Articles was, That each one should keep quietly what he had gotten: this pacifi∣cation was afterwards prolonged. Iohn Sigismund the Vayvod dyed 1571 without issue, but not without suspition of poyson. To him succeeded  Stephen Bathori, who was to continue the annual tribute to the Turk. This is he who afterward by the Sultans recommendation, was elected K. of Poland. The Turk before the peace was expired, fell upon Hungaria, where he killed above one thousand Christians, and returned with great booty
1574  About the end of this year died Selymus at Byzantium: and two years af∣ter Maximilian at Ratisbon. To him succeeded Ralph the second, his sonne: he was King of Hungaria and Bohemia before, and afterward was elected Emperor. Anno 1579. The Turks fall upon a great many unarmed Christians, being at a fair in Sixo: Some they hacked and hewed with their Cimi∣ters, 1579 others they led away captive, with their goods: they tyed two thousand of them together like Horses, whom as they were carrying a∣way, the Hungarian Rusticks in great companies pursued, delivered the Captives, and killed many of the Turks, carrying away the rest prisoners.  The like cruelty in higher Panonia was exercised by the Turk, and the like measure they received from the Christians near Agria. The Empe∣ror had a conference with the Hungarian Peers at Posonium, about secu∣ring 1580 the Kingdom from the Turks. Anno 1582. During the peace, an Army of sixty thousand Turks, un∣der Sanzacus, broke in upon the higher Panonia, wasting with fire and sword all that lay in their way: but as they were returning home with their spoiles and plunder, the Caesarian Forces set upon them near A∣gria, killed most of them, and recovered the Plunder. The news of this overthrow did highly move and incense the great Turk at Byzantium: but when he understood how the Turks without any ground or provoca∣tion  began the quarrel, he was satisfied and appeased, and of his own ac∣cord desired a continuation of the peace, which was effected between Rodolph the second, Emperor, and Amurath the third, for eight years, be∣ginning the first of Ianuary, Anno 1584. Yet three years after the Turks 1587 robbed fifteen Villages, and carried away many Christians; but George Se∣rin recovered the bootie, with the losse of two thousand Turks. Some few years after, Matthias, the Emperors brother, with a great Army out of Germany, fell upon the truce-breaking Turks of Hungaria: Novigrad 1594 is surrendred to Mathias. Serin, takes divers castles. Tiefenbach, having slaugh∣terd divers Turks, took Iasprin by assault. Mathias fell upon Strigon, and  took the old town; but whilst he was beleaguering the new town, and hearing that Sinan the Turk was coming, he riseth with his Army against the Germans will. This Sinan, with one hundred thousand Turks, and sixty thousand Tar∣tars, besiegeth Iavernum. A terrible battle is fought, in which Sinan lost one hundred thousand men. But Hardeckins, notwithstanding he was pro∣mised by Mathias to be relieved within two days, delivers up Iaurin to the Turk: For which fact, afterward he lost his head. In this strong town were one hundred fifty great guns, six thousand of the Garrison were kil∣led,  three thousand dismissed. The Island Comora, over against the town was stoutly defended by the Germans. Sinan being dead with griefe for his many losses, Mahumet the Sultan prepares to invade Panonia with a great ar∣my. Mean while the Christians take Hatuana, using there all manner of 1596 cruelty, which upon the coming of the Turk, they plunder and burn. But the Sultan revenged himselfe upon the Agrians, whom he put all to the sword. Pappa is delivered up to the Turk by the Christian Garrison, for want of pay: which town, whilst Swartzemburg afterward besieged, he is killed with a musket bullet. Rederus pursueth the Traytors, some of which he tortured and put to death. Philip Emanuel of Lorrain imployeth his ar∣my against the Turks, from whom he took by force Alba Regalis, but the souldiers defaced and ransacked the town, not sparing the ancient Regal bones and Monuments of Hungary. The Turks striving to regain the City, were beat back with great loss, but the next year the Conqueror being dead, they retake the place.
George Basta, growing bold upon the Turks weakness, (for the Sultan was yet a childe, and the Persians had over-run his Dominions as far as Ba∣bylon) raiseth an intestine War between Hungaria, and Dacia. He forceth 1602 the Protestants to hear Masse, Plundering those that refused: but the Turks took courage, and withall, Pesta, being forsaken by the Christians, out of fear: afterward they take Strigonium, after it had been ten years under Rodolphus. Bethleem Gabor, having married the Widow of Moyses, the Ciculian, was in hope to become master of Transylvania, but his hopes were blasted by the victory which Tampirius had over him. Sthephen Botsca∣tus, a kinseman of Battors, stood up for liberty of Conscience, in defence of the Protestants: acknowledgeing Caesars right no otherways, then upon  this liberty. But the intestin Wars caused such sterility and devastation, that for want of other food, parents did eat their children; which was presaged by a new star, as Kepler observes. Mathias being established in 1610 Hungaria, makes peace with the Turk, and enters Bohemia vvith a great Ar∣my, vvhere he is Proclaimed King, and by the consent of his brother the Emperor, is Crovvned. Forgatzias the Palatin of Hungaria, marcheth in∣to Dacia; where he brings Claudiopolis, and other towns into the obedience of King Mathias: but shortly after he is beaten by Battorius, and hardly es∣caped with his life through the woods. Battorius in Transylvania, attempt∣ing 1611  to take Cronstad by storm, sends Andrew Gietzius to the great Turk for aid; but Andrew promiseth to the Sultan some Castles, if he would con∣fer the Principality on him: order presently upon this motion, is given to Mahumet Bassai, that he should turn out Battorius, and settle Gietzius in his place: Which Battorius perceiving desires assistance from the Palatine of Hungaria, and Protection from King Mathias; at which the Turk was offen∣ded, 1612 and expostulated with Mathias, yet was not in capacity to make War against him, because of the Arabian Rebellion. Gabriel Battor, willing to retain Dacia, halted so long between the Emperor, and Turk, that Bethleem Gabor rebels against him, and at last by the Turks aid, utterly defeats him, 1613 who the year following was murthered by his own servants. Gabor also to  keep what he had got, swears fealty both to Caesar, and the Sultan. The Turks break the peace, and burn some towns in Hungaria. Gabor in Hunga∣ria and Dacia, subjected Lippa, and some other places to the Turk; and would also have delivered up Waradin to the Sultan for a reward of his protection; about which, he and Humanoius fell at variance. Near Agria, 1616 the Turks making excursions, are defeated by the Heiducci; but in Polonia they have better success being assisted by the Tartars, whom the Cossacks had pro∣voked by their dayly plunderings. Mathias, King of Hungaria, and Bohemia, who was also Emperor, caused 1617 his Cosin Jerman, Ferdinand, to be declared King of Hungaria. Bethleem Gabor, the Turks Vassal, having by letters imparted his resolutions to the Bohemians, and gaping after the Crown of Hungaria, enters that Kingdom with a great Army, and takes Cassovia, Poson, and other places, some by storm, some by surrender: he assumes the title of Prince of Hungaria, and seizeth on the Crown, which was usually kept at Poson, and useth the Pa∣pists 1619 with all extremity. Not long after, he calls a Diet of his Faction (the Clergie, and chief Peers of the Kingdom, being absent; and divers Cities whose Legates were there protesting against it) by which he is proclaim∣ed King of Hungaria: then he makes an incursion upon Austria, and sends  aid to the Palsegrave. Dampier, attempting to take Poson, is killed. The 1620 Emperor sends out his Declarations against Gabor, for invading the King∣dome of Bohemia, for delivering to the Turk some Forts of that Kingdom, and for assuming the title of King. Notwithstanding Gabor had possession of the Crown, which he removed from Poson, to a more secure place, yet
refuseth to be Crowned. And the rather because Bucquoi was entered Hun∣garia with an Imperiall Army, with which many of the Princes and Cities joyned and fell off from Gabor. Besides that, Bucquoi had taken Poson, with 1621 divers other towns. So that now Gabor was in danger of losing Hungaria totally: but the untimely death of Bucquoi put him in fresh hopes again, therefore he recovers some lost places, besiegeth Poson, but is repulsed with great loss: at last, he is reconciled to Caesar, and is enjoyned to restore the Regall Crown, and to govern those places now in his possession, in Cae∣sars name. The next year after this, the Crown is restored to Caesar, and Gabor sends an extraordinary Ambassador to the Port, to acquaint the 1622  Turk with the reasons why he made peace with Caesar, shewing he was ne∣cessitated thereto by the deslation, famine, and sickness of Hungaria, his souldiers not being longer able to subsist there: besides, he feared a revolt of his own people in Dacia, by the instigation of Caesar, and the Polander. Lastly, seeing the Sultan had concluded a sudden Peace with the Poles, he was afraid the burthen of the War would be lest upon him alone, but withall he saith, that his Master meant not to keep the peace long, there∣fore desires full power from the Sultan that he, with the Bashai of Buda, might when they saw cause invade the Empire or Poland. This motion was sleighted by the Sultan, who now was unfit for a War abrode, and per∣ceived  that Gabor aimed holy at his own ends. Yet the next year an Army was granted by the Turk to Gabor, for subduing of Hungaria, to the wonder 1623 of those who knew the Turks weakness at this time. Gabor being then at Cassovia, receives the Turkish Forces, which he joyns with his own, but he wanted Artillery and other necessaries: his chief hope was in a generall revolt of Hungaria, and assistance from the United Princes of Germany: but the States of Dacia, assembling at Alba Iulia shewed how unwilling they wear to break with the Emperor; therefore they send to him, who at Vienna receiveth the Commissioners kindly, and sends the Bishop of Ni∣tria to Dacia, where a new peace is concluded between Caesar, and Transyl∣vania. But not long after, Gabor with an Army of 60000. over-runns Hungaria, at last he makes a truce of ten monthes with the Imperialists. The next year, Caesar raiseth an Army of 50000. to invade Hungaria, which made the Turk jealous, but Caesars Ambassador assured him, that the Emperor intend∣ed no hurt to the Port, but onely to recover what Gabor had taken from 1624 him. Yet some supplies were sent to Gabor by the Turk: mean while, the Prince fearing Caesars greatness, makes an absolute peace with him, dis∣claiming all title to Hungaria, and consenting that Caesars Sonne should be presently chosen King thereof; that the Prince of Transylvania, should  serve him in all his occasions; that Gabor should remain quietly, Prince of Dacia, Earl of the Ciculi, and Lord of Cassovia, which after his life should return to the Crown of Hungaria. This Article much troubled the Sultan, who desired not that Dacia should depend on the Empire. After this Ga∣bor sends to the Port for a confirmation of his Lady in the succession to the 1626 Principality of Dacia, which the Turk put off, because of his troubles with the Persian. Yet fearing least the Prince should take a confirmation of the Emperor, the grant is dispatched. The Prince joyns his Forces with the Bashai of Buda. Walstein endeavor∣ed to keep them from joyning vvith Count Mansfielt, but could not: so af∣ter  divers skirmishes, the Imperialists are beaten. But shortly after, Ga∣bor sends to Caesar, to excuse his taking up Armes, because some Articles were not observed. Then he sends to the Port, to excuse his making of peace vvith Caesar, because the Bashai of Buda was called avvay from him
by the Sultan. So  Ianus like, he looks both ways. Yet underhand he aids the confederate Princes, and stirs up the Turk against Caesar, fearing too much his great∣nesse. For this cause, the Basha of Buda is continued in his place, and order given, that when occasion served he should aid Gabor, Caesar sends a private Agent to the Port, complaining against Gabor, and that he was the chiefe 1627 disturber of the peace: these Letters were intercepted by the Visier, and not suffered to come to the Sultan, but sent to the Bashai of Buda, to ma∣nage things as he thought good. The Turk at last, upon Caesars second complaint, checks Gabor for his double dealing. At last, after all his jug∣gling  tricks, death, which cannot be deluded seizeth on him. 1629 CHAP. XIV. The affaires of Germany, Hungaria, Poland, Turky, Bohemia, Austria, Millan, Naples, Cyprus, and Borussia, under Albert and Frederick, Emperors, from the year one thousand four hundred thirty eight, till the year one thousand four hundred eighty. ALbert, son in Law to Sigismund, in the space of a few months,  being but Duke of Austria, became Duke of Lucemburge, Marquess of Moravia, King of Hungaria, and Bohemia, and 1438 withall, Emperor of the Romans. He scarce sate two full years in this dignity: for the second year of his Empire, he was taken with a dysenterie, by a surfet of Musk-millions, and dyed in Hungaria, near Strigon. He was fain to fight for the Kingdom of Bohemia; For some of the No∣bility had called in the Polander, against whom, the Emperor imployed Al∣bert, Marquiss of Brandenburge, who defeated the Polander, and made him  sue for peace, and leave Bohemia: to which Kingdom, Albert had a two∣fold Title; one by his Wife Elizabeth, of the Royall blood; the other, by vertue of a Covenant between the Austrians, and Bohemians; That when in either House the issue Male did fail, the other should enjoy the Crown. The Hungarians were not content that their King should meddle with the Empire, because that whilest Sigismund was busie about the Imperial af∣fairs, Hungaria was exposed to the fury of the Turks. The reason why Ptarsco, Chief of the Hussites, called into Bohemia, Casimir, Brother to Ladi∣slaus of Poland, was, for that Albert was much addicted to the Roman faith, and a bitter enemy to Husse: therefore he fortified all the Cities of the  Hussits, and joyned the Thaborits with the Polanders, but they were (as we have said) defeated, and divers Hussits carried away prisoners by Frede∣rick, Elector of Saxony. Caesar having left a Vice-roy in Bohemia, falls upon Poland with Fire and Sword; but his sickness caused a peace. He left two daughters behinde him; Anna, who married William, Duke of Saxonie; and Elizabeth, wife of Casimir, King of Poland: he had also a Post-humus son, Ladislaus, whom his Mother Crowned the 4. month of his age, which Crovvn she had se∣cretly conveyed, and hid for that purpose. But the Coronation of this young King, could not keep Hungaria from troubles; For Amurath, vvho lately had deprived George Despot of Servia,  (vvhose daughter he married) both of his Principality, and tvvo sonnes, vvhom he left at Sanderovia, vvhich tovvn the Turk took, and the tvvo sons he caused to be both emasculated, and exoculated, pretending they vvere about to raise nevv Forces for their Father: I say, this Amurath invades
Hungaria, with Fire and sword: the Hungarians to encrease their strength, propose a Treaty between their Queen and Ladislaus of Poland. The Q. willing to preserve the Crown entire for her son, refuseth to marry, which occasioned a great War; For divers of the Hungarian Peers sided with Ladislaus, others with the Post-humus King. The Polander by the help of the Hungarian Peers, take many places in Hungaria: the Queen on the other side was busie in retaking the same pla∣ces. Mean while Amurath was not idle, but brings his Army through Mysia, and Triballiae, and sits down before Belgrade of old Taururum, the chief Fort of that Kingdom Ladislaus gave the charge of Transylvania, to Iohn Huniades, to keep off the Turks on that side. George, he sends to the borders, to keep the Turks at Belgrade from excursions. The Christian Princes understanding their danger, strove to take up the difference between Ladislaus and the Queen Mother; and withall, to bestow her two daughters on the two brothers, Cast∣mer and Ladislaus: in the interim, Huniades defeats the Turks, recovers all Moldavia, and a part of Servia, with Bulgaria, by the help of Ladislaus. Hu∣niades in one day, defeated the Turks in five several Battels, and towards night, he utterly routed the Bashai of Aa, Amuraths his kinsman. 30000 Turks were here lost. Amurath, to repair this loss, sends Carambeius the Basha of Phrygi, with a great Army, which Ladislaus by the prudence of Huniades, totally discom∣fited in the Valley of Hemus. This so allrighted Amurath, that he was about to have killed himself had not Halibaeus Basha, who succeeded Carambeius en∣couraged him to raise a new army, and to elude, Fabius like, with long de∣lays, the courage of Huniades, by shutting up the Streights of Mount Rodo∣pe, which Ladislaus pereeiving, returns in a tryumphing way, but against the will of Huniades, to Belgrade, shewing his booties to the people, and with them, captive Carambeius. Upon the reporte of these Victories, Caramannus, Prince of Cilicia is en∣couraged to invade Pontus, and Bithynia, the Turks Provinces in Asia, A∣muraths being unable to undertake two Wars at once, and fearing the greatness of the European enemy, sends Ambassadors to treat with Ladi∣slaus for peace, upon what conditions he pleaseth. It was agreed, that A∣muraths should depart out of Servia; deliver up all the Towns and Garri∣sons he had taken there, and restore to George, the Despot, his sonnes, and whole Estate, and for the time to come, should offer him no wrong: and that he should not meddle with Moldavia, and that part of Bulgaria which was lost. Amuraths desired, that he might onely retain Bulgaria, to which Ladi∣slaus  assented, and so the peace was concluded for ten years, and ratified by a solemn Oath. But Ladislaus, a fiery spirited young Prince, more Am∣bitious of War-like glory, then of peaceable security, soon after Amu∣raths was gone into Asia, breaks the League by the instigation of Pope Eu∣genius, and Iulian the Cardinal, who perswaded him he might lawfully violate the Oath he took to an enemy of Christ, and that he should have Absolution, and withall the assistance of the Pope, Philip Duke of Burgun∣dy, and the Venetian Fleet, which should stop Amuraths from conveying aid by the Hellespont, out of Asia into Europe. Upon these perswasions and hopes, that Ladislaus should recover again the Greek Empire, and presu∣ming  on his former fortunes, marcheth with his Army through Walachia, and Bulgaria, till he stayed at Varna, of old Dionysiopolis, a town in Bulgaria, where he fell sick, Amuraths upon these news, leaves Caramannus, and returns to the Hellespont with all speed, and at Calliopolis, transmits his Army into Europe, in the
sight of the Italian Fleet, which perfiduously sufferd them to pass. The ships that transported them, were these of Genua. The Turks with an incredible celerity, march towards Adrianopolis, and beore Ladislaus knew of any thing, lying yet at Varna; They pitch their Camp close by him: the Christian Army was so ordered by Huniades, that one side of it was defen∣ded by a Lake, the other by Waggons and Chariots, chained together like a Wall: the hills behind them guarded the Rear: the fight continued three days and nights together with such violence, that the fields run with bloud. The Victory was inclining to the Christians, for the Turks began to give ground, and to fly away disorderedly: the Prelates too rashly  drew the rest of the Army to pursue farther then was safe; for the Turk perceiving that now the Christians lay open, who before were in a man∣ner enclosed with Fences, he causeth all his Archers to let flie at them, by which means they were presently disordered, and inclosed by the Turks Legions. The young King having got into the Turks Life-guard, had his Horse shot under him, and he himself was slain, with many wounds. The Pre∣lates in their flight fell into Bogges, and were drowned. Huniades, with much difficulty escaped, and that part of the Army that fled, dyed misera∣bly: some with cold and hunger in the Woods: some with toyl and watching, and many drowned in Lakes and Pools. Iulian, the Author of breaking the Oath, was found dead in the way, of many wounds: some think he was murthered of his own party. Huniades, the scourge of Turky, the defendor of Hungaria, and Bulwark of Christendom, was preserved by God for more work: He after this defeated Mahumet, Amuraths successor at the siedge of Belgrade, where forty thousand Turks were slain; but ha∣ving overwearied himself, vvith tvvo days fight, he fell sick, who commen∣in gthe care of his Countrey to Christ, and exhorting his sons to virtue, de∣parted this life. Ladislaus, Albertus his Post-hume, vvas educated by Frederick the Empe∣ror,  who would not suffer the Hungarians to enjoy him, though they had often Petitioned, till he was of years and understanding, fit for Govern∣ment; in which he was altogether ruled by Ulricus his kinsman, Earl of Cilia, which encreased the peoples ill opinion of the King, and their old hatred against Ulricus, who alwaies envied Huniades for his valor and hap∣piness, and used all opportunities he could, to disgrace and murther him: and being neither satisfied with his virtues, nor content with his death, he persecutes his Children, Ladislaus and Matthias, whom by false calumnies he thought to oppress. Therefore one day Ladislaus coming to expostulate with the Earl, from  words, they fell to blows: Ulricus, that began the quarrel, and drew first, was killed by Ladislaus, who cleared himself to the King, and upon that re∣ceived the publique faith, and a pardon, with a purple garment: yet af∣terward upon new calumniations, the King causeth both the Brothers to be apprehended: He put Ladislaus to death, causing his head to be cut off in that purple Garment he gave him. He was three times struck by the Executioner, and three times he lifts himself up, though his hands were bound, calling upon God, and pleading his innocency, but the fourth stroke out off his head. The King perceiving how he was hated of the people for this murther,  and finding no security for his abode in Hungaria, goeth to Bohemia, whi∣ther he carried with him Matthias, the other son of Huniades, fearing least the people might have in the Kings absence tumultuously set him free; be∣sides he could put him to death more safely in Bohemia, then in Hungaria, where he was so well known. But before the King had pronounced
sentence of death against Matthias, as he was celebrating his Nuptials with Margaret, King Chrles the seveuths daughter of Thrace, at Prague, he was poysoned, of which he died within few hours. Boiebracius, one of the greatest men in that Kingdome, seized on the Crown: who restored up∣on the desire of the Hungarians, Matthias to his Liberty, and bestowed his daughter on him, with many rich gifts, by which he was fitted to receive the Crown of Hungaria, which was set on his head by the general con∣sent of the people, who had not forgot what his Father had done for them. But though Matthias was thus Honourably dealt with, by the Bohemian,  yet he sufferd himself to be perswaded by the Pope, to take up Arms a∣gainst him, to the great prejudice of Christianity. To Albert in the Empire succeeded Frederick the third, of Austria, whose inauguration was accompanied with some Austrian troubles: for he had after the death of Albert, undertaken the tuition of Ladislaus King of Hungaria, and Bohemia, and Arch-Duke of Austria. But Ulricus, Earl of Cilia, great Uncle to the Childe, challengeth the right of Tuition: with him Albert sides: He was Fredericks Brother who demanded a share of his Fathers inheritance; but the two bsothers were reconciled by the Ger∣man Princes, and Vlricus is commanded to lay down his Arms. After this  Frederick endeavors to compose the schism raised by Pope Eugenius, in call∣ing a Synod at Florence, against that of Basil; but when the Dolphin brought his Armeniac Forces, (so called from the Earl of Armenia in Gascoin, who was their Leader) against Basil, he did not stir, because he hated the Swit∣zers, whom he suffers to be all cut off, being 1600. in number, by the French. Nor did stir in that War which was between Albert the Marquiss, and the Noribergers. In 8. battels, Albert had the better, in the 9. he was beaten, and then he made peace with the confederat Cities. Frederick having perswaded Foelix, to resigne the Pontificat to Nicholas, and him to confirm the decrees of Basil, he repairs to Rome for his Co∣ronation,  with Albert his brother, and Ladislaus the young King. In his journey he bestowed many Dignities, and titles of Honour upon the Itali∣ans, by which he procured much love among them. He entertained his Spouse, Lonora, King Edwards daughter of Portugal, at Cenae; thither she came by sea, and from thence he conveys her to Rome, where he was Crowned first King of the Lombards. (For Millan was fallen to Francis Sfortia upon the death of Philip Maria Visecount, which succession Frederick would not allow.) Two days after, with his new Bride, He was Crowned Em∣peror of the Romans. Upon his return homeward, the Venetians, and Fer∣rarians did Royally entertain him: for which he made the Marquiss of  Ferraria, Duke; and with the Venetians he made a league. Mean while, there were no small troubles at home by the plottings of Cilian, and the Austrians, who demande the young King Ladislaus to govern them: so that he was foreced, being suddainly beset with an Army, to dismisse La∣dislaus. Frederick also had much trouble with Albert his brother, and Sigismund Exerch of Austria, about the Principality of that Countrey: for these were Cosin Jermans, or sons of two brothers, and claimed an equal right: but after a long War, the Emperor at last obtained all Austria. After this he had troubles with Matthhias Huniades, about the Kingdom of Hungaria: this was like to break out into open War, had not the differences been com∣posed by the German Princes. For though some of the Hungarian Peers desired Frederick to be their King, Ladislaus being dead, yet the major part were for their Countreyman Huniades, who yet could not obtain the Crown, which was delivered to Frederick with the tuition of
the child, by  Elizabeth the Mother, till he had redeemed it for 80000 Crowns. Mean while, Pius the second, the Pope, who had been Secretary to Frederick the Emperor, had deposed Isebergius, Bishop of Mints, for resisting the Levies of Money in Germany, enjoyned by the Pope for the Turkish War: and be∣cause he refused to take the Oath imposed on him, which was, That he, nor his successors should not without the Popes leave assemble the Princes for election of a new Emperor, or for any thing that concerned the state of the Empire: this occasioned matter for a new War. Frederick Count Palatin of the Rhene, and Ludovic of Bavaria, both hated by the Emperor, side with the Bishop against the Pope: but Albert, Marquiss of Brandeburg  with divers other Princes, take part with Adolphus, the new elected Bishop: who in a battel were defeated by the old Bishops faction, which was lesse numerous then the other. This War was scarse ended, when a more dangerous arisieth between 1461 the Emperor, and Matthias Corvinus, King of Hungaria, about the Kingdom of Bohemia, which the Pope had bestowed on Matthias against Boiebracius, the Hussits Patron. But the Emperor would not assent to this grant; whereupon Mat∣thias is highly displeased, and the rather because the Bohemians and Empe∣ror, had chosen Ladislaus, son to Casimer, King of Poland, by Elizabeth, daughter to Albert of Austria. In this War Matthias had got almost all Austria from Frederick. But Albert, Duke of Saxony, recovered it all again to the Empire, except Vienna, which Albert was loth to meddle with, because of the strength and power of that City. In these troubles of Germany, Frederick, makes a journey to Rome, that he might perform his vow: but Pope Pius was dead, and had for his suc∣cessor, Paul the second, a man of an evil report. After this, Frederick had troubles with Charles Duke of Burgundy, that high spirited and turbulent Prince, who was much incensed because the Emperor would not confer on him, the Title, Crown, and dignity of a King: nor would he consent  that Charles should be Lieutenant, or Vicar of the Empire. Upon this, Charles raiseth an Army, with wich he besiegeth Novesium, or Neuiss, a confederate City four miles below Colen. Frederick on the other side Le∣vieth 80000 men, among which were most of the Imperial Princes. The Duke of Saxony was Standerd bearer. But whilst both armies were pre∣paring to fight, Frederick and Charls having had privat conference by the mediation of the Belgic Princes, peace is proclaimed in both Armys; and it is agreed, That Charles his onely daughter, should marry with Maxi∣milian, the Emperors son, who was to enjoy all the Provinces belonging 1475 to Charles, if he should dye without issue male. But out of this peace were  excluded, Lewis, King of France, Sigismund Exarch of Austria, the Emperors Cosin Jerman, Renatus, Duke of Lorrain, and the Switzers, who had broke in upon Burgundy by the instigation of King Lewis, and had taken two Towns. Charles then removing his Camp from Nuiss, fell upon the Lorrainer, whom he drove out of most part of his countrey. Then he falls upon the Switzers, Lorrains Confederates, and takes from them the town and Castle of Granson; but at last his Army is totally routed by them, so that he hard∣ly escaped himself. The next year he was overthrown again by the Switzers: and the year  after that, being the 3. Warre he had with the Helvetians, he both lost his Army and life by them. The perfidiousness of Campobassus, the Neapolitan, who forsook him, was the cause of his overthrow, thus revenging himself 1477 for the cuff the Duke gave him on the ear heretofore. These troubles were accompanied by two Commets, the one
apeared five years  before the death of Charles, and the other, in the same year hee dyed. The death of Charles bred a new War between Maximilian, and the French. He claimed the marriage of Mary, Charles his Daughter, accord∣ing to the Articles of pacification: and withall, the Provinces belonging to her. The French on the contrary, assisted by some Belgic Princes, whose Chief was Philip Ravesten, wasted Burgunay and Flanders, and changed the Dukes Provinces: but at last Maximilian prevailed, though often times in danger by his seditious Subjects, chiefly at Brugis, where they had be∣set him. In 8. years space he recovered all his Father in law's Countries; chiefly by the help of Albert, Duke of Saxony. Ravesten is driven into France, where he was made Admiral of a Fleet, which he lost in a Sea∣fight with the Turks near the Isle of Lesbs. Frederick, after the death of Mathias, returns to Austria, where he sup∣pressed the High-way-men. He was much troubled with a running Can∣ker in the Foot, called by Physitians, Phagedena, and having overthrown his stomack with Musk-Millions, he fell into a looseness that killed him the 78. year of his life, and of his Empire, the 54. He left onely two Children behinde him, Maximilian, who succeeded, and Cunigunda, that 1493  married with Albert of Bavaria. In Bohemia, Boiebracius, against whom the Pope had incensed Mathias of Hungaria, being dead, Ladislaus is made King, who makes War with the Hungarian for Moravia, and Silesia, which in hatred of the Bohemian Reli∣gion, submitted themselves to the Hungarian. But the controversie was taken up by the Princes, without effusion of bloud: and it was agreed that a part of Silesia, lying next to Bohemia, with both Lusatia's, should be∣long to Ladislaus, but Matthias should possesse the rest of Silesia, with Mo∣ravia, conditionally, That if he died without an Heir Male, it should re∣turn to Ladislaus; if he had an Heir, That then it should be free both to him, and to Ladislaus, either to leave, or buy these Provinces for 200000 Crowns. In Italy, the differences about the Principalities of Millan, made way for Francis Sfortia, a Mercenary Souldier, to invade it. For Philip being dead, in whom the ancient Race of Viscounts, from Matthew the great, failed; so that none of that race was remaining, except Valentina, Philips sister, whom Iohn Galeatius the Father, had married to Lewis of Orleans, son to Charles the fift of France; with whom he gave the Citie Asta for her portion, with this condition, That if her Brothers should die childeless, her children should be lawfull Heirs to the Principality of Insubria. This  grant was not Confirmed by the Emperor, but by the Pope. Duke Philip had another Daughter, Blance, named by his Concubin, whom he be∣stows upon Francis Sfortia, and withall, Cremona for her portion: many laid claim to this Dukedom. Frederick the Emperor by the Law of Feuds, which gives Title of Lands to the Lords, when there is no Heir; Charles of Orleans, by the righ t of his mother Valentina, to whose Heirs that Dutchie belonged by the will of Galeatius, Confirmed by the Pope; Alphonsus of Arragon, who seised on Na∣ples, laveth claim by the last will of Duke Philip, vvho named him Heir for assisting him against the Venetians, vvhen they threatened Millan. Fran∣cis  Sfortia in the right of his Wife, the Bastard of Philip, and by his last Will challenges the Dutchie. Mean while, the Millanois aimed at liberty. Frederick, being troubled vvith Domestick broiles, sleights his Title. Charles of Or∣leans sends an Army into Italy, under the command of Reinaldus, but he vvas taken, and his Army
overthrovvn by the Millanois and so he lost that  Principalily. Alphonsus, finding it too far from him, and beset with so many Competitors, lets fall his claim. Mean while, the Venetians finding divers Cities of that Dutchie, unwilling to be under Millan, begin to fish in these troubled Waters. Placentia and Lauden, freely submit to Venice. Papia and Derthona, receive F. Sfortia. Navarr, lying next to Vercelle, come under the Savoyen: but Sfortia being hired by the Millanois, took Placentia and Lauden from the Ve∣netians, whom he overthrows in a great Battel: then they make peace with him, and assist him against the Millanois, and afterward they help the Millanois against him, aiming at that Principality themselves: but Sfortia deceived their hopes, for by his Arms and Fame, he made all the Cities of that Principality submit to him. Then he called in Bajazet the Turk, a∣gainst the Venetians: but at last, the French King apprehended him at No∣varia, as he was raising of Forces out of Germany, Switserland, and the Gri∣sons Countrey. He carried him into France, where he imprisoned him: he died miserably, and was justly punished for his parricid and ambition, the 5. year of his imprisonment. Frances, also, Grand-childe of Iohn Galeacies, was brought into France, and there shut up within a Monastery. So Lewis the 12. obtained the Principality of Insubria; and to corroborat his Title, he bribed some a∣bout  the Emperor Maximilian with gold, to get his approbation, That Lewis with his posterity, and Successors, should hold the Dutchie of Millan in Fee of the Emperor. Lewis obtained to this purpose, the Emperors Patent, but with this clause, That he should hold this Dutchie in Fee, so it might not preju∣dice anothers Title: upon this, Pope Iulius (that he might drive the French quite out of Italy, who had already overthrown the Ligurian, & Ve∣netian power by land) joyns his Forces with the Venetians and Switzers, and restores Maximilian to his Fathers Principality, which he held til the com∣ing of King Francis, who having taken Prosperus Columnus, at the foot of the Alpes, and beaten the Switzers near Millan, he takes the City, and by a strict  Siege, forces Maximilian to surrender, who by poyson lost the use of his understanding. He was carried to France, where he dyed of Melancholy and a Fever. There now remains his Brother Francis, whom Charles the 5. Emperor, brought back; having in two several battels defeated the French, and ta∣ken King Francis prisoner▪ But after Charles had put Francis of Millan in possession of his principality, he dispossesseth him again upon suspition of Treason: Pope Clement, the Venetians, and the French also, upon this are made friends; for they thought it not safe, that Charles the Emperor  should have too much footing in Italy: therefore they resolve to main∣tain Sfortias cause, but finding that Charles was too potent to be forced by Arms to this, they work upon him by intreaties to restore Sfortia to his principality, to which Charles assented. Sfortia is invited to Bonona, upon the publick faith, where he receives his Dutchie, and withall the Empe∣ror betroths to him his Neece by his Sister, to wit, the Daughter of Chri∣stiern, King of Denmark. By this double knot, Sfortia was tyed to the Em∣peror against the French: but the Duke dyed shortly after his marriage; then, when Caesar having taken Tunis, was returning to Naples, and from thence, in a triumphant manner to Rome: the Sfortian race being extinct in  this Francis of Millan, King Francis demands from Caesar, the principality of Millan for him and his Heirs, being his right by inheritance, and Maxi∣milians grant. This was denyed by Charles, except Francis would restore the D. of Savoy to his Lands which were violently taken from him by the French, most of which Lands were restored; but Caesar in the
mean time  parts not with his Hold of Millan, which he enjoyed whilest he lived, and then transfers it upon his son Philip. About these times Apulia is in great trouble, by reason of the Wars be∣tween Arragon and Anjou, which lasted twenty years, occasioned at first by the impudent lechery of Queen Ioan, whom Pope Martin, and Lewis of Aniou, did pursue with all Hostility. Hereupon Ioan implores the aid of Alphonsus, King of Arragon, now in Corsica: he upon her intreaties arives at Naples, with a Fleet of twenty sail, and beats the Forces of France, and those of Sfortia; for which service, she adopts Alphonsus: he was the Son of Ferdinand, and Grand-childe of Iohn, King of Castile, Arragon, and Sicily. This Alphonsus being the wisest, and learnedst Prince of his time could not endure the insolence and impudence of Queen Ioan, therefore he force∣ably drives her out of Naples, who presently repairs to the Pope, accusing Alphonsus of his ingratitude, and impiety; therefore shee cuts of her for∣mer Adoption, and makes Lewis of Anjou her Heir, whence arose great Wars; in which sometimes the Aragonian, somtimes the Andegeven, was master of Naples. Upon the death of Lewis, his brother Renatus undertook the War; but he was so employed in the Wars of Britany, that he left the Neapolitan War to his son Iohn, who for divers years, but with ill success, had Wars with Ferdinand, the Bastard son of Alphonsus, whom he made Heir of Naples by his last will. At length near Troy Iohn was quite defeated, having lost both the Kingdom, and the Island Aenaria, now Iscla. Not long after, be∣ing conveyed to France in a ship, he dyed of a Fever; his Father Renatus dyed shortly after, childeless; his Heir was Charles Main, his brothers son, who being also childeless, made Lewis the 11. of France, Charles the 8. Fa∣ther, his Heir, who could never be perswaded to recover his right of Na∣ples by Arms, affirming, that he would first quiet all at home, pull down the greatness of the Princes of the bloud, and leave the Kingdom to his son, free from trouble and fear. Alphonsus dyed at Naples the 65. year of his age: he left the Kingdom of 1458 Sicily and Arragon to his Brother Iohn, then King of Navar, for his Wife Blanca, against his Bastard son Ferdinand, King of Naples. Charles the 8. made War, but before any action, Ferdinand dyed, having left two sons, Alphonsus his successor, and Frederick, and a Grand-childe, Ferdinand of Al∣phonsus. 1492 Iohn of Arragon, Brother to Alphonsus, the elder, left Sicily to his son Ferdinand, of a second venter, and married him to the sister of Henry, King of Castile, by whom he had afterward, upon the death of Henry, and his son Alphonsus, the Kingdom of Castile, Henrys daughter being excluded,  because she was born in Adultery. So Ferdinand is now King of Sicily, and of both Spains. Shortly after by his conquering Arms, he added the King∣dom of Granado and Naples, all which he transferred upon Charles the 5. his Grand child by his daughter. This is that Ferdinand who subdued and drove out the Moors, by the ad∣vice of Cousalvus the great, after they had inhabited Spain almost 700. years, from the time that Miramolinus, King of the Moors, was called in a∣gainst Roderick, King of the Goths. For this Service, and for causing the Moors that remained in Spain, to imbrace the Christian faith, he obtained the title of Catholick. The dissention of two Kings in Granado, on of which  submitted himself as Vassal to Ferdinand, the other fled into Mauritania, made this Conquest easie to Ferdinand, who had both the assistance and councel of Cousalvus in obtaining this, and recovering the Kingdom of Na∣ples from the French. These great changes and troubles of Europe were ac∣companied with 3. great Comets, which appeard in the space of 16. years.
About the year 1454. the Borussians fell off from the Marian Knights, to Casimir, King of Poland, who some years before had much weakned the power of these knights by divers victories he had over them: the cause of their defection, was the Tyrannical Government of the Marians, occa∣sioned by their often Wars, [of which when people grow weary, they kick off their Governors.] The Borussians joyn themselves to the Polander, on these conditions, That they shall be equally capable of all Honours, Offices, and places in the Kingdom: they shall have the suffrages in Parliaments, and in election of the King; That their Merchants shall traffick in Poland safely; That all  Customes and imposts imposed by the Marians, shall be abolished; That no strangers be admitted to be Governors in their Towns or Castles: they shall enjoy their own goods, as heretofore, and shall be ruled by their own laws. But the Borussians cunningly to cut of all occasion, either in the Polonian to set up, or in the Marian, to renew their Tyranny, discharge all their Garrisons, and destroy all their Forts, Castles, and Cittadels, before they made this union with Poland. This defection of the Borussians, was the occasion of 12. years War, between the Marians, and Polonians; at last a peace is concluded between Casimir of Poland and Lewis Erlings huss Master of the Marian Family, on these Articles, That the Castles and Towns of Marieburg, Stuma, and Christeburg; with some other places and Towns lying upon Pomerania, should be delivered up to the Polander, the Marians should retain the rest so long as they would be faithfull and sub∣ject to Poland. This was the 250. year since first the Marians under Hermanuus Salcensis, were called in by Conradus Masovius, against the rebelious Borussians, on this condition, That what they did subdue by force of Arms, should be their own. Since that time then that they began to destroy the inhabitants, and their Idolatry, and to replenish the Countrey with Germans, it became a part of the Empire under Frederick, till now the Polander hath ob∣tained it. About this time, Iohn, King of Cyprus, married his daughter Carolota, to Lewis of Savoy, to whom he promised that Kingdom for her portion: after King Iohns death, Iames, his Bastard son seizeth on the Kingdom: short∣ly after, upon the invitation of the Cyprins, Lewis arrives, and Iames a∣voyds the Island. But shortly after he returns with an Army out of Egypt, and drives Lewis, with his wife, and Rhodian forces, out of the Island: to make his Title the surer, he marrieth with Acatarina, daughter to Mark Cornelius the Venetian, to which the Senate assented, and withall, adopted her for their daughter, that by her they might have the easier access to that Kingdom. Not long after the marriage, Iames dyeth, and leaves his wife great with childe to the Senat; this childe dyed also shorly after his birth, whereupon the mother returns home, and delivers the possession of Cy∣prus to the Senat. In the year 1440. when Frederick began his Empire, the Art of Printing was found out at Mintz in Germany. In the year 1477. Eberhard, Earl of Wirteberg, whom afterwards Maximilian made Duke, erected the Uni∣versity of Tubinga.
CHAP. XV. The prosecution of the affaires of Germany, Italy, France, Spain, and the o∣ther neighboring places, under Maximilian the Emperor, with the Coronati∣on of Charles the fifth, from the year one thousand four hundred eighty six, till one thousand five hundred twenty. MAximilian was made Coleagu with his Father Frederick in the Em∣pire by the Electoral suffrages. He was a wise Prince, a great Scholar, and a good man. In his time the University of Witteberg 1486 was erected by Frederick of Saxony: and that of Franckfort on Via∣drus, by Ioachim of Brandeburg. He had 8. years War with the Belgians, who had rebelled. These at last he forced to submit to the Imperial yoak, by the Valor and councel of that brave Commander, Albert, Duke of Sax∣ony, who having subdued Gelderland, falls upon Frisia, which Maximilian by the consent of the Imperial Princes, bestowed on him, for a recompence of his valor and charges. Some part of this Countrey he subjugated, but being prevented by death, he leaves an imperfect Victory to his Sons, who though they mastered them a while, yet could not long retain Friesland in subjection: for not long after, the Cities and Nobility conspire together, and shake off the Saxon yoak. In the begining of these Belgick Wars, Maximilian found much difficul∣ty for two years after his election: he was taken and kept a close prisoner in Brugis, where he was discracefully used, and forced to look upon the tortures, and cruel deaths of his servants, till he was set at liberty by his Father, and the whole strength of the Empire: after the death of Mat∣thias, Maxymilian makes War upon Hungaria, but at last is contented to give way to the Election of Ladislaus, King of Bohemia, reserving the right of suc∣cession to himself, and successors, if Ladislaus should die without issue, male. After this, he makes War in Italy, but with ill success, so that he lost all he possessed there. First, he Warred in Hetruria in defence of Pisa, a∣gainst the French and Florentins; being invited thither by the Pope, Lewis Sfortia, and the Venetians. He was carried to that expedition in a Fleet of Genua, but finding that he could not take the Town and Port of Liburnum, though he attempted it to the loss of many of his men, he sent away his Army to Lombardy, and he followed after, and so returned into Germany: But greater wars were kindled by Charls the 8. of France, a high spirited and hot young prince. He hoped to gain all Italy by his right he had to Naples.  Lewis Sfortia had oportunely implored his aid against the Arragonians. Charles, to make all sure at home, makes a League with two of his enemies, to wit, with Maximilian, whom he had incensed by repudiating his daughter Margaret, and by carrying away Ann of Britany (his Spouse) by Lewis Sfortia, who betrothed Blance Mary (sister of Iohn Galacius) to him, after he was defeated of his British marriage: then he ingratiated Ferdinand of Spain, by restoring the rich City of Perpennian, in the very entry of Spain; and those lands which his Father Iohn in the Celtiberian War had mortgaged for mo∣ney to Lewis the 11. Charles then enters Italy with a formidable army, and sets at liberty Pi∣sa, from the power of the Florentins; and these from the Medices, and Sena  from Bandulphus Petrutius. He also brought his Army into Rome, and cau∣sed the Pope enter into League with him, and to deliver up Gemes, the bro∣ther of Baazet: thence he marched with unexpected celerity to Naples, upon whose approach, Alphonsus, with his son Ferdinand, and his Unckle
Frederick, retreated; so that he without great difficulty obtained the king∣dom, and entered Naples in Triumph the first of Ianuary. The neighbouring Princes, astonished at this unexpected successe, en∣ter into a league against the French: chiefly the Pope, Maximilian Caesar, the Senate of Venice, Lewis Sfortia, with Ferdinand of Spain; which made Charles retreat; and perceiving that the way by which he was to return, was shut up by the Venetians and Sfortia, (whom Lewis of Orleans in the in∣terim had invaded, and seized on Novaria) he makes his passage by the sword, and so having overthrown them in a bloudy battel, near the River Tarus, he returns safe into France. But Charles continued not long master of Naples, for Ferdinand, son of Alphonsus, renews the War, being assisted by Consalvus, whom Ferdinand of Spain had sent with a strong Fleet to defend Sicily: but in the middest of his victories, about two years after the Victory of Charles, he dyed of a Fe∣ver, the right to that Kingdom being transferred upon his Unckle Frede∣rick. Against him a league is made between Lewis Sfortia, Pope Alexander, Lewis the 12. of France, son to Charles of Orleans, successor to Charles lately dead, Ferdinand of Spain, the Venetians, and Florentines, on this condition, That Millan should be restored to King Lewis, who claimed it by right of inheritance; and Cremona to the Venetians: That Caesar Bergia, Pope A∣lexanders  son, should be assisted to destroy the Flaminian, Aemilian, and Umbrian Noblity, by which slaughter he aimed at the Principality of Cisalpin Gallia, and that Ferdinand and Lewis should divide the Kingdom of Naples between them. Ferdinand preferred a Kingdom to Consanguinity, in respect of which, he should have assisted Frederick. The hatred of the Venetians against Sfortia, caused this League: for the Pope a little before, with Sfortia, and Venice, were in league against France and Florence, in de∣fence of Pisa: for which cause they drew in Maximilian the Emperor; but when success failed them, and the Venetians aimed at the superiority of Pi∣sa, Sfortia fell off, and opposed himself to the Venetians; which incensed them, and made them enter into league with the Princes against him. Sfortia being now in a great strait, and finding no help from Maximilian, whom the Switzers and Grisons had made War upon, he most wickedly in∣cited Bajazet against Venice, which was his ruin: For when he returned in∣to Lombardy, having the assistance of the Switzers Foot, and Burgundian Horse, he was betrayed to Tramulius the French General, and by him conveyed into France to perpetual imprisonment. His brother also, As∣canius, the Cardinal, as he was flying to Placentia, was intercepted by the Venetians, and delivered up to the French; and so Millan within one year changed her Lords thrice. Frederick of Arragon, who was now in the Kingdom of Naples, being ig∣norant of the league between the two Kings of Spain, and France, and that they had parted this Kingdom between them, sent to Consalvus for aid; but in vain, for he was suddenly surprised by the French, who were come down into Campania, so that he was forced with his wife and chil∣dren to get over into the Castle of Aenaria for safety: Naples being sur∣rendered, he obtains leave of Mamurcius and Obegnius, the French Gene∣rals, to repair by sea unto King Lewis of France, hoping to finde some fa∣vor from him. This request was quickly granted, for they knew that he should be there imprisoned. He left his young sone Ferdinand at Tarentum, to keep it with a strong Garrison, who surrendered both the town and himself to Consalvus, who sent him into Spain to partake of his Fathers fortune. According to the agreement, the kingdome of Naples was divided be∣tween the two Kings: the two Provences of Campania, or
Terra laboria,  Aprutia, or Praecutina, fell to the French, with the City of Naples, the Re∣gall seat of Campania. The other two, namely Brutij, and Apulia, to the Spaniard. But afterwards, because one kingdome could not satisfie two Kings, the French and Spaniard fell out about the division, and so the Spa∣niard having quite expelled the French, obtained the who le kingdom. Caesar Borgia, having nefariously murtherd the Italian Nobility, and poysoned his Father Alexander by a Cup, which he had prepared for the Cardinals, but by the mistake of the Cup-bearer, was presented to the Pope, by com∣mand from Ferdinand of Spain was apprehended, and there imprisoned 3. years in the Castle of Medina, whence he escaped by ropes, out of a win∣dow, and fled to Iohn, King of Cantabria, in whose Wars, with Alarinus, he was shot with a musket bullet, and so dyed. Upon the irruption of the French into Italy, Maximilian calls a Dyet of the Princes at Worms, for ma∣king War against the Turks; but he could not effect any thing: shorly af∣ter he makes War against the Helvetians, in which 20000 men were consu∣med. Eight battels were fought, in which Maximilian had the worst, whose aim was to suppress the growing greatness of the Switzers, to reco∣ver the Territories taken from Austria by the Switzers, and to reduce them to the obedience of the Empire. At last a pacification is made at Basil. Then began the Bavarian War, occasioned by Rupert the Palatin, sonne to  Philip the Elector, who married Rupert to George, Duke of Bavaria's Daughter, with whom he obtained from George, a part of the Dutchy of Ba∣varia 1504 for her portion. Caesar would not ratifie this grant of Bavaria, be∣cause it was against the Custom of the Empire, and Laws of Fees, and pre∣judical to Albert, Duke of Bavaria; yet the Pope approved it. After the death of George, Maximilian would have a 3. part of the lands granted to be assigned over to Albert of Bavaria, another 3. to Rupert for his Wifes portion, and the rest to the Palatines Family for the losses they had re∣ceived from Lewis of Bavaria. Philip refused these conditions, therefore he takes up Arms: Maximilian proscribes him, and raiseth an Army which  much weakened the Palatine Family: Rupert was assisted by the Bohemians, 2000 of whom were slain. At last, the Palsgrave being worsted, Frederick, Elector of Saxony, reconciles him to Caesar, causing him at the Dyet of Co∣len to make his submission to Maximilian, for which he incurred a while the Emperors displeasure; in that he would mediate for such an enemy of the Empire: yet Caesar pardoned the Palatin, and gave to Ruperts sons, a part of that controverted countrey. The Venetian War was undertaken by almost all the Kings of Chri∣stendum, at the instigation of Pope Iulius, who had lately driven out of 1508 Bonomia, Iohn Bentivolus, being now 70. years old. Their power began to  be formidable to the other Princes: but after they had punished the Ve∣netians sufficiently, the same Iulius raiseth another War in defence of them. Two years before this, Phylip the son of Maximilian, Prince of Belgium, is invited to Spain by the Nobility, to undertake the Kingdome of Isa∣bella his Mother in law: Ferdinand perceiving his peoples affections more inclined to Phylip then to himself, in anger he sailes to Naples: but Phy∣lip being unacquainted with that hot climat, fed too plentifully, and so fell into a fever and dyed the 28. year of his age. He left by his wife two sons, Charles and Ferdinand, and four daughters. Before his death, a Commet was seen. When Ferdinand understood his son in law was dead, having setled Na∣ples,  he returns into Spain, and by the way meets with the French King, with whom he consults about the Venetian War, which the Princes wer willing to undertake, that they might curb the growing estate of that Ci∣ty, which used to raise her selfe by the fall of others, and aimed at the Do∣minion
of all Italy. Therefore Maximilian Caesar, Pope Julius, Lewis of France, Ferdinand of Spain, and Alphonsus of Ferraria, enter into a Confe∣deracy against them. Caesar was willing to be revenged on Venice, for stopping his passage into Italy, when he was travelling to Rome for his In∣auguration. He took from the Venetians by Ralph Prince of Anhalt, his General, Vincentia, Verona, and Padua, and defeated the Venetian Ar∣my, whereof 9000. were slain. But shortly after they poysoned him at Verona, and so the Cities revolted to the Venetians again. Lewis of France 1513 took from them, Cremona, with some other Cities: Alphonsus of Ferraria seized upon divers of their Territories: Pope Iulius took Ariminum, Ra∣venna, and other Towns: and they were Fleeced also by Ferdinand. Thus being exhausted of their mony by this War, and robbed of their Cities, and Territories, they humbly beg peace from Iulius, which he granted them, but could not perswade the French and Germans, nor the Ferrarian to lay down Armes, which occasioned a new War, in which the French take Bononia, from the Pope; whereupon he excommunicates Lewis, the French King, and pretends to bring back Maximilian Sfortia unto his Fa∣thers principality, whence he was unjustly expelled. The French King on the other side, sleighting the Popes curses, calls a Synod at Pisae, in which, after the example of the Synods of Constance and Basill, he desires  the Popes actions may be questioned: to this the Florentines at first assen∣ted, but shortly after they recanted; whereby the Cardinals and French Garrison by a popular tumult are expelled the City, so that they repair to Millan. The Pope was assisted by the Venetians, Switzers, and Ferdinand of Spain, who expelled out of Cantabria, Iohn, King of Navar, being of the French Faction. Behinde, France was invaded by King Henry of England. The French and German Army defeat the Venetians near Athesis, then they march to Ravenna, where they totally rout the Popes army, of whose men there were slain sixteen thousand the rest flung down their Armes and sub∣mitted. After this, the Emperor calls home his forces, and makes a league with Spain and England, which furnished the French with work at home: wherefore the French Army is called out of Italy, but as they were march∣ing, they are set upon by the Switzers and Venetians upon the Popes insti∣gation, and driven quite out of Lombardy. So the Pope recovers again Bo∣nonia, and casts out the Beutivoli. Genua asserts her own liberty: Maxi∣milian Sfortia is restored to the principality of Millan, and so are the Medics brought back into Florence, whom the French had driven out: and so end∣eth the Confederacie against the Venetians. After this, Leo 10. takes from  Sfortia, Placencia, and Parma, extending the Churches Territories as far as Po. Lewis of France, and Ferdinand of Spain, secretly make a league, con∣firming Cantabria upon the Spaniard, and Millan upon the French: but the French King dyeth not long after, and the year ensuing, the Spanish fol∣lowed: in whom ended the race of the Arragonian Kings, which had reigned from the Berengary Earls of Barcebona, 370 years, and 230 in Sici∣ly. His death was portended by a Commet. To Ferdinand succeeded Charles the fift, his Grandchild by his daughter. To Lewis succeeded, Fran∣cis, Duke of Angoulesme, his son in law: he began his reign with the Itali∣an 1515  War, in which, breaking through the Alpes, he defeates the Switzers, 1516 fighting for Maximilian Sfortia at Millan: the battel lasted two days; of 25000 men, scarse one halfe escaped. He takes from the Pope Parma and Placentia, restoring them to the ancient jurisdiction of the Insubrians: the Castle of Millan is surrendered to him, and
Maximilian conveyed into  France. Upon this success, Francis intends to invade the kingdome of Naples, had not Maximilian Caesar called him out of Italy, by stirring up the Switzers and English against him. The Venetian War begun by Maximili∣an, was ended by Charles, in the league between him and Francis, on these Articles; That Charles should restore the kingdom of Navar to his son Iohn, if the Arbitrators should think fit, and withall 100000 crowns yearly to the French King out of the Kingdom of Naples, for confirming of his right to that Crown: also that Verona should be restored to Venice upon the payment of 200000 crowns to Caesar at two times. Maximilian being now old, confirmed these Articles, and the rather, becaus he had no hope of  aid from Switzerland. But when Charles was elected Emperor, which Francis aimed at, this league was broke, and great Wars fell out between Charls and Francis, in which the possssion of Naples, and Millan was recovered by Charles. About this time, Charles Duke of Gelderland, upon the insti∣gation and charges of the French, made Wars against the Brabantins, in ha∣tred of the house of Burgundy. About these times in the Diocess of Spire, the people began to mutiny for their liberties, after the example of the Switzers: but this sparkle hid 25 years under the Cinders, brake out into a flame through all Ger∣many. At Vienna there was a meeting between Maximilian Caesar, Ladislaus,  King of Hungaria and Bohemia, and Sigismund, King of Poland, who renew the old league, which they confirm by mutual marriages, That Mary, Neece to Maximilian, should marry with Lewis, the son of Ladislaus: Anna the daughter of Ladislaus should chuse either of his Nephews for her Husband, with hope of succession to the Kingdom of Hungaria, if Lewis should dye without issue male: That after the death of Ladislaus, Maximilian and Sigis∣mund should have the protection of the children and kingdom, but the Hungarian Nobility, after the death of Ladislaus, which followed shortly, neglected both these Guardians, and fell into Factions about the Tuiti∣on of the young King, scarse yet ten years old; dividing his Revenews  and power among them, which gave occasion to the Turk (Maximilian being dead, and the Polonian involved in a three-fold War, to wit, the Tartarian, the Russian, and Borusnacetu) to invade Hungaria, and take Belgrade, the chief strength of that kingdom. Maximilian held his last Dyet at Auspurg, in which a consultation is had about the Turkish Warre; for Selymus having overthrown the Sultans kingdom, did threaten Chri∣stendom. He recommended his Nephew Charles to the Princes to take care of him after his death, which followed shortly after, having fallen in∣to a Fever, and loosness the 59. year of his age, and the 32. of his Empire. 1519 He had two wives, the first was Mary of Burgundy, by whom he had Phi∣lip, who by marriage added the kingdoms of Spain, Sicily, and Naples to the House of Austria: His other two sons dyed young; his Daughter Margaret was betrothed to Charles the 8. of France, but by him repudia∣ted, having taken by force Ann of Britany, the onely Heir of that Dutchy, after she was promised to Maximilian. Then Margaret was betrothed to the Prince of Arragon, who dyed before the marriage; at last she marri∣ed with that unfortunate Prince, Philbert of Savoy. Caesars other wife was Blanca Maria, Daughter to Galleacius of Millan, and sister of Iohn Ga∣leas, by whom he had no issue. Some few years before Caesars death, Sigismund, King of Poland, and Con∣stantine, Duke of Ross, or Rossia, defeated the great Army of the Musco∣vits,  having killed about 40000 of the enemies near Borysthenes. About this time arose the quarrel between the Franciscans, holding the Virgin Mary to be conceived without sin, and the Dominicans, who held the con∣trary: which troubled the world, till some Monks were burned for speak∣ing
through hollow Images of the Virgin, and deluding the people. An. 1517. Martin Luther began to oppose the Popes indulgences: 100 years after, the burning of Iohn Husse at the Councel of Constance, being encou∣raged thereto by Frederick, Duke of Saxony, and seconded by Erasmus, Me∣lancthon, Bugenhagius, and others. His intention at first, was onely to op∣pose the abuse of Pardons, but being exasperated by Tecelius the Domini∣can, who burned his papers, and stirred up other Monks to write inve∣ctives against him: he writes to Pope Leo, and Albert, Arch-bishop of Mag∣deburg, Primat of Germany, that he would submit his Theses to the Judgement and Censure of the Roman Church; and at the last Dyet of Maximilian, held at Ausburg, he promiseth to Cardinal Cajetan that he  would be silent, if his adversaries would be quiet: but they still incensed his fiery spirit, with more oyle, so that now he proceeds further in oppo∣sing Image worship, Purgatory, Transubstantiation, and other controvert∣ed points. After the death of Maximilian, the Turk having setled Syria and Egypt, prepares to invade Panonia: the French King having beat the Switzers, and possessed himself of Millan, aims at Naples, and strives to translate the Empire from Germany to France: Therefore he raiseth an Army, makes way with Pope Leo the tenth: desires the Title of Emperor of Constanti∣nople,  and promiseth to make War against the Turk. For this purpose, the Venetians are invited to joyn with him: Ambassadors are sent into Germany to treat with the Electors for the Empire. The Arch-Bishop of Mints sends to acquaint the Electors that the Emperor was dead, and that they should meet at Franckfort about his successor, who all met at the day appointed, and place, in the Church of S. Bartholemew, where the Pat∣tent called the Golden bull, was read, the Decrees of which, the Electors standing at the Altar, swear to observe. After this, they go from the Al∣tar to the Chappel, where the Election useth to be; there the Arch-Bi∣shop of Mints having prayed for direction from God, and a blessing on their proceedings, he makes a speech to them, shewing the weight and ne∣cessity of that business they were now about; of that concord which ought to be amongst them: how dissenting suffrages have heretofore caused much civil War: how much bloud had been shed about the suc∣cession of the Emperor, till Otho the 3. by the Popes approbation establi∣shed this Electoral Colledge, by which these 500 years, the Imperial pos∣session hath remained in this Nation: He alleadgeth many examples of misery and destruction in Germany, by disagreeing Elections; and how needful at this time concord is, when Germany hath so many enemies, and the Turk is threatning Christendom: when the eyes of all Nations  are now fixed upon this Election: When the Bishop had ended his speech, the Electors commended him for his wisdom and eloquence, and promise to follow his directions. Mean while the Ambassadors of Charles, King of Spain, Arch-Duke of Austria and Burgundy, with some German Princes, come to Mints, recommending to the Electors, the wisdom, courage, mo∣deration, and other virtues of this Prince; likewise his power and ability above othe Christian Kings, which Maximilian perceiving, recommend∣ed him to the Electors: this so wise a Prince, so loving to Germany would not have done had he known the contrary. But the French Legates at Confluence, with great promises, strive to procure the Electors suffrages, shewing that they should not prejudice the Laws if they Elected Francis for their Emperor, if they consider the great union heretofore of the German and French Nation, under the Family of Pipin and Charles, almost 100 years: how by their united strength they suppressed the Lombards, Sarazens in Italy and France: how needful
their union is now to suppress  the Turks greatness; how much Francis was affected to the well-fare of Italy, whereof he had now a good part, which being united with France, and Germany, would master the Turk both by Land and Sea. Besides that, no Prince in Christendom was so fit to be Emperor as Francis, both in re∣spect of his power, as of his Militarie skil, valor, and happiness, whereof he hath given good experience in recovering of Insubria; and that the Germans should lose nothing of their Liberties by this Election, but rather increase them by obtained offices and places of Command in France, pro∣mising that no French Garrisons should be kept in Germany, but the natives of Germany onely. The Electors thanked the King for his good will to Germany, promising to proceed in the Election according to their Laws, and Oath which they had taken. Not long before this, the French King had sent Legates to the Switzers, shewing them how needfull it would be to the peace of Christen∣dome, and destruction of the Turk, if Francis were chosen Emperor, that therefore they would be no hinderance to this Election, which was so much desired by the Christian Princes, and the Pope himself for suppres∣sing of the Turk who was aiming at the total subversion of Christian laws, and religion: He promiseth also that the Switzers shall be great gainers by this Union. To this the Switzers answer, That they would not hinder  or molest the liberty of the Electors in their choise. They send Letters also to the German Princes, shewing how the French were busie to procure suffrages, and withall disswade them from Electing Francis, for that would cause much trouble in Germany, and that there was no need to chuse stran∣gers, having so many able men of their own Nation fit for that high im∣ployment. They write also to Pope Leo the 10. That he would not per∣swade the Electors to chuse Francis, for that would cause great Wars be∣tween France and Germany, to the great prejudice of Italy. The Pope by his answer seems to be inclined rather to Charles, then Francis, though he nameth neither. Mean while the Electors proceed to the Election, the Bishop of Mints speaks first, shewing that it was against their Oath, the liberty, Honour, and safety of Germany to chuse Francis being a stranger, & wohse aim was to transferre the Empire into France, which could not be possessed in Germany heretofore by Charles the Grosse, and the Otho's, without great Wars. If then Frances be chosen, the French will domineer in Germany, and will set it all on fire of Civil Wars: for he hath already denounced War against Charles, and hath broken the old league between France and Burgundy; and threatened War against Naples; besides, the Austrians and Belgians have al∣ready refused to be under the French yoak: and there is no more reason  for France to demand the German Empire, because they derive the Origi∣nall of their Kings from the Germans, then they have to demand Troy from the Turk, because they derive themselves from Hectors son. If Fran∣cis (saith he) be chosen, then must the Electors make war against Austria, so well deserving of Germany, and violate the Will of Maximilian. They will arm Francis, who is too ambitious of domination, with power to raise War in the bowels of the Empire. As for his suppressing of the Turks, in that he can do nothing, except first he suppress the Belgians at home, and the Neopolitans in Italy. He concludes then Negatively, against the Electi∣on of Francis: as for Charles he is doubtfull, because Spain is so remote  from Germany, which by reason of the Turks, or of civill dissentions, re∣quires the Emperors presence. Besides, it is to be feared that Spain having once got the Empire, will not part with it again, nor will they ever suffer Germany to enjoy Millan, which they have conpuered by their bloud. Therefore he thinks it might be safer to chuse
one of their own German  Princes, if any one had power enough to buckle with Spain or France; but if these two Kingdoms fall out, Germany will be wronged for want of a potent Emperor: which was the cause that in Frederick the 3. time, the Burgundians marched without controle through a great part of Germany: Philip Maria domineered in Italy; and the Emperor himselfe was beset even in Austria, who was beholding to Bohemia for his liberty: and lastly he was driven out of Austria by the Hungarians; besides the late controver∣sies in Religion are like to make great broiles in Germany, which cannot be suppressed without a generall Councel, and a prince more potent then a∣ny of the German Peers, who must both assemble and defend the Coun∣cel:  and no small power is required against the Turk; therefore he con∣cludes in the Affirmative, that in respect of power, Charls is the fittest for the Empire; and the rather because he is a German prince, as Arch-Duke of Austria, and not a stranger: and besides, a prince of excellent parts and temper for government, whereof he hath given ample testimo∣ny in setling Spain, and composing the differences thereof: discended also of brave princes, if you look upon the virtues either of Philip his Fa∣ther, or of Maximilian his Grand-Father: He is also of an age fit for Act∣ion and Government; not a childe, nor an old decrepit man. As for his remoteness from Germany, he may be so dealt with, (in respect of many  urgent occasions, and of his large principalities in Germany, and Belgium) to make his oftnest residence there, seeing he will finde employment enough in driving the French out of Italy, in keeping off the Turks from Austria, and in setling Religion. Having finished, the other Electors desire the Bishop of Trevers to speak, being a man of learning, judgement, and experience, as one accu∣stomed to publick employments both in Rome and Germany, and well ac∣quainted with the estate of France. He therefore having commended the Bishop of Mints for his wise speech, sheweth, That if his opinion be followed, the old prophesie will be fulfilled, which was, That Maximili∣an  should be the last German Emperor. But saith he, there should be no need of a forreign prince, if the princes of Germany were not idle and la∣sie, but would imitate the valor of their progenitors: Yet if there must be a forreign Emperor, he prefers Francis to Charles, because Spain is far∣ther off, which having got once the Empire, will hardly part with it again; besides, if Charls should be elected, because of his principalities in Germany, then Francis may be chosen, who hath the Dutchy of Millan, and Kingdom of Arles, anciently belonging to the German Emperors. Again, the benefit that will redownd to all Europ, by the Union of France with Germany is very great; for so Italy will be quieted, the pope satisfied, and the Turks  suppressed: the French also, and German natures do sympathise in love, manners and opinions; but Spain as it is more distant in place, so it is more different in qualities, and in respect of longinquity, less able to help Germany at a pinch, and to endure our cold climat: besides, That Spain will have the glorie of all our Victories, and make us their slaves; whereas the French will share with us: if Francis be Emperor, Millan will be as well ours as theirs, and the Belgians will be less able to stir against him, and he will have the less cause to War against them, or to trouble I∣taly seeing Francis enjoyeth Millan quietly; so that he will have no thing to hinder him from falling on the Turk. But if we chuse the Spaniard, troubles will arise in Italy, and so the Turkish War will be hindred. The French will fall upon Naples, and if he prevail, will force the Pope to an∣nihilate our Election, which will cause unspeakable troubles; besides, how hard it will be to get the Empire out of the Spaniards hands having once hold of it, may be conjectured by the Carthaginians, who
having  once got footing in Sicily, could not in many years be driven out thence, nor the Spaniards out of Naples, nor can the Turks yet be expelled Eu∣rope. If we compare these two Kings together, we will finde that Francis is the better Scholar, the wiser man, and more experienced, because more a∣ged: in Charles there is but an inclination and disposition as yet, to prince∣ly and military arts; but in Francis there is a habit who hath with such fe∣licity managed his Wars in Italy, as to overthrow the Switzers, and subdue Millan: Therefore he concludes in the affirmative, for Francis, shewing what inconveniences will arise to Germany, by the remoteness of Charles:  but he prefers to both a Native Prince of Germany, who is such in Habita∣tion, Language, Manners and Original: such a man may be potent e∣nough, saith he, if there be but worth and courage in him, and unity among us: for when one told Lewis of France, That Maximilian was but Consul of Auspurbg signifying his weakness, true, saith the King, but when he beats his Drum all France trembles; intimating the Emperors power, which is formidable to the neighbouring Nations, for (saith he) inferior Princes, such as Albert Duke of Saxony, Albert Marquiss of Brandeburg, the Bavarian and others, have upon occasion raised great Forces, why then should we mistrust the Emperors power, or prefer a stranger to a  Native. After he had spoken, the Electors sat silent a while, musing what was best to be done: at last Frederick, Duke of Saxony, delivered his opinion, That Francis by their law could not be chosen: that Charles was a German prince, and that they stood in need of a powerfull Emperor in those tur∣bulent times, and that Charles was in this respect to be preferred before all others: but yet that certain conditions for the liberty and safety of Germany, must be proposed to him. To this the other Electors assented. The Bishop of Trevers told them, that he foresaw the Fate of Germany, and change of the Empire, therefore wished them seriously to consider, but  withall for quietness sake, he would joyn his suffrage with them, so that day was spent in debates. The next day they meet to consult about the conditions to be proposed to Charles his Ambassadors then at Mints, which being accepted, a day for the election is set in S. Bartholemews chappel: Mints is first asked whom he thought fit should be Emperor, answers Charles Arch-Duke of Austria; then he asks the rest, they all answer the same. These suffrages were indorsed and sealed, and then publikely proclaimed: whereupon the Arch-Bishop of Mints made a speech to the Nobility and people, thanking God for chusing a Prince so eminent in Virtue, so excellent in power, so sweet in his own nature and disposition, who being now of the same age with Alexander when he began his Empire, was fit for great Actions, and Heroick exploits. He thanked God also for the u∣nanimous assent of the Electors; whereas heretofore their disagreeing Elections have been the cause of much bloudshed and Civil Wars in Ger∣many; therefore he wisheth the people to be thankful, joyful, dutiful, and obedient to such a Prince, who is no stranger to them but of the Au∣strian Family, which for above 80. years had deserved so well of Germa∣ny, who hath given already testimonies of his princely Virtues, by setling and uniting the factions and warlike spirits of Spain, which now was to be united to the German Empire. When the speech was ended, all gave a  shoot, and with joyful acclamations allowed the Election, and prayed for the prosperity of the Emperor. The Embassadors of Charles are sent for, and their advice is required about setling of the Empire in quietness from the French Factions, till Charles should be ready to come himself: upon this
Casimir, Marquiss of  Brandeburg is appointed to place Garrisons where there was suspition, and to have an Army ready if need should require: some Electors were joyn∣ed with him as his councellors: the Ambassadors are accompanied by the Electors to Mintz, who returning to Franckford, send Frederick, Palatine of the Rhen, with some other Princes, as their Ambassadors to Charles, one of whom made such hast that he came to Barcinum, or Barellona from Franckford in nine days: He found the King in Bed, in the morning, whom he acquaints with the glad news of his Election, for which he is rewarded with good store of Gold: the Palatin is met with by the King almost three miles without the town, to whom he delivers his letters, in which  the Princes express their good will to, and great hopes they have of him, whom they humbly desire to accept of the Empire, and to hasten his com∣ing into Germany. Charles, by his Orator Mercurinus, answers the Ambassadors, That he was very joyfull for the good will of his Countrey towards him, and their good opinion in conceiving him onely worthy of that high employment, and honour, therefore promiseth to return mutual love to his countrey, and perpetual good will to the Princes his Cosins. In the mean while, Charles was perplexed within himself, when he considered the great weight that lay on him if he accepted the Empire, to wit, Wars both with France and the Turks, and the offence he should give Spain in forsaking them: on the other side, he thought it hard to refuse what God, and the free Election of his Countrey had cast upon him, tending so much to the honour of his Family, and well-fare of Christendom: Therefore he wisheth Frederick to acquaint the German Princes, that he would accept the Empire: then he calleth to God for wisdom, with Solomon to rule his people, Grace to imitate the virtues of Trajan and Theodosius, two Spanish Princes called to be Emperors: then having writ his Letters to the Prin∣ces, promises to act nothing without them, and to be with what speed he can in Germany. He dismisseth the Palatine, after he had bestowed rich  gifts on him. In the begining of the spring, Caesar set sail, and arrives in England, where he is Royally entertained by King Henry the 8. who promised to wait on him at his Coronation: so a league is confirmed between them. Then he comes into Belgium, where he is received with joyful acclamati∣ons, finding him now a man, who went from them a childe. He made some stay there to settle the Countrey, and to receive King Henry who came not, being hindred by the French, with whom he enters into a league. At last Charles comes to Aix, attended by the flower of the Bur∣gundian, and Belgian Nobility. He was met by the Electors, and rest of the German Princes: by the Priests also, carrying the Monuments of  Charles the great. The next day, being the 12 of October, he was crowned, though the plague was in the town. Mints and Colen put on his Robe, and led him to the Altar, the Palatine carrying before him the Globe of the world; Saxony, the Sword, and Brandeburg, the Scepter: Trevers An∣noynted him: Colon and Mints Crowns him. After he had sworn at the Altar, then the Sword and Scepter were delivered to him: after this, the great Feast is prepared, in which Mints standeth with the great Seal in his hand; Brandeburg with the Scepter; the King of Bohemia's Ambassador is Cup-bearer; and the Palatine, Sewer. Mean while, the Duke of Sax∣ony  distributes Hay in the Market place to the Horses: awhole Ox, stuff∣ed with all sorts of Birds, is rosted, of which the first dish is presented to the new Crowned King of the Romans: after the Coronation, Caesar, 1520 with the Princes go to
Colen, to confer about the next Dyet, which was appoynted to be held at Wormes, the first of Ianuary: this being done▪ Charles returnes too into Belgium, and the Princes to their ovvn homes. CHAP. XVI. The affairs of Italy, Germany, Netherlands, with the actions of the Popes of those times, and the Councel of Trent, &c. under Charles the 5. Fer∣dinand and Maximilian, from the year one thousand five hundred twenty,  till one thousand five hundred seventy six. CHarles the fifth being Crowned (as is said) in his first Dyet held at Wormes, proscribes Luther to ingratiate himself with Pope Leo: but Frederick the Elector hid him at Wartberg till the troubles were past over, rai∣sed by Carolostadius for breaking dovvn the Images; then Luther returns to Viteberg. Mean while the Pope makes a League vvith Charles to drive the French out of Insubria, and all Italy, vvhich vvas easie to be  done, by reason the Svvitzers had fallen off from the French for vvant of pay. Millan is restored by Caesar to Francis Sfortia, brother of Maximili∣an; Parma and Placentia to the Pope, vvho shortly after dyed not vvithout suspition of poyson given him by his Chamberlain, in vvhose place vvas set up Hadrian, Bishop of Utricht, sometimes Caesars School-master, but then Governor of Spain: He gave way for a general Synod to suppress the dif∣ferences in Religion, and to correct the corruptions of the Clergie. He made a League between Charles Caesar, Henry of England, Lewis of Hun∣garia, and some of the Italian Princes, having excluded the French, from whom the Venetians fell off: in the interim, Adrian dyeth the second year of his Pontificate. In his time the Inquisition begins to burn Luther∣ans as Hereticks: two Monks were burned at Bruxels. Luther rageth at Henry the 8. for writing against him, and assuming from the Pope the Title of Defendor of the Faith. Zuinglius, a Canon of Tigurum, caused the Se∣nate of that City to cast off the Roman Religion. King Francis of France taking occasion upon the Commotions of Spain, seiseth almost all Navar, and sends a great Army against Millan: but Caesar drives the French again out of Italy, and sends Charles of Burbon into Province, who in vain at∣tempted Massyles. Francis retakes Millan, being forsaken by Sfortia, but in the siege of Papia is taken himself prisoner, having seperated his Army by the advice of Clements 7. who succeeded Adrian. Hereupon Clements fear∣ing that Caesar would be too great in Italy, makes a League with the French & Venetians, to restore Sfortia. Caesar sets Francis again at liberty on such conditions as he would not perform, and being angry with the Pope abolishes his power throughout all Spain. He takes the Castle of Millan, and the Columnii invade Rome, where they besiege the Pope in his Ca∣stle 1527 of S. Angelo, and plunder his Palace of the Vatican. The Churches are spoiled, the priests abused, the rich men plundered, the Pope forced to yeild upon Caesars conditions, and the Cardinals Caps are openly sold. Thus was Clement punished for breaking his League with the Empe∣ror. Mean while the Florentines turn out the Medices, and set themselves free: Genua is forced to submit to the French power, which after this layeth siege to Naples, but the sickness
so raged in his Army, that it consumed  20000. the rest were dispersed. Neither was their French Fortune better in Insubria, for they lose Genua again with the Castle, and are driven out of Savona, and Burbon taken prisoner, so that the Confederates are now forced to think of Peace with Caesar: but Germany is much troubled now with Controversies of Religion: the Protestants are divided among them∣selves; Carolostadius, with Zuinglius, and Oecolampadius, in poynts of the Eucharist oppose themselves to Luther: many Lutherans are burned for Hereticks: the Rusticks and servants, under shew of Evangelical libr∣ty, rebel against their Lords and Masters: Luther with all his preaching and writing, could not reclaim them, but they in great flocks drive out the Gentry, pull down their Castles, kill and butcher all that make resist∣ance.  At last by the confederat Swevians are overthrown near Ulme, Fran∣conie, and other place. About 50000 of them are slain, and their Ring∣leader is rosted alive at a gentle fire: yet shortly after they fly out again by the instigation of one Thomas Munzerus, a mad Preacher, but are ut∣terly defeated by Philip, the Landgrave: Munzerus preaching is spoiled by the loss of his head. Another Rebellion against the Bishop of Tre∣vers, is quieted by the punishment and death of their Captain Siccin∣gus. Mean while Luther goeth on boldly in his Reformation. He sets out the New Testament, and Psalms in Dutch, and causeth Divine service to  be performed in the Vulgar tongue, whose labor in this is commended by Iohn Duke of Saxony, who suceeded his brother Frederick by George of Brandeburg, by Ernestus and Francis of Luneburg, by Philip the Landgrave, Philip of Pomerania, and some others. These protested against the de∣crees of Ratisbon, and Spire, in prejudice to religion: hence came the name of Protestants. Albert, Master of the Teutonick order, and Duke of Borus∣sia, 1529 marrieth with Dorothy, Daughter to Frederick, the first King of Denmark; then did the Rhodian Knights obtain the Isle of Malta, and at the same time the sweating sickness brake out in England. Charles preparing against the Turk, makes a League with the Pope at  Barcellona, wherein it was agreed, That Caesars Daughter Margaret, should marry with Alexander of Medices, and that he may be restored to his anci∣ent Dominion of Florence. The Venetians also joyn in this League, and delivered up the towns they had among the Samnites, in Picenum, and Apu∣lia. It is also agreed, That Francis paying 200000 Crowns, should receive his Children again which were his Hostages. Then after Caesar had beaten Solyman, he is Crowned at Bononia with great state by the Pope, to whom he swore to destroy the Lutherans, who at Marpurg tryed to be reconciled to Zuinglius, but could not. Shortly after in the Dyet at Auspurg, they exhi  bited the confession of their faith▪ from the place called Augustana, which was openly read, but then rejected by Caesar. The Lutheran Princes are enjoyned to restore all to the Church again, under pain of proscription, and not to write or speak against the Roman Doctrine. But Luther pub∣lisheth a book, exhorting the Germans to reject that impious Edict of the Dyet, and to oppose the Roman Tenets, and to defend the Protestant Princes by the sword. Caesar, to retain the Empire in his Family, caused his Brother Ferdinand, at Colen to be proclaimed King of the Romans. The same year Florence, after a long siege is surrendered to Caesar, and according to the Agreement between Caesar and the Pope, Alexander of Medices, the Bastard son of Laurence, is made Duke of Florence; but Charles finding the  Turk preparing against him, makes peace with the Lutherans, by the me∣diation of Albert, Arch Bishop of Mints, and Ludovick, the Palsgrave. In his Army arose a great mutiny for want of pay, which made him alter his
resolution, and return by Italy into Spain. The Turks wast and plunder all where they came; but in their return lose both their spoiles and lives in Helvetia. The Bernois after the Example of Zurich and Basil, shake off the Roman religion: whereupon by the instigation of Ferdinand and Clement, great troubles are raised, which the French endeavoured to compose, but could 1531 not. At last they come to a Battel, in which Zuinglius is killed, and his body burned. Oecolampadius grieving for the loss of his friend, dyed. The Tigurins recruit again, and try another Battel, in which there was such loss on both sides, that they agreed to live peaceably one with another, notwithstanding their differences in religion. In Westphalia a War is raised by Iohn of Leyden, the Taylor, who being infected with the madness of Muntzer, and back'd by Bernard Rotman, Minister of Monaster, cavilled a∣gainst Baptisme of Infants, braging much of Enthusiasmes and the Spirit: A great part of Monaster sided with him. No disputation nor councel could work on these men; but to strengthen themselves they call in many strangers, they thrust out the old Senate, and choose new Senators; they call the City Ierusalem, and dream of new Apostles, Kings, and Judges: but the Bishop by the German forces so besieged their new Ierusalem, that it was vexed with as great a Famine as the old, and all kinde of calamities and outrages. At length after sixteen months siege the Town is taken; the Souldiers are put to the sword, King Iohn, Knipperdolling, Beruh, and their Minister Kretchting, are nipped with hot burning pincers, and hanged upon a high tower. Pope Clement confirms a new Order of Capuchins, and procrastinates the promised Synod, leaving that burthen by his death to Alexander Fer∣nesius his successor, whose pontifical name was Paul the third: he seemed very desirous to have a general councel: He makes his Nephewes Car∣dinals: Mantua is the place first named for a Councel, then Vicentia. Fif∣teen of the protestant Princes, and 30 Cities do remonstrate to  his Embassador Vergerius: That a general Synod is the Tribunall of the whole Church, not of the Pope alone; and that the Pope was a party, there∣fore no competent Judge: that he ought not first of himself to condemn Luther, and then force the Synod to do the like. Luther at Smalcald, frames some Articles, subscribed by certain Divines, which he exhibits to the Synod at Mantua. Mean while Caesar makes an expedition into Africa, to restore Muleasses to his Kingdom of Tunis, being turned out by Barbaross, the pyrate of Mity∣lene, whom Solyman had furnished with a fleet, himself being employed in the Persian War. Barbaross is overthrown, the Moor restored to his  Kingdom, and the Castle Guleta built by Charles, which made the Christi∣ans Navigation the more secure. The Turk took Seleucia, but in his return lost the most part of his Army by Famin and Want. When Caesar was re∣turned from Afric, he seizerh on Millan, (now void by the death of Sfor∣tia) as being Lord of the Fee. The French King on the other side claims it as his inheritance, and because the Duke of Savoy adhered to the Emperor, he drives him out of a great part of his Territories, which so moved Gaesar, that he made a great complaint to the Pope at Rome against the French, and withall sends an Army into France: but Pope Paul, un∣derstanding that the Turk had taken Clissa in Dalmatia, Corcyra from the Venetians, and subdued Moldavia, makes a peace of ten years between Cae∣sar and the French at Nicaea, a town of Province, where he procures for his Nephew Octavius, the Widow of Alexander Medices, who for his intempe∣rate Letchery, was murthered by his Cosin Jermin, Lawrence. Cosmus Me∣dices, is by Caesar made Duke of Florence, but against the Popes
will. The  fleet which the Emperor, Pope and Venesian sent against the Turk, is over∣thrown by Barbarossa and stormy weather. Luther translates the Bible into Dutch, and prints it; whose example in this, was followed by divers other 1538 Nations: At Straisburg a Colledg is erected, the Iesuits societie is instituted by Loiola a Spaniard; the Protestant Princes make a league among themselves, to whom is joyned the Dane, who had lately changed his Religion: Caesar up∣on the intreatie of his brother Ferdinand, calls a Dyet at Francford, for re∣conciling the differences in Religion, where a truce is given the Protestants. Caesar not long after this, having buried his Emperess Isabel, King Iohn of Portugall's sister, makes a journey into France, where he is royally recei∣ved by King Francis at Paris, and Eleanor his sister, King Francis his wife; he sends Ambassadors to Venice to incite them against the Turk, whose metro∣polis Constantinople was almost burned down; but the Castle of Guleta was recovered by Barbarossa; then Caesar hastneth to Belgium to suppress the rebel∣lion of Gaunt, whose old Priviledges he took away, and put to death the se∣ditious Authors, he appoints a conference at Wormes, between the Catholicks and Protestants, which was interrupted by the Pope fearing a Schisme. Af∣ter this Charls growing more milde towards the Protestants, indeavoured to have a conference of moderate Divines at Ratisbon, for reconciling some con∣trovered points; but Catarenus the Cardinall fearing the Popes displeasure, a∣verted  the Emperors minde, who referrs it to the general Synod, for he was then preparing of a fleet for Algier in Africk against the Turks, which came to no∣thing, for the winds and storms so spoiled the ships before Algier, that they were forced to return into Spain with great loss; so likewise Ferdinand's pre∣paration in Germany against the Turks did miscarry, by the sickness in the Ar∣my, and for want of discipline: About this time also, Francis finding that Charls deluded him about the restitution of Millan, and that he had put to death his Legats going to the Turks, breaks off the league, and drawes Willi∣am of Cleveland, to whom Charls had denied the possession of Gelderland, to side with him, who therefore endeavoured to seise upon Antwerp; for Charls  of Egmund heir of his fathers quarrell with the house of Burgundy, left Gel∣derland by his last will to William of Iuliers, and to his onely daughter Ma∣ry his wife, whose son William became heir of Iuliers, Cleveland, Gelder∣land, and other places; this wealth, that he might the more easily enjoy and retain, against the great power of Caesar, he thought it his safest way to en∣ter into a league with France, which caused afterwards great warrs. Chls to strengthen his cause against France, strives to make the Pope on his side, therefore he labours to suppress the Protestants; yet he would not part with Parma and Placentia, parcels of the Dutchie of Millan, to Octavius, Farnesi∣us, Pauls Nephew. He prepares then to make warr upon France and Cleve∣land, for this purpose he restores to Cosmus Medices his Castles for two hun∣dred thousand crowns: The French are assisted by Christian 3d. of Denmark, and Gustavus the Swede, for some wrong they had received from Charls; But Francis unwisely divides his Army into 5. parts, and falls upon 5. several Im∣periall Territories, by which he weakned his power, and lost quickly the pla∣ces he took; Cleveland lost so many of his Townes, that he was forced to submit to Caesar, and to content himself with the loss of Gelderland: But the French take Laudress and Luceburg, and assist the Turk in the siege of Nicea, and defeat the Cesarians in Piemont; wherefore Caesar at Spire gives peace to 1544 the Protestants till the next Dyet: Shortly after he recovers Luceburg, and takes divers Townes from the French, wasting all his Countrey almost to Paris, so that Francis was glad to sue for peace, and to restore Savoy. During the quietness which the Protestants had under Charls, they erect in divers places Colledges, and Schools for learning; but those Halcyonian days held not long; for Caesar and
Francis combine together to restore the old Religion, and to suppress all gainsayers: Therefore Proclamations are made through all their dominions against Protestanisme: One Peter Brulius for op∣posing the Roman Faith, is burned at Turnay; The Waldenses are massacred in Provence: Their extirpation was urged in the Dyet at Wormes. Paul as∣sembleth the Synod at Trent; with him Caesar, the French, and Polonian joyn in league, Caesar is reproved and threatned in a sharp Letter, which Luther answered, for conniving so long at the Protestants. Henry of Brunswig; for raising new troubles, is taken prisoner with his son by the Land-grave; the 1546 next year after this Luther died, 29. years after he began this fatall quarrell. The conference at Ratisbon is dissolved, the Protestants complaining of their  hard usage; and refusing to stand to the decrees of Trent. Mints and Tre∣vers fall off from Herman of Colen, and Frederick Palatine, who were lately turned Lutherians: Caesar raiseth an Army, Colen is proscribed by the Pope, a truce is made with Solyman, lest he should hinder the warr intended against the Protestants: The Pope promiseth to assist Caesar with 12 thousand Foot, 500 Horse, and good store of gold. Charls declares that his raising of For∣ces was not against the Cities, but some Princes who obstructed justice and the peace: The Saxon and Landgrave, whom Caesar aimed at, remonstrate that they were free from all crimes except Heresie, which was the onely cause of the Popes war: most of the Princes side with the Emperor. Denmark was  now in league with Charls, and the house of Burgundy; therefore to avoid offence, Christian the third, would not assist the Protestants. The Saxon and Landgrave are proscribed by Caesar, who hath now a great Army of Pontificians, Spaniards, and Germans, with which, great Forces of the Belgi∣ans do joyn near Ingolsta notwithstanding the Protestants endeavoured to hinder this conjunction: Caesar to distract the Protestant Army, assists Mau∣rice the Saxons Cosin German, with Forces against the Elector, with whom before he had a quarrell: Hereupon the Protestants are necessitated to trans∣ferr their Army into Saxony, and to leave a Garison in Saevia: The Land∣grave returns home with his Forces, unwilling to fight against Maurice his son in Law; So it was easie for Caesar to subdue the Sueves and Noricks. Fre∣derick Palatine, a friend but lately to the Protestants, now reconciles him∣self to the Emperor, so many others submit to him: In the mean while the Protestant doctrins of traditions, Apochripha books, originall sin, justifica∣tion by faith alone, and their opinions of the Sacraments are condemned in the Councell of Trent. The Saxon recovers what Maurice had taken from him, and withall surpri∣seth divers of his Towns, he drawes to his side the Bishopricks of Halberstad and Magdeburg, Caesar puts a mulct upon Ausburg and Strasburg, and receives them into favour; But Herman Bishop of Colen, upon perswasion of his friends, resignes his Bishoprick: His successor Adulphus presently abolished the begun reformation: Caesar takes in divers Towns in Saxony, in the inte∣rim his great Enemy King Francis dies, a friend to the Protestants, not out of love to them, but of hatred to Charls, therefore he used sometimes un∣derhand to furnish them with money: Saxon being now destitute of the friendship of France, is exposed to the Emperors fury, who with the Forces of his brother Ferdinand and Maurice, falls upon his Countrey; the Duke had sent most part of his Army into the Cities, therefore makes haste to shel∣ter himself in Witteberg, but Caesar foording over Albis, overtakes him, and forceth him to fight: In this conflict the Duke is wounded and taken, and by a Councell of Warr condemned to die, but he redeems his life by resignati∣on  of his Electroship, and by surrendring Witteberg and Gotha to Caesar; his estate was confiscate, and bestowed upon Ferdinand and Maurice; a yearly pension was allowed him. At Dracenburg, though the Protestants had the better of the day from the Cesarians,
yet they were much dejected for the  affliction of the Saxon. The Landgrave by perswasion of Maurice his son in Law, and Brandeburg humbly submits himself to Caesar, who detained him prisoner: Caesar carried away out of Germany into his Provinces, about 500. piece of Ordnace, and exacted of the Protestant 160000 thousand crowns; Ferdinand also punished the Bohemians, for not invading, but rather defending the Saxons Territories: The Protestants are forced to submit to the Counsell of Trent in many places; but some jarrs arise between the Pope and Caesar, for indeavouring to moderate the Counsell upon the Protestants re∣quest, 1548 and for slighting the Papall dignity. Pope Paul being told by his Physitians, that the aire of Trent was not wholsome, transfers the Synod to Bononia, against which, Caesar by his Ambassadors complains. Maurice, for his fidelity to Caesar, is made Elector of Saxony, he repairs the University of Witteburg; in all other places of his Jurisdiction he causeth the Protestant Ministers, to be either deposed, banished, or killed: The exam∣ple of Francis Spier, who falling off from Protestanisme, fell into dispair at Padua, was the occasion that divers were converted. Bucer, Fagius, and Martyr, passe over into England: Brentius, Musculus, and others, are strange∣ly preserved. The Captive Saxon, Brandeburg and the Palatine, favour the Protestants. Magdeburg, Brem, and some other places of Saxony, stand up∣on their libertie: Flaccus Illyricus leaves Witteburg, where he condemned Melancthons Faith, and goeth to Magdeburg; which City Caesar proscribed, and commanded the Elector Maurice to besiege it. The Electors are 1550 wrought upon to transfer the Title of King of the Romans upon Philip, Caesars son, by Mary of Portugall, but they would not recede from their first Act. The Magdeburgers overthrow some Forces of their enemies, among which were 200 Gentlemen. Mean while Paul 3d dieth with grief; his son Peter Loisius being slainbefore by Ferdinand Gonzaga. After three months alteration, to Paul succeeded Iulius 3d whose name before was Iohannes Maria Montanus, he had been President or Moderator of the Counsell. Henry 2d of France, son to Francis, strives to stir up the German Princes against Charls, chieflly Maurice,  who was offended for the imprisonment of his Father in Law the Land∣grave; Maurice combines with Albert of Brandeburg, and the Megapolitans with France; for the German liberty, he is leader of the Magdeburg Army, who having made his peace, leaves the Magdeburgers to Caesars mercy, who lay∣eth a heavy fine on them, leaving them to their Religion and Liberty. The Protestant Divines exhibit their Positions to the Counsell of Trent, but they were rejected. The Elector Maurice having often Petitioned Caesar for the Landgraves libertie, but still in vain, makes war against Charls, seiseth upon Auspurg; and having affrighted the Trent Fathers, with the report of his com∣ing thither, they all fled. Crescentius the Cardinall, President of the Counsell, was affrighted in the night by a black dog. The French take some Townes of the Empire, and by Lorrain break in upon Alsatia, and ex∣torts provision from Straisburg. Maurice propounds a league with Ferdinand and the Bavarian. The French King understanding that the Cesarians out of Belgium, were got into Champany, wasting all with fire and sword, turns nside to Lucem∣burg. The Saxon having taken the Alpin Straits, kills and takes about 3000. of the Caesarians, which so affrighted Charls and Ferdinand, that by the light of their matches, they stole away from Oenipont to Villacum by night: Oenipont being taken, all goods belonging to Caesar or the Spaniards, were plunder∣ed, but the goods of Ferdinand and Germans, were not touched. A truce is  made at last, and then peace. The Landgrave is dismissed from his Belgick prison. A free and perpetuall exercise of Protestanisme in Germany is gran∣ted, and all proscriptions are abolished. Before this transaction, Ulme, No∣riberg, with the Bishops of Bamberg, Herbipolis, and Mints, had
suffered  much loss and dammage by Albert, who had also subdued Wormes and Spire, and taken Trivers by surprisall. Maurice sends his Army into Hungary against the Turks, who had taken there divers Towns in revenge of Caesars taking of Lephs in Affrick against the peace. Ferdinands losses were so great, that he was forced to buy his peace from Solyman for an yearly pension of 30000. crowns. Caesar goeth against the French, but loseth most part of his Army by sickness, and his fortune began still to decline, he made war against Par∣ma and Mirandula, being assisted by the Pope, where he lost many men, but did no good. Sena fell off from Caesar to the French, because the Caesarians built a Castle in that Town. The Territories of Sena with long War was laid waste, and at last subdued by Cosmus Medices, who by Famin took Se∣na, and added it to his Principallitieby Caesars permission. Henry, by the Turks assistance, took the Isle of Corsica from the Germois, and wasts with fire and sword, Caesars Territoies, who on the other side destroyeth some French Towns. About the beginning of the year 51 of this Century, the Pope dieth, to whom succeeded Marcellus 2d he also the two and twentieth day of his Pon∣tificate, 1551 is suddenly taken away by an Apoplexie, in whose place came Iohn Peter Caraffa, now called Paul 4th a great Antilutherian and promoter of the Inquisition, the consumer of 150 thousand Protestants in 30. years  space: he imposed heavy tributes on the Iewes, and caused them for distin∣ction sake, to wear yellow caps, being angry with Caesar for opposing his E∣lection, he raiseth an Army against Naples, his own Countrey, but Charls being weary of the world, after the Example of Dioclesian layeth down his imperiall dignitie, leaveth his hereditary Kingdoms to Philip his son, and the Empire to Ferdinand his brother, then retires himself into the Monastery of S. Hieroms Order, dedicated to S. Laurence by his son Philip, in memo∣ry of the great Victory he had over the French at S. Quintins; this Covent is in the Escuriel near Madrid. Here Charls spent two years in devotion, and then died the 38 year, or as some say, the 40 of his Empire, and the 54  of his life, his death was presaged by a Commet: Mean while the Pope assisted by the French, makes war against Philip, who in revenge, strips the Pope of almost all Latium, wherefore he finding Philip too potent to buckle with; now the French being defeated, and the most of their Nobility taken at S. Quintins, and that Octavius Fernesius was in favour with Philip from whom he had received Placentia, admits of peace which was accompanied with the innundation of Tibris, that did more hurt then the war. In Charls his time, Ferdinand Magellan found out the Strait, so called from his name, and in two years space sailed about the world, and returned again to Sivill. In the space of 20 years Ferdinand Cortes, took multitudes of Towns, the chief where∣of is Mexico, with many Provinces: The Country also of Peru is subjuga∣ted by Varga and Pizzarus, in which is the great City Cusco: The Portugalls also take many places in the East Indies. Castrius obtains a great Victory a∣gainst the King of Cambaia, and withall takes Dio, the rich and great City of that Country which became the chief Seat of the Portugalls under King E∣manuel, and King Iohn who looked more strictly to the Government of that place then Charls did to the Government of America, being intangled with the wars of Europ, which occasioned the Spaniards to Tyrannize over the poor Americans. To Charls succeeded his brother Ferdinand, King of Hungary and Bohe∣mia.  He confirms the peace of Germany, advanceth the University of Sena, erected before, by Iohn Frederick the Elector, appoints a conference at Wormes between the Papists and Protestants, which took no effect because Melancthon and other Lutherans would not condemn (as the Romanists desi∣red) Calvin, Osiander and the rest who had
receded from the Augustan con∣fession;  Yet the peace of Germany was not by this interrupted: But Livonia, a Province of the German Empire, is much shaken by Iohn Basilides D. of Mu∣scovia, because upon their civill Warrs they had neglected to pay the tribute, they owed by promise to the Muscovit; therefore he takes Narva by surpri∣sall, layeth waste the Countrey of Derbat, and threatens the ruine of Livonia, which at last paid the gold, but yet could not pacifie the Tyrant. There∣fore the Rivaliens desired Christian 3d of Denmark to be their protector against the Russian by reason Estonic had anciently been subject to Denmark; but he 1559 wisely refused, affirming he had more land then he could well govern; yet he helps them with money and arms, and the next year died: after he had  caused the Bible to be translated into Danish, and had set up preaching Mini∣sters in his Kingdome: This year also was fatall to Queen Mary of England, King Henry of France, the D. of Venice, and Pope Paul 4th whose Marble sta∣tue the Romans contumeliously used, by cutting off his hands and head; they deface all the Scutchions, or Arms of the Famly of Caraffa, they open the Inquisition prison, and let out the prisoners, and then set the house on fire. This year also Adolphus D. of Holst subdued Dithmars by the help of Frederick 2d King of Denmark, son to Christian 3d: This Duke having utterly defeated the Dithmarsians, they were forced to send their Priests with white staves to beg pardon for their rebellions, which was granted conditionally they would  give up their arms, and submit to his Government; which was assented to: and withall, they were contented to pay yearly a Florens for every acre of land they enjoyed. The Livonians by reason of their continuall oppressions, were forced to desire the King of Poland's protection, who made Gothard Ma∣ster of the Knights, Duke of Curland, when that Livonian order had con∣tinued 358 years. After 4 months debate, Pius 4th called before Iohn Angel of the house of Medices, is made Pope. At his Inauguration 18 men were killed, as they were scrambling for the money flung that day among the people, and about 40 hurt, an ominous initiation to his Pontificate: he pardoned those that abused his  predecessors, but was very rigid against his friends and nephews. He put Cardinall Caraffa to death, and divers other prime men, upon suspition of Treason. He confirmed Ferdinand in the Empire, absolves Charls 5th and his son Philip from Pope Pauls criminations. Abdisu Patriarch of the Ea∣stern Christians came to him, with a resolution to imbrace the Roman Faith, which he did, and was sent back into Affrica with rich presents. He ordereth the general Counsell to sit again at Trent, and sent his Legats to invite the Pro∣testants thither; but the Palsgrave and Saxon with some other Teutonick Princes, meet at Naumburg, and return this answer to Ferdinand Caesar; that they would willingly yeild to a nationall or generall Counsell if it were free,  which they could not acknowledge this to be: And they tell the Popes Legats, that he had no power over Princes, nor authority to call a Synod. When they came to Lubeck, they were rejected by the King of Denmark, because the Pope had accounted him an Heretick; But Philip King of Spain, and Francis 2d of France, persecute the Protestants; under whose successor Charls 9th they had some rest, and withall a new name, for they are now called Hugonits, from one Hugo, in whose house they used to have their meetings. In the Counsell of Trent there is some debate between the Pope and Spanish Bishops, who would scarce yeild that their dependance should be from him. The Kings also of Spain and France, did strive there for precedencie, the one pre∣ferring the Title of Catholick, the other of most Christian: The matter be∣ing  referred to the Pope, he gives the precedencie to France. There was also much altercation about the residence of Bishops, and the peculiar care of their Flocks, which they should have; but nothing in that point was determined: At last the Synod is concluded. 27 Years after it was called by Paul 3d at
1563 Mantua; and 18 years from the first session at Trent: It sate without inter∣ruption 5 years; to wit, two under Paul 3d, one under Iulius 3d, and two under Pius 4th; it was subscribed by 255 Fathers, most of the Canons were made by the Italian and Spanish Clergy, the French came not till about the end of the Counsell: Few of other Nations were there present. A strict Oath is imposed on the Clergy and Magistrates, to adhere to, and main∣tain the determinations of that Synod. For this purpose divers Bishopricks and Archbishopricks are erected in the Belgian Provinces, as at Mechlin, Ca∣meray, Utricht, Harlem, Middelburg, Antwerp, Brugis, and elsewhere, which promoted not, but hindred the Pontifican cause, and raised a rebellion against Philip; which shook off the Spanish Yoke. About these times, King Philip was beat at Sea by Solyman the Turk, who took the Isle Meninges on the coast of Affrick, in which the Viceroy of Sicily, the Duke of Medina had strongly fortified the Castle. For Pialis the Bassai that defeated the Spanish fleet which had besieged Tripolis, takes in the Castle being weakly manned and victualled, killed and carried away 18000 Christi∣ans, therefore Cosmus Duke of Florence erects a new Order of Knights, called Stephanits against the Turks, & assignes for their habitation the Isle Ebusa: Up∣on the Petition of William of Orange, Egmund and Horn. K. Philip removes from the Government of Belgium, Antony Perenot, and Atrelacius the Car∣dinall, and gives a fuller power to his sister Margaret of Parma. Ferdinand having ruled the Empire 6 years in peace, died, leaving his son Maximilian to succeed. David George his heresie is detected at Basil, who taught he was the promised son of David, and his body is burned to ashes; about that time Francis Xaverius the Jesuit is sent to Iapan and other Eastern parts, to con∣vert the Indians. Maximilian 2d succeeded to his Father Ferdinand, both in the Kingdoms of Hungary and Bohemia, as also in the Empire, when Iohn Sigismund of Trasilva∣nia, relying on the protection of Solyman, gave himself out to be King of Hun∣gary, he was by Maximilian suppressed; by reason Solyman was then before  Malta with a fleet of 205 sail; so that the aid he sent to the Transilvanian came too late. The Turk upon that enterprise lost 22 thousand, Malta holding out all the while stoutly against him, under the command of Iohn Valet great master of the Rhodian Knights. The Turks after six months siege, be∣ing repulsed, convert their totterd & torn forces, upon the Isle Chias, which had been under the Genuois above 200 years, but now by Pialis Bassai is brought under the Turkish Yoke, at which time Paul 4th died, who having exhausted his treasures on the Counsell of Trent, and magnificent buildings, was neces∣sitated to exact upon his subjects, and to wink at Symone. To him succeeded Michael Chisserius, who called himself Pius 5th. In Belgin the seeds of a  long lasting war are cast by the Spanish harsh severity, a mitigation whereof was Petitioned for by Henry Bredenrod, and the rest of the Gentry; these Peti∣tioners were called Geusies, that is, beggers from their mean apparel which nick∣name they retained afterward. When they had entred into a confederacie for Libertie of conscience; this wise course of the Gentry was marred by the inconsiderate zeal of the Calvinian multitude, who setting up Pulpits every where, of their own privat motion threw down the Images; But William of Orange caused a form of rites and doctrin to be compiled for the Protestants 1567 to follow; to whom he gave power to preach in publick: at which Marga∣ret of Parma did connive presently. Philip abolishing all Liberty, and taking  the Government from Parma. Ferdinand Alvares Duke of Alba, a fierce natured man, is by him made Governor. William being affrighted at his comming, departs thence to his Teutons: Egmund and Horne are cunningly apprehended and beheaded. A Garrison and Castle are forced upon the An∣twerpians. Orange wanting help, obtained
Conde's Army, who had lately ex∣torted  peace to his Hugonots from Charls, By the assistance of Iohn Casimer. Alba proscribes Orange as a Traitor, and puts many of the Nobility to death; he also overthrew in a battell Lewis of Nassau Orange his brother. An Army is suddenly raised by this William, intending to win or loose all. Alba an old beaten Soldier knowing so great an Army could not be sustained without pay, avoided fighting; so that William is forced to lead his Army into France for pay, which in the interim mouldred away. The Belgians having pai'd in Taxes twentie hundred thousand crowns, labour to ease themselves of this burthen, and to avoid the Tyrants crueltie; therefore divers undertook a vo∣luntary exile; where consulting with Orange, who was also banished, they first  seise upon Briel in Holland, then they make Ulushing, Enchusen, and other Townes to take their part. Lewis of Nassau by a Stratagem, takes Monts in Henault. William obtains Ruremund, Lovan, and Mechlin, whilst Alba  be sieging of Monts: But William not being able to raise the siege and re∣lieve his brother, finding also that the French, wholly intent in persecuting of the Protestants, were about to desert and betray him, he removes present∣ly to Holland, which with Zeland he makes his own: So Monts is restored to Alba. Mean while the Ulushingers and Encusers beat the Spaniard by Sea. Harl is besieged 7 months; at last being forced by Famin yeilds to the Spa∣niard▪ In the midst of these troubles, Alba is called into Spain, after his ar∣rivall  into Belgium 6 years. Lewis Requiesensius succeeded him; who shortly after lost Middleburg, the Metropolis of Zeland; but by Avila and Mandra∣gon h defeats the Belgian Auxiliaries at Neomag, and besiegeth Leyden, which being almost famished, Orange relieved by opening the banks, and letting in the water, by which also provision was brought; after this, he honors the Town with an University. Requesensius being dead, and a Commonwealth to be guided by States, is setled, till the coming of Iohn of Austria, the Belgians resolve unanimously, by force of Arms to drive out the Spaniard: Alba's Statues are abolished; the  perceiving how the Spaniards out of the Cittadel had plundred  , castout their Garrison, and make themselves free, whose exam∣pe the other Towns follow. Not long after died Pope Pius 5th and Sigis∣mund King of Poland, in whom ended the race of the Iagellons, though he married two sisters. Cyprus is lost by the Christians, but the battell of Le∣panp is won by them: the Protestants are massacred at Paris, Poland being 1572 fon by Henry, who preferred the Crown of France, is divided about a new election. Some are for Maximilian Caesar, some for Iohn Bator Prince of  after Iohn Sigismund was dead. Caesar by staying too long in suspence, and doubting whether he should swear or not to the Polonian Laws brought to him by the Legats, was prevented by Bator, who marrying  with Ann the sister of King Sigismund, obtained the Kingdom. Maximilian shortly after died, the 12th year of his Empire, a moderate and just Prince, he besstowed divers priviledges on the Universitie of Helmestad, his saying was wont to be: [To compell the conscience is to force heaven] About this time Iohn of Austria, Charls the 5th^'s Bastard, restored Amidas to his King∣dome of Tunis, after he had been flung out by the Turks, and built a new Fort; but perceiving that there was little trust to be given to Amidas, he makes his brother Fiduciarie King of Affrick, but to no purpose, for the Turk by San Bassi suprised Golet and the new Fort, takes 500 pieces of Ordnance, with other rich spoiles, kills and beats the Spaniards out of Affrica. 40. Years after Charls th had added Tunis to his dominions. The same year Cosmus to whom the Pope gave the Title of great Duke of Etruria, died, to him suc∣ceeded his son Francis: The Venesians fortifie Corcyra against the Turks. Charls Prince of Spain for pittying the hard usage of the Netherlanders, is by his father Philip, pretending Treason,
imprisoned, where he died. Iohn Frede∣rick  the younger, Duke of Saxony, for aiding some whom Caesar had proseri∣bed, was proscribed himself, and imprisoned, where he ended his life: Ham∣burg is fined in 100 thousand Jochims to King Frederick for spoiling the Free∣dom of Trade. Rostoch by their intestin discords, is subjected to the Mega∣politan Dukes; But upon acknowledgement of their fault, is restored to their freedom: In Maximilian's time the Protestant Faith is prohibited through France, England, Scotland, Hungary, Poland, and Belgium, in the Bishopricks also of Magdeburg, Halberstad, Verdava, and Dukedom of Brunswick: But as they began to increase in wealth and ease, they fell into divers Factions cau∣sed by needless disputes and controversies, with which the world hath been too long troubled; at which the Elector of Saxony was so vexed, that he thrust out of his University of Witteberg divers professors, and imprisoned Caspar Peu∣cerus his Physitian, with Cracovius his Secretary. Valentine Gentilis for Blas∣phemy against the Son of God, is burned at Beru. 1576 CHAP. XVII. The Affairs of Portugall, Affrick, Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, Po∣land, Hungary, Transylvania, Bohemia, Russia, Venice, &c. under  Rodolphus 2d Emperor, from the year 1576. till 1612. ROdolphus 2d succeeded to his Father Maximilian, both in his Kingdome and Vertues. About the beginning of his time, Sebastian King of Portugall made an unluckie expedition into Affrica, to restore Mahumed King of Mauritania, whilst he warreth with Abdelmelech Uncle to the banished Mahumed, he lost both his life and King∣dome: In this battell three Kings fell, and the Christian Army defeated. Abdelmelech in the fight died suddenly of an Apoplexie,  Mahumed was drowned in the bogs, and Sebastian slain. Hameth the other Uncle of Mahumed enjoyed the Fruit of the victory, with the Kingdome of Fesse: Portugall fell to Henry the Cardinall, an aged man; and Sebastians great Uncle, who died about a year after, on whose Kingdom Philip King of Spain, Henry's sisters son seised by the Duke of Alba; Anthony being driven away, whom Lewis, Henry's brother begot in Fornication: Lisbon proclaimed him King, but he was forced to flie, and as he was pursued, flung money behind him, to hinder his pursuers: He by the help of France and England, hoped to recover his lost Kingdom, but could not; for he was beaten both by land and sea; and with Portugall he lost also the Islands Azores: The  Lowcountrey wars under Iohn of Austria, and William of Nassau, was porten∣ded by a Commet: Iohn had deluded the Gantois with hopes of peace; but they being impatient of Tyrannie and mock'ry, reject the Spaniards, send for French and Germans, and resolve to make a Commonwealth of their own; they invite into Belgium, Mathias brother to Ralph the 2d Emperor, and who afterward was Emperor himself, to be their Governor, hoping thereby to finde the Emperor Ralphs more favourable towards them; till he came Willi∣am discharged his place, who took in Amsterdam, Mechlin, Deventry, and o∣ther Sconces, whilst the Austrian was busie in subduing Brabant, shortly af∣ter they send for Iohn Casimir the Palatine with an Army, and then fall upon  robbing and defacing of Churches, and invading the Clergies Revenues: but shortly after peace is proclaimed between the Catholicks and Protestants throughout Belgium, with Liberty of Conscience; but the people of He∣nault and Artois, upon this were offended, and therefore called themselves 1579 Malecontents, for they would admit no other Religion then the Roman.
The Austrian being dead of a Feaver, his Nephew Alexander Farnesius, Duke of Parma and Placentia succeeded in the Government, whose begin∣ning was accompanied with an Epidemicall disease in his Army, which by a loosness swept away 12 thousand: He reduced Utricht to the Spaniard, and la∣boured what he could to foment the intestin discords among the Belgians in the mean while Caesar sends into Colen 3 Bishops, and 2 Princes to treat with the States Ambassadors about a peace between the Spaniard and them, but to no purpose; for Orange would not hearken to any peace without the enjoy∣ment 1582 of Liberty and Religion; Wherefore he is proscribed by the Spaniard. Mean while Francis Alanson the French King's brother is invited into Belgium, who gaping long for that imployment, hastneth thither, but whilst Orange and he were together at Antwerp, a desperat young fellow set on by the Spaniard, shoots Orange with a bullet through the cheeks, so that he hardly escaped with his life. Alanson having got supplies from England, promised much in defence of Belgium, but performed nothing, having more regard of his French, then of those whose defence he undertook, and swore to; which ap∣peared in Brabant and Flanders, where at Antwerp he received a notable de∣feat; by means of the French, his jugling was much more detected at New∣port, Dunkirk, and other places, which give occasion to Parma to recover Newport, and divers other Towns for the Spaniard. Hereupon the Go∣vernment is taken from him by the States, and he returns into France with his French Forces; but not long after, Orange and the States were necessitated to send for him again, who died before he had done any thing for the Com∣monwealth; 'tis thought he was poysoned, because they found he was sorry for his former double dealing with the States. About a month after, the Prince of Orange is murthered by a Burgundian, Balthasar Gerard, who had been lately received into Orange his service, he shot him with a musket at Delph, not with∣out the knowledg (as 'tis thought) of Parma, the murtherer was cruelly put to death: Shortly after this, Brugis, Gaunt, and all Flanders almost is reduced to the Spaniard. In Germany the Protestant Princes and Cities, strive by Conferences and Synods, to take up the controversies among themselves: Gebhard Bishop of Colen, professing himself of the Augustan confession, permitted freedom of the Gospel to his people, and falls in love vvith Agnes Mansfield, vvhom he intends to marrie; but he is upon this deposed by the Pope, and forsaken by most of his Diocesse; Ernest of Bavaria being set up in his room: Gebhard in maintenance of his right, and Ernest on the other side, raised opposit Forces. They fight upon doubtfull terms divers battels, in one Skirmish Ernest lost 2000 old Soldiers, at length Gebhard is worsted, and upon the taking of Bon∣na, totally defeated of his Bishoprick by Ernestus. A nationall Synod of  Protestants is desired in Germany, but hindred by factious spirits. Steven Bator the new Polonian King makes war against Dantsick, for refusing to swear Fealtie to him, till first he confirmed their Priviledges: after much slaughter 1583 on both sides, at last by a friendly transaction, their differences were compo∣sed: The Polander to requite the Muscovits wasting of Livonia, falls with fire and sword upon his Territories, and takes from him many Towns; so that the 1584 Muscovit is forced to renounce all he had taken in Livonia: The Swedes also take divers places in Livonia from the Muscovit, which Batorius desired might be restored to the Polander, but could not prevail; about this time an Epide∣micall infection run through all Europ, accompanied with a colde, and a  cough, called the weathers maladie, because sheep are most troubled with it: Few died of this disease. A little before this, the Muscovits having had some contestations with the Swede in Livonia, whose Officers he put to death, for causing some Towns swear Fealtie to Magnus, not to the Russian, died the same year that the Jesuits were obtruded upon
Livonia. Then it was  that George Frederick, Duke of Borussia having paid a sum of money to the Dane, possessed himself of the Diocess of Curion as a Polonian fee. The next year Iohn Basilides the Russian Tyrant, having knockt his son on the head with his Cudgell, of which wound he died, and after 25 years war with Li∣vonia, he died also, exhorting his son Theodor to live peaceably with his neighbours. The same year the Praecopit Tartars, of the Turks confedrates becom theirslaves. Pope Gregory the 17th about this time reformed the Calendar, by thrusting 10 days out of the month of October: Amurath the Turk, began to suspect some plot upon compliance between the Pope and Byzantin Patriarch, therefore  banisheth the Patriarch, and takes away from the Christians two of their Temples in Constantinople; for approving this reformation of the Calendar; which caused some troubles at Auspurg in Germany, and Riga in Livonia; di∣vers Protestants, rather out of pride, then Judgement rejected it: This Gregory erected divers Colledges of Jesuits, whose learning and holyness be∣gan to be held in admiration: In Rome is instituted a Colledg or Seminary of all Nations, to propagate the Roman Faith. 3. Ambassadors of Iapon sent by the Jesuits, arrive at Rome, after 3 years travel, offering their service to the Pope who having royally entertained them, died within the space of two hours of a Squinzee; who all his time could not suppress the insolencies and robbe∣ries committed daily by his Soldiers, and those that had been proscri∣bed; But Batorius King of Poland, by putting to death some of his Nobi∣lity, curbed the insolencies of the great men in his Kingdome. So Frederick 2d of Denmark brought the Rostokers to submit to Ulricus the Megapolitan. The Farnesian Family of the Dukes of Parma, grew famous by the happie 1585 success of Alexander Governor of Belgium, who after he had besieged Antworp one whole year, at last upon composition, took it; 4 years were granted to the Protestants, to settle there, or to depart, whereof many went and setled in Hamburg. Mechlin and divers other Towns submit to the Spaniard: A 1586 great storm hung over Riga, for resisting King Stevens edicts of Poland, who threatened it with fire and sword for opposing the Roman Religion, and putting to death some of his Legats: About this time showres of Locusts fell 1587 in Thracia; of geese and ducks in Croatia, on which many people did feed. Maximilian of Austria, Caesar's brother, who by his Father was named King of Poland, marcheth to Cracovia with an Army; but he was defeated and driven back towards Silesia, where he was besieged and taken, and for∣ced to redeem his freedom with the loss of his Kingdom; which Sigismund obtains in the right of his Mother, being descended from the Kings of Poland. The year ensuing was fatall to many Princes. Maximilian was thrust out 1588  of Poland by Sigismund, Frederick the second of Denmark died, Maurice son to William (murthered at Delph) and grand-child by the mother to Mau∣rice of Saxony is by the united States of Holland, made their Governor. The Spanish Armado consisting of 125 great ships, 20000 Soldiers, 10000 marri∣ners 2000 Ordnance is defeated: Henry 3d King of France is murthered by Iames Clements, a Dominican; the Polander is molested by the Muscovit, who took some Forts from him; and by the Tartarian, who with fire and sword invaded his borders; so that he was fain to buy his peace of the Tar∣tar with a great summe of Money. Gregory the 13th being dead, Faelix Mon∣talt 1589 is made Pope, and cals himself Sixtus the 5th. a mean man of Parentage;  but a rich Pope; for he left 5 Millions behinde him, and yet in his Life-time very profuse upon Obelisks, High-wayes, Churches, Pallaces, Aqueducts; up∣on Hospitals also, and the Vatican Bibliothec; He spent 38 thousand Crowns in removing one Obelisk alone. He incurred the King of Spaine's displeasure by denying to aide the Parisians when they were besieged
by King Henry's  Army; whereupon he dyed with grief. Iohn Baptista Castanaeus succeeded, called Urban 7th his inauguration was accompanied with an Earthquake through Austria, Moravia, and Bohemia, and a great siccitie with heat, by which some rivers were dried up; he died within 14 days of a burning fea∣ver: To whom succeeded Michelas. Sfondrat called Gregory 14th: he was born the 7th month, and therefore had a weak sickly body, he died the 10th 1590 month of his Pontificat, in his time the plague and famin so raged in Italy, that in one year at Rome there died sixty thousand people: He spent upon the French War 500000 crowns ont of the publick treasure, besides 40000 out of his privat Coffers. Grave Maurice mean while seiseth upon Breda his na∣tive  towne in Brabant, by a turf boat, within which lay hid many armed men. And shortly after he takes divers other Towns. To Gregory 14th succeeded Iohn Antonius or Piemont, who assumed the name of Gregory 9th; he was of the Spanish Faction against France, and lived but two months in the Pontifi∣cate. 1591 To him succeeded Hippolytus Aldabrandinus or Clement 8h: Grave Maurice attempteth to take the Sluice and Utricht, but could not; yet he takes Steinvick, and Covord, and divers other places upon the death of Parma. To whom succeeded Peter Ernest of Mansfield, who sent his son Charls into 1592 France; to assist the Spanish faction there. About this time Sigismund Bator the Transylvanian denies to pay the pro∣mised  tribute to the Turk, and so by the Jesuits perswasion incurs the displea∣sure of a potent enemy, to the grief of his friends; some of which he kills for disswading him. The Despots of Walachia and Moldavia revolt to him: The Walachians fight the Turks and beat them, Strigon and Vicegrad are taken by the Christians: Lippa also submits to the Transylvanian, and in a battell Sinan looseth 10000 of his men. Bator being now allied to the Emperor, is ai∣ded by him to take Tergovistia, the seat of the Princes of Walachia. After many defeats given to Sinan, he chaseth him beyond the river Agrius, where he died with age and grief. Albert Arch Duke of Austria, Caesars brother, of a Cardinall becomes husband to Isabella Clara Eugenia, Philips daughter, and enters Belgium in great state. Upon the death of Ernestus he besiegeth Callis, and takes it: A league is made between England, France and Holland, against Spain, and confirmed by a victory obtained by the English and Hol∣land Fleet, against the Spaniard at Cadiz. The Hollanders send a fleet to Ben∣tam, a Town in Iava the less: And another to finde out the North-east pas∣sage; to no purpose, except to their own hurt, having lost the most of their men with cold. In the mean time Albert takes Hulst from the confederates, and they beat his Forces at Torvahut, having taken 38 Colours of foot, and two of horse with their baggage and money: About this time died Philip the 2d of Spain, as they write of the lowsie disease: To whom succeeded Philip 3d, who married Margaret daughter to Charls the Arch Duke; and then also died Theodor Prince of Russia in whom ended the Basilidan race. Boris Federovitzius the Queen of Russia's brother; dealt so with the people; that they preferred him to the Nobility in competition for that Scepter, which by their favour he obtained, and after this confirmed it by his successfull ex∣pedition against the Tartars; but afterward his government proved Tyranni∣call: Palfias and Barnestein; Imperiall Commanders defeat the Tartars in Panonia, and besiege Iavarin, but upon the coming of the Turks, the siege is raised. The Popes Forces which were levied against the Turks in Panonia, were imployed against Caesar Atestinus barstard, son to Alphonsus of Ferraria, who by the sword sought to obtain the antient Titles of that Dutchie, though he  was Anathematized by the Pope, yet he fights the Romans and beats them: but at last finding his friends fall off from him, he resignes Ferraria to the Pope; so the war is continued against the Turk, and Iaverin taken by Swart-zemburg, with the loss of 1600. Turks.
Sigismund Batorius for fear of the Turks, delivers up Ducia or Transylvania to Caesar, afterward his minde changed, upon the perswasion of Andrew Ba∣tor Cardinall, his kinsman, on whom he confers this Principality, and the ra∣ther, because the promised pension was not paid him. Hence arose wars be∣tween him, and Maximilian, Caesar's brother, which incouraged the Turks, who with 60000 men beleaguer Varadin, but are beat off again; and so is An∣drew Bator driven out of Transylvania by the Austrians, who took Alba Iulia, or Wasisngburg, with divers other Towns. Francis Mendoza the Spa∣nish 1600 Generall under Albert, takes divers Towns upon the Rhen, which exaspe∣rated the Germans, and caused Caesar to send expostulatorry Letters to Men∣doza▪  On the other side, Grave Maurice takes divers places from the Spani∣ard: About this time a Monster was seen at Paris like a Satyre, with a horn on his head. Some maids, both in France and Germany, fasted 3 years or more. A strange disease called Ploa, or Cirragra, invaded Poland and Hungary. Fer∣dinand Arch Duke, son of Charls that was Ralphs Uncle, at this time was Governor of Styria: He goeth to Rome, being the year of Iubilee, and swears to the Pope, to extirpate the Protestants within his jurisdiction; which upon the Jesuits instigation, he did accordingly, by pillaging and banishing all of the Augustin confession throughout Styria, Carinthia and Carniola, though they had paid for their freedome of conscience a great sum of money: Cam∣s  the chief Fort of Styria is besieged by the Catholicks, who were forced by reason of the cold frost, (which in one night killed one thousand horsemen) to raise their siege, to leave their Artilery and baggage behinde them. In Belgium Albert the Arch Duke having brought his wife Isabel to Bruxels, is sollicited by the Confederates to send away all the Spaniards out of the Netherlands, if he would have peace setled there. To this he would not as∣sent, 1601 as being neither safe for him nor honorable, he purposeth to besiege Ostend. Maurice strives to prevent him: At Newport a battel is fought, in the beginning of which, Albert had the better; till the Confederates by their danger grew desperate; for being almost inclosed by the Sea, they fell so furiously on their enemies, that the vanquished put the vanquishers to flight, having killed above 4000, with the loss of 2000 of their own; one hundred Colours were taken from the enemy. In Transylvania Michael Valachus Caesars Generall, in a long and doubtfull battel, defeats Bators Forces, and subdues also a great part of Moldavia: He was much envied by George Basta, who accused him to Caesar as one that was ambidexter, and who aimed at the principality of Transylvania himself: upon this, the chief command over the army is committed to Basta, whom Valachus scorns to be under, therefore he goeth to the Emperor to clear himself, in the interim Sigismund is again received by his people, and acknowledged for Duke of Transylva∣nia; hereupon Valachus is sent back with more Forces, who falls on the Ba∣torians  as they were carelesly marching down a hill, and with his great Ord∣nance so galled them, that they were forced to run; ten thousand of them at least were killed, and so being incouraged by this Victory, thrusts Basta out of his command, by whom not long after he was murthered: and Da∣cia now swears allegeance to Caesar. Baorius is driven into the Town Bistricia, 1602 where he is taken; and contenting himself with a yearly allowance for his maintenance, lives obscurely among the Bohemian Barrons. shortly after one Moyses Generall of the Ciculi, who had been driven to the hills, takes up∣on him now to be the deliverer of Transylvania; therefore having gathered together a considerable army, seiseth upon Wessenburg, or Alba Iulia. But  at last in a Battel he is killed, and his army having lost 128 Colours, quite defeated: Mean while Mars rageth at Ostend for almost 40 months together; all which time the besieged behaved themselves gallantly, by often sallies, and bringing in Provision
through the mid'st of their enemies, by digging a new harbour, when the old was obstructed, by building a new town, whilst the old is assaulted; by their many conflicts they had, not only with the enemy, but also with famin and sickness, during which siege, one hundred and 44 thou∣sand men lost their lives; at last it was taken by the art and industry of Am∣brose Spinola: For which one Town, Maurice took Grave the Sluice, and di∣vers other places. After this the Hollanders, and the other confederate pro∣vinces 1604 impose an Excise upon their victuals, to have ready pay still for the Sol∣diers: The Indian Navigation is advanced, and the adventurers united in a Corporation: They beat the Portugalls out of Bantam, they sail about the world, and return rich with Spanish money. About this time almost all Livonia is made subject to Charls Suderman, ex∣cept a few Towns on the borders of Muscovia, which acknowledged still the Polonian Scepter. Such devastation was every where in the fields, that thirty thousand people died with cold and famin, which perswaded some of them to eat their on children. Charls at last returns to Swede, and accepts of that Scep∣ter he had before refused. King Henry 4th of France makes a Law against Duels. The Savoyen attempted in the night time to surprise Geneva, two 1605 hundred Soldiers had already scal'd the walls, and killed the watch; but a boy with a Lanthorn raised the Town, who armed themselves, and apprehend ded the Conspirators, whom they put to death. Pope Clement dispenceth with Sigismund of Poland, for marying two sisters of the Austrian Family, and perswades King Henry of France to call home again the banished Jesuites. Christian 4th of Denmark, visits in his own person the remotest parts of Nor∣way, giving Order for setling of Ministers in those ignorant and remote cor∣ners. Hamburg, the most flourishing City of the Saxons, doeth homage to him, as Duke of Holsatia, with great solemnity and magnificence: He er∣recteth a new Town from the foundation, which by his name he calls Chri∣stianopolis, upon the borders of Swedland. To which he added upon the same borders afterward, two stronger Fortifications; to wit, Tychopolis and Christiana: In Belgium there is great joy for the birth of Philip the 4th, heir to the Kingdoms of Spain: Friesland is now made the seat of the war: Com∣mand is given to Count Bucquoi, to raise Forces about the Rhene, which be∣ing passed over by Spinola, divers Towns are taken for the Spaniard: Mau∣rice attempts Antwerp, and Spinola Berg upon Som, but in vain: Bucquoi also takes some places. Peace again is proposed by the Austrians, but rejected by the Hollanders, as not daring to trust the Spaniard. The antient City of Aix, as also Marpurg of Hessia, were much shaken and weakned upon the change of Religion, and admittance of Calvinisme. Brunswig was at first like to be betrayed, but the Plot was discovered and prevented: Then Henricus Iulius, the neighbouring Prince, thought to have surprised it by hiding of armed men  in Waggons within the works, but the Townsmen defeated and slew them: at last this broke out into an open war. The Duke besiegeth Brunswig, dams up the river that it had almost drowned the Town, till a strong winde broke down the banks, and gave way for the water to return into its old channel: At last by Caesars command, a truce is made, and the differences referred to Arbitration: In Rome Pope Clement 8th being dead, great contestation a∣riseth about the election of a new Pope; The French faction stood for Caesar Baronius the great Annalist; but the Spaniard opposed him, because he had no good opinion of his claim, and Title to Scicily: Some were for Bellarmin the great Catholick Champion, but he was withstood by the Montaltan Faction:  At length Alexander Medices being 70 years old, is chosen; who calls him∣self Leo, but he died the 25 day after; whose successor was Camillus Burge∣sius, afterward called Paul 5th. In Russia great commotions were raised by one Demetrius, who gave out he was the son of Iohannes Basilides,
who was thought to have been mur∣thered  by Boris Fedrovitzius long agoe: He appearing on the Scene, gave out that he was hid in Monasteries, and educated by the Jesuits, that he might be the more inabled for Government: The King of Poland believed this had been the true heir, therefore assists him with an Army, and bestowes his daughter on him. Shortly after he marcheth with his Forces into Russia, gets the Cossacks to side with him. Many Towns and Castles fall off to him, in hatred of Fedrovitzius his Tyranny: In his first Incounter with Boris he was worsted, but in the second he got the Victory, and withall the life of Bo∣ris, who was slain and his children poysoned. Demetrius with the great ac∣clamations of the people, enters Mosqua, where he is Crowned; then he  makes a league with the Polander, whose daughter he brings in great state from Poland and married her: But the Russian Nobility storming at the Po∣lonian insolencies and pride, conspire against them, and the rather, because they are perswaded that this Demetrius is a counterfeit: The people also si∣ding with the Peers, fall to murthering of the Polonians, whereof 1200 were massacred, besides 400 Russians disguised in Polonian habits. Demetrius is wounded in many places of his body, and disgracefully used; his Bride stript of all her wealth and ornaments, and sent back to Poland in a poor habit. Ba∣silius Iohanides, the chief man of the Conspirators, is by the consent of all the Peers, proclaimed Prince. And Demetrius his carcass drawn naked up and down by a rope tied to his privities. At Venice some antient Laws were renewed; among the rest, that none should erect Churches or Monasteries, nor bestow lands or houses on the Clergy, without the Senats approbation; they had also imprisoned some scandalous Priests. The Jesuits acquaint Claudius Aquavia the Generall of their Order, with these proceedings. Pope Clement 8th being a moderate man, winks at the business; But Paul 5th of a more violent spirit, Commands the Venetians to abrogate those Laws, which they refusing to do, were excom∣municated, and their whole Territories put under an interdict: Yet most of the Clergy took no notice of the Pope's anger, but officiated as before. The Jesuits offended at this, remove thence to other places, and write bitterly,  (chiefly Bellarmin and Baronius) against the Venetians, whose cause is maintai∣ned by Francis Paulis Servita, and Iohannes Marsilius: At last they fell from words to blowes, Armies are raised on both sides, the Spaniards assist the Pope, and the Hollanders the Venetian; at length the controversie is taken up by the French King: The Venetians are injoyned to set free the prisoners, and not to stretch the execution of their Lawes, further then their Ancestors intent and meaning; So the Pope's curse was revoked, and the Jesuits ba∣nished out of the Venetian Territories. In Poland, Iohn Samoiscius had thrown the Jesuits out of his Colledge; after whose death they grew very great with the King, stopping his ears against  the Protestants complaints, whose Church at Posomium they burned; upon this, the Nobility calls a Parliament, and shortly after these Parliamentier s, or Ra∣chosians (for so they were called) take up arms against the King; one thou∣sand of whose men they killed, and put the rest to flight, and had not most of the Parliaments Army fallen off to the King, they had been absolutely victorious. Then arms being laid down on both sides, the differences are referred to a free Parliament; meanwhile the people tumultuously thrust the Jesuits out of their Monastery of St Briget at Gedanum; and at Thorun they 1607 take the great Church from them, and the Nobility urgeth their banishment:  Words are also cast abroad about election of a new King; but whilst the Parliamentieres (called in their language Rachosians) were too secure and con∣fident; the Kings party falls suddenly upon them, kills many, disheartens the rest, and dissolves the Parliament: These troubles of Poland were for the Swedes advantage, who in the interim strengthneth himself against
Sigismund,  whose esteem was daily lessened in Swedland: These troubles of Poland mo∣ved Mathias the Arch Duke, to settle with all speed the commotions of Hun∣garia, by assigning over Transylvania to Botscadus, and giving Liberty of Conscience: The Prosultan upon the defection of Alepo, Damascus, and Tripolis, was willing to make peace with the Christians, therefore it is resol∣ved there should be peace for 20 years, during which time, Achmet Sultan should call Caesar Father; and he Achmet his son: That likewise both Caesars should every third year entertain friendship, by saluting each other with pre∣sents: Botscadus the chief promoter of this transaction, shortly after died. Ragotscius is elected, whose help the Rachokans of Poland required, but he  refused, holding it unlawfull for them to rise against their Prince: And to shew how little he regarded dominion, he laid down again his Principalitie, and trasmitted it to Gabriel Batorius; at which time the Persian Ambassador at Prague, highly commending the power of his Master, and shewing how re∣solved he was to overthrow the Ottoman Family, made Rudolph slow in entring into league with the Turk. Mean while Mathias grew gracious with the Hun∣garians, and makes way with the Nobility for his election. This same year was seen a Commet over Germany, portending ensuing trou∣bles there; for at Donaverd, a Town in Suevia upon the Danow, the Towns people contumeliously abused the Abbot, as he was carrying the Banner and  Cross in procession: For which cause they are proscribed by Caesar, and sub∣dued by Maximilian of Bavaria, though they had proferred satisfaction to the Abbot. This occasioned some differences among the Princes of the Empire; the Protestants desiring the Town to be restored again to its liberty, which the Catholicks would not hearken to. Mean while, in Belgium the War continues, and divers Towns are taken and re-taken; A military sedi∣tion is raised in Alberts Army, which could not bee appeased, till Diesta was pawned to them for their pay, which they received shortly after. Divers of the Mutineers were banished, and some that stay'd behinde executed. The Hollanders prepare a Fleet for the West-Indies, which made the Spaniard and Archduke propose a peace, to which the united States were inclined, if they 1608 could have been secured of their Liberty; but that they may not be surprised with expectatiou of peace, a fleet is sent to Calz under Hemskirk, which infe∣sted the Spanish Coast, and spoiled the Kings Navie, 2000 Spaniards were killed, and so was Hemskirk himself; a truce then is resolved upon, and the united Provinces declared to be free from all claim or title, either of the King or Archduke; but withall its required that the West-Indies shall not be med∣led with by the Hollander, or Zelander: This disceptation held out some months, at last Iohn Naius a Franciscan, is sent to King Philip, but he staid so long, that the French and Danish Agents went away; and so the peace came 1609 to nothing; yet at last a truce of 12 years was concluded, by the mediation of the French, English, and other Princes Ambassadors, in which libertie of commerce was left to the pleasure of the Spaniard in his dominions with∣out Europe; Yet he was not to debar the Hollanders that were imployed by Forraign Princes, in their commerce to the Indies. In Germany, Mathias Caesar's brother comes with an Army into Bohemia, to disappoint (as it was given out) the Spanish intent, who had resolved to settle Ferdinand the Arch∣duke in Hungary, and the other Principalities of Austria, because he was more addicted to the Pope then the rest. The Bohemians promise to maintain Cae∣sar's Title with their arms, if he would after the example of Maximilian, permit them to injoy their conscience, this their Petition was deferred, there∣fore  Mathias was to receive Hungary and Austria, vvho presently forbids the exercise of the Protestant Religion: The Bohemians take arms vvith in∣tent to defend themselves, but vvithall, they humbly petition that they might have the same liberty in Religion which Hungary and Austria injoyed: To this
the Prince assented, and the Emperor by his Letters Pattents confirmed; who also committed to them the ordering of the Universitie of Prague. The not observing of this Grant, was the occasion of future warrs. Shortly after followed the troubles of Iuliers, for Iohannes Gulielmus dy∣ing childless, The Elector of Brandeburg, the Palatine of Newburg, and divers others laid claim to it in right of their marriages with the sisters of Iohn de∣funct; but the Emperor pretending that it was in his power to decide the con∣troversie, sends Leopolde of Austria, to rule Iuliers in his right, and in the name of the Empire. Leopold's part is maintained by the Catholick Princes, but Brandeburg, and Newburg, by the Protestants: Hence were divers mee∣tings  of Catholicks and Protestants, a part; at Hala in Suevia the Prote∣stants meet, at Herlipolis the Catholicks: hence confederacies with forraign Princes to the ruine of Germany. Brandeburg and the Palatine raise Forces, and take in most Towns of that Dutchie, except Iuliers, the City which Leo∣pold 1610 held; but this also was taken by Grave Maurice, after two months siege; at length both sides lay down arms, who choose certain Judges at Golen to decide the controversie, but to no purpose. About this time Gambalot the Satrapa of Alepo being defeated by the Turks, and deserted by his friends, obtains pardon from Achmet, upon pro∣mise that he would turn his Forces against the Persian; who notwithstanding continues his expeditions, and desires the Pope's aid, by promising him power over all the Christians within his Dominions: He sollicites Caesars as∣sistance by shewing what advantage it will be for him to joyn with so potent a friend as the Persian, against the Turk: For this cause the Pope injoynes the Religious houses to maintain some professers of the Hebrew and Arabick tongues, that he may imploy them among the Eastern Christians. The Polander having composed his differences with the Rackosians, prepares to be revenged, both on the Russian and Swede, for the wrongs received from them; and with prosperous success he defeats the Sweds in Livonia, and the Russians in Lituania. He besiegeth also Smolenscum, the Metropolis of Lituania, and after two years siege, takes it, where 200 thousand Muscovits lost their lives. Novograd submits to Sigismund, and so doth the Cham of Tartar. Vilna is burned by the Muscovits. In Holland Arminius being called from his Ministeriall charge in Amsterdam, to be Divinity professor in Leyden, conferred with Iunius by Letters, about the point of Predestination, and some other Articles, he was opposed by Gomarus the other Divinity professor, who with Iunius stood stifly to Calvin's doctrine: Divers disputes and conferences were held about these points, so that Schollars, Magistrates, and inferior people fell out into factions, Arminius's Disciples were called Remonstrantes; Calvin's Contraremonstrantes. This con∣troversie  was like to have ruined these Provinces, so violent was the contestati∣on between them. Arminius mean while died, the 9th year of this last century. About whose successor Vorstius, there was no small trouble, some stifly maintaining him, others accusing him as a Schismatick and Heretick in his opinions of the divine attributes, but at length King Iames got him to be removed from Leyden; threatning to renounce all friendship and league with them, if he were not deposed; So he was sent to Gauda, and Arminianisme by degrees suppressed. This year 1612, died Caesar Rodolphus, in whose 1612 life-time Mathias his brother cunningly obtained Austria, and Hungary, to which he added Bohemia a few months before his death; for Leopold's Soldi∣diers  who were raised for defence of Iuliers, consisting of 9000 foot, and 4000 horse, invade Bohemia, Buduise is taken by Stratagem, and the lesser Prague by storm. Mathias comming to aid the Bohemians, obtains that Kingdome from Caesar, upon promise of payment of a yearly pension. Leopold's army fearing the power of Mathias, having received
their pay, remove from thence.  Rodolphus died as the Civill wars of Germany were beginning to break out, having reigned 35 years, he left behinde him a rich treasure, he was a good Prince, but too much addicted to women, yet without Legitimate children: His 3 brothers Mathias, Maximilian, and Albert, were also childless; There∣fore his cousin German was his heir. So the estate of Maximilian is devol∣ved upon the children of his brother Charls, who by Mary of Bavaria had 5 sons, and 10 daughters, the eldest son Ferdinand, after Matthias, obtained the 1612 Imperiall Crown. In Transylvania Batorius lost the greatest part of Vala∣chia; but he overthrew Thorgascius, who strove to make King Matthias Master of Transylvania, but he was defeated by Batorius, and driven into the woods, there he lived in great misery, till he went to Poland, where he ex∣pected preferment, Sutscius being sent thence with an army against Muscovia, which was overthrown by the Russians, and withall the Polander lost Smolen∣scum: Batorius in hatred to the Turks, applies himself to the Austrians, so that Gabor by the Sultans assistance, makes way to invade that Principalitie. A conference between the Roman Catholicks and Protestants was held at Ra∣tisbon, but to no purpose, for the one would have the Church, the other the Scripture, to be judge; the one would have traditions with Scripture, the o∣ther Scripture alone, to be the rule of controversies. About this time, the brothers of the Rosie Cross, bragging much of their perfection and know∣ledge  appeared awhile, and then vanished. In Affrica, Fesse and Maroco be∣ing worne out with mutuall wars, are both subdued by Mule Sidan King of Fesse, who had been driven out of his Kingdome by his brothers. This mans Uncle Schequus, in recompence of the money and aid he had from Spain, delivers over to the King of Spain, the strong Fort Alarachia on the Affri∣can shore, near Hercules his Pillars. Philip drives out of Spain the Moores, who had been ancient Inhabitants, upon pretence that they had invited the Affricans, and Turks into Spain. These being stript of all except a little Vi∣aticum, are shipped at sundry times (for there were 900 thousand of them) and exposed on the Affrican shore to hunger, cold, and the sword. CHAP. XVIII. The affairs of Germany, Denmark, Swedland, Holland, Russia, Italy, Hun∣gary, Bohemia, Transylvania, Poland, Grisons, France, Switzers, &c. under Matthias and Ferdinand 2d, Emperors; from the yeare 1612. till 1626. MAtthias succeeded to his brother Rodolphus in the Empire: He calls a Diet at Ratisbon, at which were present all the  Protestant Princes, except the Elector of Saxony, who had lost the possession of Iuliers: And Lodowick of Has∣sia, 1612 who by his cousin German, Maurice was stript of the Government of Marpurg; therefore were both dis∣contented. Here the protestants complain, that in Spire, Vienna, and other places of Judicature, the Judges were all, or most of them Catholicks, and that therefore the protestants were subject to all inconveniences, having no other Judges but their enemies. 1613 They desire then, there might be the same number of protestants as of Catho∣lick Judges and votes; but in this point nothing was concluded; the prote∣stants depart in anger, and nothing done but onely a decree to raise arms in  defence of Transylvania against the Turk; for complaint was made to Ach∣mat Sultan, against Batorius, for siding with Caesar, and indeavouring to deli∣ver the possession of Dacia to him. Upon this the Turk strives to make Bethleem Gabor Fiduciarie Prince of Transylvania under him. Batorius
having  weakned himself by his cruelty upon the Saxons in Dacia, putting to death promiscuously every one that was but suspected of treachery, was for want of strength defeated by Gabor, assisted with the Turks Forces, and at last was killed at Varadinum, by the treachery of his servants. Gabor satisfieth the Turk by giving him Lippa with some other Forts, and pacified Cesar by swear∣ing fealty to him. Achmet had a great mind to pick a quarrel with the Pano∣nians, but was hindred by the Arabian sedition; in which the Sultan lost A∣denum: the Governour also of Damascus was overthrown in a great battel, by the son of Emeris Saida, who derived his pedigree from Godfred of Bullion. After Christian of Denmark, had taken Calmaria and Elsburg, the Swedes two chief Forts, upon the Baltic and the Hesperian sea, a great mortality by the plague ensued, which occasioned a peace; wherein was articled that the Swede should relinquish his title of Lapponia, and should pay 12 Tuns of gold to the Dane, for his expences on the last war; till the payment of which sum, Elsburg should be left in pawn. The Hollanders at Constantinople, make a League with the Turk for com∣merce. At Aix and Colen, a sedition is raised against the Catholicks; at Franc∣fort, 1614 and Wormes against the Iews. At Aix the Protestants had been along time debarred the exercise of their religion, and punished for the same, which the Townsmen thought was a great oppression, therefore in a popular tumult  they seize on the City, and turn out the Jesuits: but by the French Agents, and those of Iuliers, a patcht peace is made up, to which the Catholick Senators would not assent. At Colen many who were forbid the exercise of their religion, remove to Mulheim two miles from the City; they of Colen fearing lest that new Town of Mulheim should out-run in wealth, inhabitants, and priviledges, their anci∣ent City, they labour to hinder the building and increase thereof. Brandeburg and Newburg, are inhibited by Cesar from the building of that place, and the inhabitants are threatned with destruction. Mean while, Wolfgangus Guliel∣mus of Newburg, and Georgius Gulielmus Marquess, the Electors son, Princes near of kin, fell out about the possession of their mothers lands; and withall  differed in religion: for Newburg having married Magdalen of Bavaria, be∣comes Catholick, the other a Calvanist, who by the assistance of Holland, for∣tifies Iuliers, as Newburg had done the same at Dusseldorp. Cesar proscribes Aix for turning out their ancient Senators, and the execution of this Edict is committed to Albert Cesars brother. Newburg puts Cesars sentence in execu∣tion concerning Mulheim, which he destroyeth; the Elector of Brandeburg complains of these Edicts; as being against law; in the interim, Spinola sei∣zeth upon Aix, and restores the Senators; the Protestants fly, they that re∣mained, were punished; he overthrows the remainders of Mulheim, and brings under the subjection of Newburg, Vesalia, upon the Rhen, and other Towns of  the Principality of Iuliers. Maurice being called upon by Brandeburg, takes in Emerec and some other places. Newburg upon the death of his Father Phi∣lip Ludovick, sets up the Roman Religion in his Dominions, and Brandeburg advanceth Calvinism in his Lands; that he might remove as much in opinion, as he was in affection from Newburg. At Berlin the people mutiny for chan∣ging Lutheranism into Calvanism, which they hated. The Iews for their great extortion are driven out of Francfort, but brought back again in great pomp. At Wormes also some Iews are banished: at Salinae in Thuringia, one Ezekiel Meth, gave himself out to be the great Michael, and Immortal Word of God; but by experience, he found himself to be mortal and miserable. Smalcius a Socinian, denyeth Christs Divinity, which blasphemy is entertained in Sar∣matia and Dacia, at this day. About this time Russia is much infested by the Polander and Swedes, many Russians did now serve the Polander in this war, in hope his son Laudislaus should
be Prince of Muscovia: but those mutinying for want of pay, gave occasion to the Tartars to invade Podolia. But these Muscovites being pacified by gold and large promises, overthrew three several Armies of their Countrey-men. Neuda, Plescovia, and other Russian Towns, are taken by the Polander and Swede. Mosqua is burned by the Polonians, the Russians resenting these losses, 1615 begin to lay aside all private grudges, and the Nobility chose a Prince of their own rank, Michael Federovitius, who sends Embassadors to Cesar and the Po∣lander for peace; to which both assented. The death of Francis Duke of Mantua, caused a war in Italy; for Cardinal Ferdinand Gonzaga, the defuncts brother, puts aside his hat, thinks of marriage, and layeth hold upon his Ancestors  Principality; from him Charles Emanuel, of Savoy, demands his daughters Dowry, who had been married to Francis: and withall the Marchionat of Montferrat the Mantuan, being assisted by the vice Duke of Millan, who was a Spaniard, did claim Montferrat for himself; and having raised an Army of Spaniards, opposeth the Savoyen, who stoutly made resistance, till a peace was made, and the Mantuan promised to pay the Dowry or portion to Mar∣garet; the other differences were referred to arbitration. But when the Spa∣niard proposed hard conditions to the Savoyen, the war broke out more vio∣lently then before, to the great effusion of bloud; the French and Switzers held with the Savoyen, the Italians and Spaniards, with the Mantuan. The Vice Duke gains Vercellae for the Spaniard, when in the interim the Savoyen wasts many places in the Dutchy of Millan. At last, the eighteenth year of this Century, restitution was made on both sides, and a peace concluded in Germany. Henry of Iuliers, offended with Brunswick, obtains a proscrip∣tion against that City, from Ralph the Emperor; the Dukes son Frederick had made peace with them, if they would have delivered him a key to open their city gate at his pleasure; this being denyed, he besiegeth them. During which time, 12000 of the besiegers, and 3000 of the besieged, were slain. At length about the fourth moneth after the siege began, a peace is made, in which it was agreed, that the City, as their Ancestors had done, should swear  Allegeance to the Duke. The proscription should be cancelled, the old com∣merce between the Duke and City should be renued, and that future contro∣versies shall be decided by Law, not by the sword. The Venetians were infested both on sea and land, by the Croats plundring 1616 oftentimes with small Boats, the Venetian great Vessels. Complaint is made to Ferdinand the Arch-Duke, against these Pirats, but nothing done, where∣fore a cruel war ensued. In which Cesar and the Spaniard stood for Ferdinand, the Hollander under Iohn of Nassau, for Venice; but they being unacquainted with the Italian way of fighting, returned dishonourably home, without do∣ing any thing. Mean while Ferdinand, as it were adopted by Matthias Cesar,  is made King of Bohemia, by the consent of his two brothers Albert and Maxi∣milian, on this condition, that whilst the Emperour lived, he should not med∣dle with the government. Hereupon he is crowned, nobly entertained by the Saxon, and fealty sworn to him by the Moravians▪ Silesians, and Lusatians. After a bloudy war between him and Venice, a peace is concluded; and the mercenary Croats, thieves rather then soldiers, must avoid Senga, in which Town Ferdinand was to place a Garison of Germans. The confederate Belgi∣ans had now redeemed from the English Flissing and Briel, which were pawned to Queen Elizabeth. At Amsterdam and Delph great troubles about Armi∣nianism. The Excise of Wine being diminished, and of Corn encreased, so  enraged the people, that they brake in upon the State, or Councel-House flung the Excise money up and down, and forced the Senate to take off that Excise. In this scuffle, the women there plaid the Amazons, and no wonder when one of them had been married successively to twenty five husbands. The Arminians finding their adversaries too strong, and
that a Synod was  called against them, were advised by Barnevilde, Grotius and others, to raise forces at Utricht, Leyden and Harlem, for their defence, alledging that each Congregation had power to choose their own Pastor: but Grave Maurice sooner then was expected, came upon Utricht, seizeth on the watch, disarms the Citizens, imprisons the conspirators, and placeth there Calvinian ministers; which much disheartned the Remonstrants. In this mean while, the Holland ships finde out another passage to the Moluccas beyond the Strait of Magellan: in two years space they pass the Line five times. In Russia before the peace was made, the Polonians out of Smolenscum, made an irruption on the Russians, of 1517 whom they slew eight thousand, and took two thousand prisoners. By the  mediation of King Iames, a peace is concluded between the Russian and Swede. It was agreed that Novograd and some other Towns taken from the Russian, should be restored to Michael the Exarch; and that Gustavus Adolphus King of Swede, should retain five Towns: that neither of them should assist the Po∣lander with arms. In Livonia some Towns are taken by the Swede, but by the treachery of Furnesbec they are surprised by the Polander. The protestants in Germany celebrate a Jubilee this year 1617. being a full Century since Luther began to oppose indulgences. At this the Roman Ca∣tholicks did much storm, and indeed this Evangelical Jubilee (as they call it) hath occasioned much sorrow in Germany ever since: for then the Pope and  Princes began to consult about suppressing of Lutheranism; the brand was set on fire in Bohemia, which caused that woful conflagration in Germany, presa∣ged 1618 by the fatal comet seen that year, by the fall of a hill among the Grisons, on the Town of Plura, which was suddenly overwhelmed, so that neither the place, nor face of a Town, could there be any more seen, but a Lake where the Castle stood. This Earthquake fell out the 25 of August, that same year. The palace at Paris was set on fire by Lightning from Heaven, which consu∣med the ancient Monuments and Statues of the French Kings. About that time I being then at Salisbury, in the Deanry, was called out into the Court to behold (with multitudes of people, being then nine of the clock at night)  divers Moons or Meteors like Moons, within a bright cloud beset with divers crosses. The Papists in Hungary and Bohemia, taking offence at some Churches late∣ly erected by the Protestants, shuts them up, or defaceth them. The Prote∣stants complain to the Bishop of Prague and Abbot of Brunonia, that this was against the Laws of Rodolphus and Matthias; it was answered that none had power to build Churches in their Territories, without their consent, and that therefore the protestants were justly punished. Then they appeal to Cesar, who gave them no satisfaction: he being now gone from Vienna, to be neerer Ferdinands Coronation in Hungary, the protestant Princes call a Diet, to con∣sult about preserving of their religion: upon this, Cesar is made believe that such conventicles as they called them, were of dangerous consequence, tend∣ing to the Emperors overthrow; and that therefore under pain of his highest displeasure, they should be dissolved. At this they were so exasperated, that they flung their Scribe, and two more out of the Castle window, accusing them as betrayers of their countries liberties, in appealing to Cesar, yet their lives were saved. They set a guard of soldiers upon Sternberg, the Governor of the Castle and Kingdom; they secure Prague, and throw the Iesuits out of Bohemia; and presently by their letters to Cesar, and their publick declarati∣ons, they justifie what they had done. But Cesar condemns their procee∣dings  as seditious, exhorts the Princes not to countenance them, and forbids levying of soldiers, promising that if the Bohemians would be quiet, he would not stir, otherwise he would raise such an army as should chastise their con∣tumacy. With this the people were contented, promising to be peaceable, and desiring no force might be raised.
Nor was Cesar averse to peace, but  some turbulent spirits who could place no security in peace, being guilty of the breach thereof, and fearful of Cesars displeasure, resolve to make war. Here∣upon Cesar by Tampir and Bucquoi, raiseth an army, Bohemia draws the Sile∣sians and Lusatians to joyn with them; they besiege Budvise a Town wholly Cesarian, and place a Garison in Crumavia. Tampir takes in Bistricium, and being repulsed from Newhouse, plunders the Suburbs, then takes Pilgron: Count Bucquoi comes with a bigger army to Saslavia, where a doubtfull battell is fought, many slain on both sides; the Palatin and Saxon Electors would fain have hid the sparkles under the ashes. But it was now too late, for the fire was broke out into a flame. Mansfield takes Pilsna for the Bohemians, Buc∣quoi  fights him; and comes to Budvise, takes Crumavia: Tampir returning with great plunder to Vienna, is met by the enemy, and plundred of his plunder. Turren makes excursions upon Austria; the protestants there being angry with Cesar, for undertaking so rash a war, without their knowledge. The Saxon Elector laboureth for a cessation, till peace be concluded: the Bohemians doubt of Cesars fidelity in keeping the peace. Divers Commanders at Vienna 1619 undertake a new order of Militia against Hereticks. Cesar proscribes Mans∣field, and in the mean while fals sick of a lingring disease, whereof he died the 62 year of his life, and the 7 of his Empire. The Grisons shortly after the Earthquake, fall into divisions, proscribing and killing all that were against their democracy, the exiles require forain aid, and make way for strangers, to invade that countrey. The Venetians found out the plot intended against them, and punished the plotters. Ferdinand 2d, succeeded in the Empire, he was grand child to Ferdinand first by his son Charls. In his first Letters Patents he establisheth the priviledges of Bohemia, and the publick Officers of the kingdom, setting by Matthias, but now thrust out by the Peers. This was disliked by the Bohemians, therefore they resolve to stand upon their guard. The inhabitants whom Bucquoi affrigh∣ted with divers irruptions, are commanded to be in arms. Turren breaks in upon Moravia, and forceth them to side with Bohemia. Wallenstein goeth to  Hungary for aid from thence. Turren having over-run Austria, faces Vienna, and takes the Suburbs, where he quartered some days as it were in the Kings presence. But whilst he is drawing the Hungarian, and Austrian protestants to confederate with him, Bucquois army increaseth by new supplies from Italy, Hungary, and Belgium: With these he fights Mansfield, and defeats him. Upon this divers Towns open their gates to him, who laden with spoil enters trium∣phantly Budveisa; this caused Turren to hasten his return into Bohemia. Buc∣quois army now consisting of 17000, takes divers Towns upon surrender. Tampir is sent against Moravia. Turren being beaten back from Vienna, King Ferdinand comes to Francfort, where the Elector of Mintz, calls a Diet for installing of the Emperour. This troubled the Bohemians, that Ferdinand whom they went about to un-King, should sit among the Electors as King of Bohemia: therefore they send Agents and Letters, to keep him off from vo∣ting, whom they held to be no King. But their labour was in vain, for not only was he acknowledged one of the Electors, but also was chosen and con∣secrated Emperor. The Bohemians on the contrary, kill the Tampirians in Moravia, and throw the Iesuits out of Silesia, Moravia, and Hungary. Be∣sides, the very next day that Ferdinand was made Cesar, they depose him at Prague, and in his place chose Frederic the Palatin. When as the Electors had cited them to Ratisbon, for deciding of the differences; the Palatin though he was disswaded by the Electors, yet unadvisedly accepts of the Bohemian Crown. Bucquoi being inraged, beleaguers Pisseca, storms it, and puts all the Townsmen to the sword. Mansfield is proscribed by the new Cesar, who rageth up and down the Country, doing more hurt to innocent people, then good to his new king Frederic that employed him. Gabriel Bethlem, or Beth∣leem
Gabor Pr. of Transylvania did most hurt to Ferdinand, who conspiring with the Bohemians, and gaping after the Kingdome of Hungary, took Lassovia, Posonium, and other places; he used the Cath olicks barbarously, and trans∣ferring the Crown of Hungary to himself, took upon him the title of Prince of Hungary: Afterwards meetings were held among the Correspondents (for so they were called who sided with the Palatin and Bohemia) at Norimberg, and of the Catholicks at Herbipolis, about the way of promoting, their severall interests and religions. Bucquoi been pinched with want, and forsaken of the Hungarian robbers, went aside into Austria, where the Protestants sepera∣ting themselves from the Papists, had an eie on the fortune of Bohemia. In Holland a Synod is called at Dort, at which were present Divines out of Great Britain, Switzerland, Palatinat, Hassia, Geneva, Brem, and Embden; In which these 5 controverted Articles were debated. 1. Whether Election and reprobation were absolute, or had respect to faith and infidelitie. 2d. If Christ died for all. 3d. If in God there are two contrary wills; to wit, re∣vealed and secret. 4th. If effectuall Grace can be resisted. 5th. If the faith∣full can finally, and totally fall from Grace. The Remonstrants refused to stand to their verdict, who were both Judges and Parties, exhibiting a con∣fession of their Faith with a protestation, would not recant their opinion, there∣fore they were condemned of error, divers of them imprisoned, and most  banished. Iohn Bernevild above 70 years of age, and who had been a good patriot, looseth his head, for favouring the Arminian doctrin and plots, for violating the Belgick Laws; for accusing Maurice as if he aspired at the sole dominion of Belgium. Ledenboroius one of the plotters killed himself: Groti∣us and Hogerbetins condemned to perpetuall imprisonment; and their goods confiscate; but Grotius by his wife was conveyed out of prison in a chest. Cae∣sar by his declarations doth nullifie the Palatins Coronation, because it was not done by them, who had the power to do it, nor was it done [solio vacan∣te] much less did it become the Palatin to take his Crown, whom he had ac∣knowledged 1620 to be lawfull King of Bohemia, and had with the other Electors  chosen him Caesar: He shewed also that the Austrians had an hereditary right over Bohemia, which the Bohemians in their printed books refuted. But Fre∣derick the new King by abolishing the Roman Faith in the Castle of Prague, and the Lutheran in other places, procured on himself much hatred; the begin∣ning of his reigne was ominous, for he sent one Slavata to take possession of the Town Gutscinum with the Castle, which was blown up with gun-powder by Smirsitzia the wife of Baron Wartenburgius, there perished shee, and Sla∣vata, with certain Judges, in all about one hundred persons: Whilst Frede∣rick is busie in making the Moravians, Cilesians, and Lusatians swear Fealty to him. Maradas conducts from Caesar new Forces into Bohemia, Bucquoi  falls upon the Mansfieldians out of order, for want of pay in the night, and makes a great slaughter amongst them. The Transylvanian makes truce with Caesar for some months. Bucquoi is forced by the Bohemians to retreat to Gremsa: The Cossacks which were the Polonian Auxiliaries, spoyle all the Lu∣theran Countries with fire and sword, multitudes of people are driven into the woods, where they are killed with cold and hunger, or the merciless ene∣mie. 1623 These also were sometimes beaten by the Silesians and Moravians. Ba∣ron Felsius as he was pursuing those Cossacks, fell unwarily into Bucquoi's quarters, where he lost his life, with many of his Soldiers. The Elector's pittying the misery of Germany labor (except Brandeburg) to perswade the Pa∣latine  to renounce his Title of Bohemia, otherwise they threaten to take arms against him. Frederick replies that the cognizance of the Bohemian cause was not in a few Electors, nor n Ferdinand Archduke of Austria, but in the Kingdome of Bohemia, or rather the whole Empire: Neither had he any quarrel with Caesar, but with the Archduke; therefore saith he, forraign
Princes desire the matter may be heard in a full Diet: But the Bohemians were so little moved with the Electors threatnings, that they named Henry Fredericks eldest son now six years old, successor to his Father in the Kingdome of Bohemia. Caesar to vindicate this wrong offered to his Family, sollicites the Pope to furnish him with money, Spain and Poland with Forces. The Palatine finds not that supply from England which he expected, The French King thought it best to reconcile the differences, therefore sends Ambassadors to desire them to be reconciled: Maximilian of Bavaria, who had a great army of Papists, agrees with the Protestant army under Ioachim Ernest, that the seat of the war should be contained within the borders of Bohemia, and the Provinces  unite to it; presently the Bavarian marcheth against the Austrians that were in league with Bohemia, and forceth them to renounce their league. Iohn George Elector of Saxony, who had exhorted before Bohemia and the Palatin to submit to Caesar; is by him imployed against the upper and lower Lusatia, both of which he subjugates to the Emperor, which greatly advanced Caesar's cause. At the same time Spinola with an army out of Belgium, by the King of Spain's command invades the Palatinat. The Prince of Orange with a strong army marcheth into Vesalia, his brother Henry Frederick into the Palatinate. In Hungary, Gabor is proclaimed King by a Diet of his own Faction: Thence  he falls upon Austria, and sends aid to Bohemia, he shoots Tampire dead, as he was attempting to take in Posonium. Bavare having quieted Austria, joynes his whole Forces with Bucquois's; many towns by them are taken, multitudes of the inhabitants slain, many of the countrey-people take arms against their land-lords, wasting their Mannors, and plundring their houses: the Bohemian army conducted by the King, did somewhat retard the enemies proceedings, some light velitations there were, but the Soldiers were unruly for want of pay, whereas the Imperial army by reason of their great plunders, and the wealth of Maximilian the Bavarian, was duely payed: The Palatine then marcheth with all his Forces towards Prague, and encampeth but in a tumultua∣ry  way on a hill not farr off, with a purpose to fight the Enemy, and to drive him out of Prague; but most of his army put more confidence in their heels then hands, for whilst they were intrenching themselves, Count Tilly, with the Bavarian and Caesarian army hastneth towards them: presently about 9000 Hungarians laden with plunder, run away; in the very first incounter of the two armies, the Regiments of Turrin and Hollach are cut off, which so dis∣heartned the rest, that they began to grow disordred, and in a confused way being struck with a panick terror, run towards the City. Anhalden and Count Hollach, prevent the rest, and bring sad newes to the King that the day was lost, and that his chief safety consisted in his horse-heels. He pro∣cures  with much difficulty truce for 8 hours, either to renounce his claim of Bo∣hemia, or to fight again: He found it unsafe to put all on the hazard of another incounter, therefore having put his wife, children, and best things in coach∣es and waggons, he hastneth into Silaesia: The Crown and Records of the Kingdom being left behinde. This victory fell out the 8th of November af∣ter 1620 the Roman account; the Gospell for which day is, Give to Caesar the things that are Caesars. The next day, the Imperialists enter Prague in a tri∣umphant way; so in a short time Bohemia submits to Caesar: In this battell were killed of the Bohemians 8000. and 2000. Caesarians. The Palatin Sol∣diers being destitute of their pay, and forsaken by their Commanders, curse Bohemia that ever they saw it, and so by flight every one shifts for him∣self. Shortly after this, Maximilian of Bavaria, returns home, the charge of the army, is Committed to Tillie, and of the Kingdom to Lichtenstein. Of the Protestant side, Mansfield had some Soldiers in Pilsna, Hermanus Francus
in Thabor, and old Turren in Moravia, in Valachia and Moldavia, Gratian, at this time was Vaivod, whom the Polonians protected, the Turks and Tartars opposed, because he had conspired with the Polander against the Turk; two battels were fought; in the first the Polanders, in the second the Turks had the better, in which Gratian with his Auxiliaries were cut off. Hereupon Os∣man having made peace with the Parthian, turns out of his Court the Poland Ambassador, and denounceth war against the King, who hardly escaped with his life, being assaulted by an Assasin, as he was going into the Church; by providence the blow was averted, the Assasin tortured, and open war a∣gainst the Turk is proclaimed. In the Valtelin, Ralph Plant being proscribed  by the Grisons, enters into a secret plot with the Catholicks, to kill all the Protestants there, as well strangers, as natives, which massacre was effected accordingly: Then being assisted by the Duke of Feria, Governor of Millan with 4000 Soldiers, seiseth on the whole valley from Lake Comon to Tirol, and beats off the Grisons united with the Valtebinois: The Duke of Feria mean while builds in fit places strong Forts. The Venetians could not endure that the gate of Italy should be shut up against the French and Switzers; The French King by his Ambassadors, desires the King of Spain to open the pas∣sage again. Upon this, divers consultations were held, but diversly interru∣pted: In the interim Pompy Plant with his friends are murthered in his own Castle. In the beginning of the next year Frederick the Palsgrave is proscribed by 1621 Caesar for accepting the Crown of Bohemia, and so are all those that aided him. Turren who could not perswade the Moravians to constancie, flieth to Bethleem Gabor, whose election to the Crown of Hungary, Caesar maketh nul. The Palatin of Segeberg sueth for aid from the Dane and Saxon, but in vain; for Caesar having declared he would maintain the peace and liberty of Germany; neither the Dane nor Saxon would stir, onely Christian of Brunswick; Bishop of Halberstad raiseth an Army, which he conducted into the Countrey of Mints, the Pallatin now was gon for Holland. Bucquoi had subdued Mora∣via;  the Saxon Silesia, which was pardoned upon acknowledging of their er∣rors, the Moravians were left to Caesar's mercy: Spinola broke the league that was between the Princes of Onoltzbac, Wirtenburg, Durlacen, and Hasse with some others that were united; these procured peace for their own Territories, and truce for the Palatinat, till means was used for a transaction. Mean while Tilly in Bohemia fights with Mansfield, who had yet the possession of some Towns there, and of the upper Palatinat. But for want of money, the Cap∣tains sold their Towns to Tilly. Mansfield being reduced to great streights, upon promise of pardon, money and honours▪ submits to Caesar; but having strengthned himself, he revolts and violates his faith, and so through the Ba∣varian  Territories, he breaks in upon the lower Palatinat, and raiseth the siege of Frankenthal; then he plunders the Territories of Spire and Strais∣burg, and possesseth himself of Hagenoa: The Palsgrave publisheth a decla∣ration, wherein he sheweth the causes why he accepted the Crown of Bohe∣mia, and withall, how desirous he was of peace, if it could be obtained upon terms of honor and safety. Count Bucquoi having subdued Moravia, marcheth towards Hungary, where Gabor cunningly refuseth to be Crowned. Presburg, Posonium, and other Towns, are taken in by Bucquoi, who perswades Seastin George to fall off from Gabor, he under-hand reconciles himself to Caesar, and doth a great deal of  mischief to Gabor, whilst he was expecting aid from the Turk; for he inter∣cepted the Auxiliaries that were sent to him: Gabor at this time was in a low condition, when Bucquoi besieging Neusolum was killed with 16 wounds, the recovering of his body from the Hungarians, cost the Gaesarians much blood; his death gave occasion to Gabor to
regain many of his lost Towns and forts:  But about the end of this year, at the Diet of Niclasburg, an accord is made between Cesar and him, and the Crown of Hungary is restored to Ferdinand. Divers Towns are left to Gabor, to be governed by him under Cesar. He ob∣tains also some places in Silesia, and the title of a Prince of the Empire. Reli∣gion is left in the same condition it was, when Ferdinand undertook the Govern∣ment of that kingdom. In the interim Silesia is much infested by Iegerndorff, who layeth heavy Taxes on them, and fights the Saxon with divers success. Twenty five Incendiaries are apprehended by the Saxon, and for Treason are condemned at Prague. Whilest the Polonian is at war with the Turk, the Swedes take Riga in Livonia, and Mitovia, which afterward was re-taken by  the Polander, and then a Truce was made. The twelve years peace between Spain and Holland, is this year 21, expired in April. The Arch-Duke by his Agent, wisheth the Hollanders to return to the obedience of Spain, they answer, that it was too late to expect obedience of them, whom Spain had confessed to be free States. Hereupon Spinola in Sep∣tember sits down before Iuliers, and takes it the next February, notwithstan∣ding Orange did what he could to help the besieged. Whilst the Grisons strive to defend, the Valtelin are beaten themselves by the Spaniard; by which means Leopold of Austria on the one side, and the Duke of Feria on the o∣ther, took occasion to plant the Roman faith there. The King of Morocco in Africa, about to take the Fort, built by the Spaniard neer Alarachia, is bea∣ten off with the loss of his army, by the Spanish Fleet, which in the Straits of Cadiz, took 32 Holland ships. Out of the Molucca Islands the Spaniards and English beat the Hollander. This year died Pope Paul 5th, of an Apoplexy, the 69 year of his life, and of his Pontificat the 16. To him succeeded Alexan∣der Ludovisius of Bononia, who made the peace between Spain and Savoy, whom after a few days Cosmus Exarch of Hetruria, followed; he left many 1622 children behind him, his eldest son Ferdinand, yet a child, succeeded; he was under the tution of his Grand-mother of Lorrain, his Mother of Austria, and his Uncle the Cardinal. The last of March died King Philip 3d of Spain,  the 43 year of his life, and of his reign 23. Philip the 4th, being 16 years of age succeeded, who thrust out of his Court such as had abused his Fathers lenity; some he imprisoned, and some he put to death. In Iuly after died Albert the Arch-Duke, and in September following, Bel∣larmine that famous Divine, being almost 80 years of age: he was sisters son to Pope Marcellus 2d. Gregory 15 made a Law that the Pope should be cho∣sen by the Cardinals only, without any respect had to the Letters of Kings and Princes. Brunswic did much mischief this year in Westphalia, he took in ma∣ny Towns, persecuted the Roman Catholicks, abused the Clergy, defaced Churches, and made mony of consecrated Ornaments; thence he goeth into Eisfeldia and Watteravia, and other places thereabout, spoiling all with fire and sword. Mean while the Palatin returns into his own country disguised. Mansfield and the Marquis of Baden, defeat Tilly near Wissoch: but afterward the same Tilly did totally rout the Mansfieldians, and took all their Artillery, aggage and Mony. Shortly after, Mansfield takes Ladenburg, and defeats the Leopoldians, as they were besieging Hagenoa. Then he hastneth to joyn with Brunswic, but Tilly did so hotly pursue him, that he retreats to Manheim. Then Tilly seeks out Brunswick, where he finds him with a great Army, but without Ordnance, near the River Moen, where he forceth them all to fly. The Duke escapes over the Bridge, and was so eagerly pursued by the Tillians, that with the weight of the soldiers the Bridge broke, and many were drown∣ed in the River. Brunswicks other Troops were cut in pieces by the Cesari∣ans: Besides those that were drowned, three thousand were killed; Hochsta was regained presently. The Palatin wanting mony to furnish Mansfield
and Brunswick, and finding  that his condition was deplorable, he supports his hopes with the agreement at Brussels, then in agitation by Digby Embassador for King Iames; he cashiered Mansfield, being desirous of the same, many Towns & forts submit to Cesar; Wormes and Spire admit Garisons; Heidelberg is besieged; the Palatin is con∣veyed to Sedan by the Mansfieldians, who joining with Brunswicks Forces, brake in through France upon Henault, where they had a sharp encounter with Consalvus of Corduba, in which Brunswicks arm was so torn and shattered, that the Chirurgions were fain to cut it off. Thence they make their way towards Breda in Brabant; sharp Skirmishes there were, and many slain on both sides. Brunswick was like to cary the Victory, had not the Mansfieldians for want of  pay, refused to fight. Not long after on the sixt of September Heidelberg after a stout defence, was taken by Tilly, the Garison all put to the sword, the Town miserably defaced and plundred, so that Tilly was fain to com∣mand the soldiers to give off. The King of Denmark sends an Embassador to the Emperor, desiring him to pardon the Palatins temerity, for publick peace sake, and to restore him to his Electorat, upon his renunciation of the Bohemian Crown. But Cesar refers the Embassador to the agreement of Brussels, which went on with so slow a pace, that in the mean while the Palatin lost all his Country; for Sir Horace Vere dispairing of any aid, delivers up Manheim Tilly, upon honourable tearms. In October following, Leopold subdues the  Territory of Spire, and other parts. The Lands of the Marquisat of Baden suffered all kind of hostility by the Bavarian soldiers, chiefly the Croats and Cosaoks. These Cosacks for their cruelty are cashiered by Cesar; for whereso∣ever they went, like mad dogs, they raged on all sorts of people, sex and ages, their cruelties, rapacity, and leachery, which Germany suffered is un∣speakable. But they were met sometimes by the Silesians, and rewarded ac∣cording to their merits. The Mansfieldians were little better in Westphalia, and East Friesland: plundring and spoiling all places as they came, and impo∣sing Taxes at their pleasure; whereupon the lower Saxony by Cesars consent, take arms for their own defence. All the Protestant Ministers are banished  out of Bohemia, and Moravia. In France the Pacification is broken by the King, who not without great slaughter takes Montpelier, and other Protestant Towns, with which afterwards he makes an agreement. The same year the Pope Canonizeth Isidor, Ignatius Loyola, Francis Tre∣sia, Foundress of the bare-footed Carmelites, and one Philip Author of the Congregation of the Oratory. He decrees it a sin, to say, the Virgin Ma∣ry was conceived in sin. He erects a new Colledge for propagating the faith. He sends into Denmark some Parsonated Divines, to season the Schools and Pulpits with their Doctrine of Rome, but vvith small success; two Danish ships richly loaden, return that year home from Ceilan in the East-Indies. Spi∣nola  before Bergen ap Zo, loseth 8000 men, and at last is forced to break up his siege. Maximilian of Bavaria is honoured with the Palatin Electorat, a∣gainst the will of Mints, Saxon, and Branburg, but with this caution, that here∣by the Palatins sons and indred should not be prejudiced. This vvas done at Ratisbon the 15 of February. The Popish Doctors are detected in Denmark, and banished. A silver Mine is found in Norway, and a new Academy erect∣ed 1623 in Seland. In Holland a Treasonous plot is discovered against Maurice, and the Anti-Arminians; the Ring-leaders, were Barnfelds two sons, one of which escaped, the other with his complices vvas executed. The King of Denmark and the Saxon Princes drove Brunswick out of their Territories into Friesland, where Tilly falls upon his Rear, and by an ambush suddenly surrounds his Ar∣my, which was very numerous; the Tillians were but 5000, who put to slight the Brunswickians, killed seven hundred on the place, took most of the chief men prisoners, with all the Ordnance, Baggage and Provision. Bruns∣wick himself escaped, with some
Troups to Brevord. Meppena is surrendred to Tilly. Frisia is still molested by the Mansfildians, till Count Oldenburg obtai∣ned their pardon from Caesar: For Tilly did not meddle with these cunning Har∣pies, yet some of them return to the Province of Munster in Westphalia where they loose 15 Colours. Limbaus with most of his Commanders surrender themselves: From that time the Mansfieldians fell off daily, their Commander accompanied with a fevv, flies back to Holland, and Brunswick to Saxony. This year died Gregory 15th of the Palsie at Rome: His successor was Cardinall Ma∣phaeus Barberinus, vvho took the name of Urban 8th. Old Turren assisted by the Turks, did much mischief in Moravia, so did Gabo, till the Turks fell off from him, and his German aid not appearing, he vvas forced to make peace vvith the Emperor, vvho aftervvard took from the title of Princes of the Empire. The Turks returning heavy vvith plunder, are killed every vvhere by the Caesarians, and stript of their spoyles: The next year peace is renevved betvveen Caesar and Transylvania; so at last Iegerndorff is turned out of Sile∣sia, Turren out of Moravia, and Gabor out of Hungary. This year strange things were seen in Germany, portending yet more trou∣bles. For in divers Poles water was congealed into blood, drops of blood fell from the beams and rafters of some houses, the bread, the tables, and books in some places sweat blood: Armies fighting were seen and heard in the aire, and corn grew upon trees. Shortly after this the sparkles of war 1624 begin to break out in Denmark and Saxony. Count Tilly places some Garri∣sons  in Saxony, though Brunswick was fled into Denmark, and had disbanded the remainder of his Army: These Garrisons so oppressed the Saxons with exacti∣ons, and want of provision, that they complain to the Dane, and he to the Emperor, that Saxony his neighbour Countrey was much oppressed, though they were no enemies either to Caesar or Bavare: It was answered, that those forces in Saxony belonged to the Bavarian, who could not with safety disband them, because he feared the Saxon strength; yet if there were any vvithin the King's Territories, they should be removed. This ansvver vvas sent by the King to Tilly, vvho returns him this scoff, That his Soldiers had no vvings to flye in the aire, therefore must have some ground and earth for their feet to  stand upon. This highly incensed the King, who was now invited by the Kings of great Brittan, France, Swethland, and the Netherlands, to stand up in defence of Kingly right. The Hollanders send a great fleet this year into A∣merica, which seisng upon some Spanish Vessels, take the Bay or port of All Saints, with the Town, where they met with rich booties: Spinola about the end of August, sits down before Baieda. Maurice takes the antient Town of Clive, with some other places; he aimed also at the Cittadell of Antwerp, but his Stratagem failed. Breda having held out siege 9 months, in which time Iustin of Nassau made many eruptions, and Henry Frederick with a great army strove to raise the siege, but could not, therefore the Town was forced  by sickness and famin, to yeild May 26. the Soldiers marched out with their arms, and the Townesmen had their liberties granted, but not their Religion, after such a day. A little before, Frederick of Toledo, recovered again their Bay of Brasil to the Spaniards. Philip 4th inhibited commerce between the Spa∣niards, and his subjects of Belgium. About the beginning of the 25th year, the storms and windes were so vio∣lent 1625 in Denmark and Golsatia, that not onely trees were rooted up, but also many houses, towers and Churches blown down, bulwarks, banks, and ram∣pires overthrown by the sea, and land-floods, fore-runners of the ensuing troubles. About the end of March at Lavenberg, a meeting was between the Princes of lower Saxony, the King of Denmark, as Duke of Holsatia, the administrator of Magdeburg, the Bishop of Brem, the Duke of Brunswick, the Megapolitans; where it is agreed, that the Regiments raised awhile ago for defence of Saxony be increased, and a
strong Army levied, over which the  King should be Generall. The Grisons war in the Valtelin is renewed. For France, Venice, and Savoy vexed that a Province, so convenient for them, should be wholly subject to any other: Therefore they enter into a Confederacy for regaining it: To whom 4 Towns and 2 Counties come in and submit. Ma∣ny that had betrayed their Countrey were put to death, but the Catholick Switzers put themselves under the protection of Austria. Presently Cleve be∣ing taken, the whole Valtelin falls off to the confederates. There is also war made against Genua, for furnishing the Spaniard with money and provisions: This War was eagerly persued in the beginning by the French, and Savoyen, in which the Ligurians were sometimes worsted: Preton and Albinga are surren∣dred,  but the French were diverted by an intestin War at home, between the Papists and Hugonots; in vvhich Duke Sonli beat the King's ships at sea, and shortly after is beaten himself, and driven into England. Rochel is besieged both by Sea and Land: Pope Urban confirms the new Militia, which began the 19th year of his age at Vienna, and gives it the name of Saint Marie's Concep∣tion. In Austria, Bohemia, Moravia, and elsewhere, the Protestant books are burned, their Church-service disturbed, and the professors of Reformati∣on banished. In France, books were cast abroad that the Hugonots inten∣ded to kill the King, and to recover their Liberty. Marcus Antonius de Do∣minis, who had wrote against the Church of Rome, whilst he was in England,  is inticed over to Brussels by the Spanish Ambassador, upon great promises, but from thence he is sent to Rome where he died; some say he was strangled in prison, and in the beginning of December was burned. Shortly after the Pope began his Iubilee, at which was present Uladislaus the Prince of Poland. Ferdinand the Emperor having made truce with the Turk for 12 years, sends Tilly and Fridland with their Armies to invade the lower Saxony, al∣though the King of Denmark had conducted an Army of 24 thousand to Vis∣rois without hurting any man; but declaring that his intent was onely to de∣fend the Saxon Liberties. Till the 10th of Iuly there passed no Act of hosti∣lity on either side: The Tillians made the first breach by seising upon a Fort  of Saxony, built near Huxaria. 10 Days after the King riding carelesly upon the Rampire, fell with his horse into a cave 29 foot deep, where powder was kept, onely covered over with deal-boards, where after two houres he was found alive, but for three daies together he was accounted no better then a dead man; wherefore the Enemy drawing near, the Danes retreat towards the Di∣ocess of Verdana: Mean while Tilly with all his Forces breaks in upon Brun∣swick, notwithstanding the Saxons by their Agents deprecated the contrary: He placeth Garrisons in divers Towns, and makes havock of the Inhabitants of Brunswick, who therefore take Arms in their own defence; The King also requires in Caesar's name, that he would remove his Army out of Saxony, but  in vain; for Tilly besiegeth Niemburg, which the King being well now recove∣red defended so stoutly, that Tilly was fain to give off the fiege with the loss of 4000 of his men: Yet Stoltzenavia revolted to him, by means of a certain Captain who was bribed. In the interim Mansfield gets recruits from England, which now was fallen out with Spain for not restoring the Palatinat. These Forces (but much diminished by the way) with some French and Flemins, he conducts into Saxony, where he takes up his quarters at Lavemburg upon Albis, when a little before, Brunswick with good supply of horse, joynes with the King. In this mean time Fridland enters the Diocess of Magdeburg, where he seiseth upon Hall, his Soldiers also make inroads upon the Territories of 1626 Halberstad without resistance; but that the flame of this war might spread no further, by the mediation of the Electors of Saxony and Brandeburg, a Trea∣ty for peace was held in October at Brunswick, after 4 months disceptation, the Treaty broke off without
effecting any thing; for Tilly would not part vvith Minda and Huxaria, neither vvould he nor Fridland confirm the rights vvhich the Nobility of Saxony had purchased over the Church-lands. So the War brake out more fiereely then before; in vvhich Brunswick overthrew a Regiment of High-vvay Robbers, vvith 800 of Fridlands men. But Mans∣field plundring some Villages of the Lubekers, vvas set upon by the Towns∣men vvho sallied out, killed divers of his Horse, and stript him of his plunder. Iohn Ernest of Vinaria, the Kings Lieutenant, takes in divers Towns. Leopold upon the death of his brother Charles in Spain, resignes his Bisho∣pricks of Strasburg, and Padua, and marries with Claudia of Medices, the Duke of Urbins Widow; the younger son of Sigismund, King of Poland,  obtains the Bishoprick of Uratislavia. About this time died King Iames in March, and Maurice Prince of Orange, the next April after, both of a Fea∣ver, whose deaths was accompanied with a great plague and mortality through Great Britain, and many other places of Europe. The King of Sweden falls upon Livonia suddenly, and takes divers Towns from the Polander, who la∣boured to recover Riga, with the loss of 600 Citizens, by Turren the yonger; the Swede also alarms Borussia in Iuly with a Fleet of eighty Sail. He takes in there divers Towns; he injoins the Dantiscans to put away the Polonian ships, and to pay him the Tribute due to the Polander, but this City resisted him stoutly, and retarded his proceedings. CHAP. XIX. A Continuation of the History of Germany, Denmark, Swedland, Holland, Poland, Italy, &c. under Ferdinand 2d, from the year 1626. till the end of 1630. THE flame of the Saxon war did this year break out into a great 1626 conflagration. The Cesarian Army being too numerous to be encountred with, the Saxons strive to keep off provisions from  them. The Mansfieldians therefore the 15 of April assault a Fort of Fridlands upon the Albis, by which he had provisions brought him by water. The attempt was desperate and rash; for the Mansfieldians were but 8000, vvhereas there was above 30000 Cesa∣rians. The Mansfieldian Horse fainting, left the Foot to the mercy of the Enemy, vvho cut off the Holland Auxiliaries, which were about 4000, the rest fled. Thirty colours vvere taken, yet they write that of the Mansfieldians not many above 1500 were slain. In Hassia the Country people rise in Arms against the soldiers, many whereof they killed and plundred. Brunswick fals upon the Province of Grubenhag, in the absence of George Lunebarge possessor thereof, who vvas raising Forces for Cesar, and fortifieth divers places with Garisons; besides, he beats in Hassia George his new Levies. The Emperor by a Herauld proclaims at Magdeburg proscription against all of the Roman Empire, that shall assist the Dane. Tilly takes Munda the key of Brunonia, and puts all to the sword, except a few that hid themselves in Vaults, or on the House tops, who after the fury of the soldiers was past, ransomed their lives for mony. This vvas in the end of May; and about the sixt of Iune Prunswick died, some think he was poisoned: the 19 of Iuly his mother fol∣lowed him, the Dane Garisons, the Castle of Vorda. Tilly delivers Hassia to William the Land-grave, and marcheth to Gottinga, vvhich was surrendred to  him, though the Dane vvas coming with all his Forces to raise the siege. The two Armies meet; the Kings first velitations were successful, Tilly having lost above six hundred of his men, vvith some Colours. The King pursues Til∣lies Reare, and had now at Lottera found a fit place for defence, where he was advised to hault,
and not to follow the Enemy, who had got the vvinde and advantage of the ground. But he vvould go on, with a resolution to fight the Enemy. The Avant Guard advanceth so couragiously towards Tillies Artille∣ry, put him in some fear, till he was strengthned with George Luneburgs Auxiliaries; then falling with all his Forces upon the Kings Foot, so gals them, that the Horse pretending want of pay, wheeled about, and refu∣sed to fight, notwithstanding they had received their pay not long be∣fore. The King did what he could to make them fight, but in vain, for they shamefully rid away, and left the Foot naked; whereof 1200 were slain by the Enemy, and 1800 taken prisoners, with 28 Colours. Many prime men were slain, Lottera forced to surrender; many also of the Tillians were slain: the King escaped narrowly from being taken; this Buttel was fought August 1. Tillies Victory was greater then his Booty, for he durst not venture too far in the pursuit, because he feared Ambuscadoes. Two days after Duke Brunswick renounceth the Associa∣tion of Saxony, and surrenders all Brunonia to Cesar. Tilly understanding that Wolferlyt, whither the King retreated in his flight, was strongly for∣tified, would not besiege it, for fear of losing too much time, but falls to taking in of other places. In the interim the King recollects his disper∣sed Forces, and provides another Army for a fresh encounter with Tilly. The Vinarien and Mansfield having joyned their Forces, which consisted  of 16000, brake in upon Silesia, whom Bechman followed▪ but could doe no good, because the Silesians by reason of his violence, were alienated from him; therefore divers places submit to the Vinarien: and now Mansfield being encouraged by the addition of Gabors Forces, and the mar∣riage of Katherin of Brandeburg, marcheth into Moravia; and trusting to the Turks aid, being animated by one of the Bassais, enters Hungary. Thi∣ther Fridland being sent with an Army, is repulsed at Neutra, by the Turks, and hath divers doubtful encounters with Mansfield; who fea∣ring some collusion between Fridland and the Transylvanian, resolves to go for Venice, with the choicest of his men; the rest of his Army he de∣livers  to the Vinarien. But in his journey he fell sick of the bloudy flux, at Bosnia, (its thought he was poisoned) and there died. The Vinarien also grieving that the Transylvanian had faln off to Cesar, died suddenly, the 32 year of his age. In Moravia the Bores rise against Count Herbers∣dorff, for abusing them; they first flung stones at him, then they fall upon his guard of 1500 men, and killed most of them; then they take in divers Towns, and the mean while Petition Cesar for a free enjoyment of the Gospel. At last they grew so strong by the confluence thither, of the banished Gentry, and others that had suffered in these Wars, that they became Masters of all Austria, above Oenus. But their Victories made a stop at Lintzium, for they could not keep off either provision or men from the Bavarian Army. At length they were so pressed upon by  Herbersdorff, Brenner, and Lobel, and encompassed by their Forces, that they submitted and flung down their Arms. But shortly after being incensed by the cruel punishments, which many of them suffered, and the burn∣ing of their Houses by the Duke of Holsatia's Regiments, they fall upon them betimes in the morning, disperst, and kill above 4000. They de∣feat the Bavarians divers times, some of whose Captains they killed. Lobel and Brenner are beat to pieces by the Boores iron cudgels, and above 2000 men were destroyed. Cesar being much troubled at these disasters, promiseth liberty of Religion to the Austrians, and by his Proclamati∣ons at Prague, calls home the Bohemians that were banished for their con∣science. Afterward whilst these Boores labour to bring others into their society, they fall to quarrelling and destroying each other, till  came upon them with a Brigade of 8000, disperses, kils, and
destroys  them; some escaped, and some were taken and reserved for publick pu∣nishment. Mean while the Wars remove from the Grisons to the French, who fall out among themselves about matters of Religion. Barbarinus the Cardi∣nal perswades the French King to make Peace with Spain, and that the Van be left in deposito with the Pope, and that a Passage in the Grisons Straits, be opened for both Kings. But the Venetians and Savyen were at enmity with the Genuois. The French and English fall out about send∣ing away Queen Maries Priests, which hindred the pay promised to the King of Denmark; to wit, 140000 Joachims monethly from the English, and 100 thousand Crowns from the French; yet the King not willing to be a meer spectator of the German misery, gathered again 6000 Foot, and 4000 Horse, and suddenly assaults Hoia, which he took, though he was shot through the arm with a Bullet. Christian 5. Prince of Denmark, hast∣neth provision into Niemburg; then the King goeth into Holsatia, where he calls a Diet at Redensburg, about continuing the War. Rantzovius the Vice Duke, promiseth his best assistance. Christianus Thomaeus, is sent Em∣bassador into Belgium and France, but is taken by the way, and set at liberty again by Isabella. He obtains from the confederate Belgians some Forces for the Dane. The King had exhausted a great Treasure, and borrowed large sums of his people, in maintenance of this war,  which tended both to the defence of Denmark and Saxony. Mean while the Vice-Duke died, whose Funeral the King in his own person honou∣red: Then he builds Forts upon Visurgis and Albis, to keep off provisions 1627 from Tilly, whose men offering to take the Rampiers, are beaten off with loss. George Luneburg takes Brandeberg by storm. Slaersdorff possesseth the Black Friars Church in Hvelberg, and fortifieth it; from thence he killed with Musquet shot above 4000. The Marquess of Durlac, and old Turrn whom the Venetians honourably discharged, now the Italian War being almost ended, are entertained by the King; the Country of Lunae∣burg is pitifully wasted by the royal & Cesarian parties, burning each others  Corn; and almost through all Germany, there was nothing but wasting, plundring, and murthering; so that the three Ecclesiastick Electors desi∣red peace, before Germany be totally ruined. The Bors of Brunswick, rob and destroy about the Hyrcinian Woods, whom the Cesarians defeated. Ntheim is surrendred Iune 17. Mean while the Tillians are pinched for want of provisions, by reason the Rivers Albis, Visurgis, and Havila were guarded by the Danes: Therefore Tilly to open a way, marcheth towards Albis, takes in some places by the way. About the end of Iuly, whilst the King is at the Diet of Redensburg, Tilly observing the neglect and paucity of the Watch upon Albis, before break of day, Ferries over  a Company of soldiers, with as great silence and privacy, as could be, when he perceived the Watch did not stir. He sends over another Company, the Watch awaked; which seeing one Company coming, and another already Landed, they out of fear run away, and withall affright Bnburg, near to which Town were divers praetorian co∣horts, who in stead of encounring with the Enemy, falls to plundring of their friends, so that without resistance, Tilly passeth over with his whole Army, and withall seizeth upon the Bridge, which the Dane had built; so all that Country on this side of Albis, becomes a prey to the Ce∣sarians. In Holsatia also a controversie arose between the King and his  sisters son Duke Frederick, who fearing the storm that was coming on his Country, and understanding that Tillies Army was got over, repairs spee∣dily to him to make his peace. All that he could obtain, was this, that if he would forsake the K▪ his Country & friends should fare the better, which promise was scarce performed.
In Silesia Cesar having pacified Bethleem Gabor, the Danes could look for no aid thence, but what they should get by the sword. Therefore Fridland sei∣zeth upon divers Towns and Forts. Him Count Merodius, and Bechman fol∣low, with 7000. A hot skirmish ensueth, in which the Danes had the better, but when the Polonian Foot, and Croats were come to aid the Cesarians, Baudisi∣us with his Regiments, betake them to their heels, upon which the prisoners are released. Brandeburg wisheth the Danes to be gone, who having got the Isle Paela, took shpping at Grotenbrod: and now about the end of August, Fridland joyns with Tilly, and Luneberg, who by the River Alstria brake in upon Storma∣ria; the Holsatians who had seated themselves near Hamburg upon the confines  of Albis, return home. Hamburg victualleth the Cesarian Camp. From Hamburg they march to Pippenberg, a Castle in Stormaria, where Tilly was dangerously wounded with a Musquet bullet, yet took the Castle, by reason its powder was spent. There were not in Stormaria above 3 Towns that could hold out a while, and in Holsatia only Redensburg; so that the strength of Holsatia consisted in the Marchian and Silesian Troops, most of which were gone from their own homes to Denmark, Holland, Frisland, Lubec, Hamburg, and those of other places. Those of Merchia had neither powder, nor shot, nor hearts to fight; yet the Holsatian Horse, and the Scots Foot, fought stoutly, till they were cut off. The K. of Den∣mark finding Gods judgments so heavy against him, and his people, caused a fast  for 3 days, besides daily prayers and supplications to be had through his two Kingdoms. In the interim at Rendensburg the Enemy received some loss; the K. being forsaken by most, betook himself into Fionia, he permits the town to make an honorable surrender. The Castle of Bredenberg held out a great while, to the loss of 4000 of the Enemies; at last its taken by storm, and the whole Garison put to the sword by Fridland. Marsia and Iutia are exposed to pillage, not only of the Enemy, but even of their own Country men, which made most of the Gentry take shipping, and remove farther into Denmark, or else to Norway; thinking it safer and more honorable to forsake their houses and lands, then their Allegiance and conscience. They only grieved at this, that they were conque∣red before they fought, and banished before they took arms. The country there∣abouts with the Diocess of Brem, submit and deliver up their Colours to Tilly, whose victories are stopt upon the shoar of Fionia: Stada which was stoutly defended by Sir Charles Morgan, was for want of food delivered up to Tilly 1628 the 25 of April. Niemburg by the Kings permission is delivered up to the D. of Lunaeburg. The Cesarians labour to perswade the Hans Towns to joyn with Cesar and the Spaniard, against Denmark; but they knowing how powerful the K. of Denmark was by Sea, did wisely decline such an union, yet shewed their readiness to serve Cesar against Denmark and Holsatia, by carying to them all kind of provision, and performing such offices as they were injoined: yet some Hans Towns, either inveigled by promises, or affrighted with threatnings, sub∣mit their necks to the Imperial yoak; such were Rostok, Wismaria, and all the Towns of Pomerania, except Stralsound, and Stetin, which with those mighty cities of Saxony, Lubec, Hamburg, Brunswick, Magdeburg, and Brem, retain their ancient priviledges. Pomerania, Marchia, and East Frisland, with all the lower Saxony, are subject to heavy Taxes, and domineering soldiers. Hamburg was careful to give all content possible to the Cesarian Army. The King in the Month of April, recovers by a strong Fleet Femaria, a rich Island in the Baltick Sea, having slain or taken the Garison consisting of seven hundred. He takes also some Towns, and faces Wagria: but upon the coming  of the Cesarian Army, he returns with his Fleet into Denmark, having put a Garison in Femaria. The Imperialists impose a heavy Tax upon Stral∣sound; whereof though they offered a part, yet a Garison is put upon them by Arnheim an Imperial Commander. He under pretence of Peace, labours un∣der-hand to seize upon Denhoim, but the Townsmen
perceiving his treachery,  presently seize themselves of the place, and insist upon a new agreement. At last, not being able of themselves to resist his strength, they admit into their Town the Danish Auxiliaries; by these they stoutly resisted all his assaults, and slew many of his men. Holk the Commander of the Danish Auxiliaries, un∣derstanding, that Arnheim had been tampering with some to betray the town to him, he causeth Letters to be sent, intimating to Arnheim what hower, and into what place he should come. Arnheim not knowing his plot, was dete∣cted, came at the hower appointed, when the Townsmen broke out upon him, and drove him back to his great loss. They also sprung a Mine under his works, which they blew up with many of his men. Holk being one day absent at a Wedding, the Senate had almost yeilded to surrender the Town;  which he understanding, returns and breaks off the Treaty, as soon as it be∣gan; which the Town was the more willing to break off, because a Fleet of Danes was now in sight of them. In one night during this siege, there were 5 several assaults upon the Town-works, by Fridlands whole Forces, and so many repulses; presently the King with his two sons, Prince Christian and Duke Frederick, came to relieve Holk. Whereupon Fridland broke off the siege, leaving his Works for the Danes to possess; who in a short time took divers places, so that Pomerania now was in hope of liberty, till the 22 of Au∣gust, when Fridland routed the Kings Army, and slew 400 of them. Upon this the King, with the remainder of his Army, takes shipping and returns to Denmark, and Fridland to the siege; this being the third year since it began. At last a Garison of the Swedes is admitted into the Town by the perswasion of Oxinstern Chancelour of Swedland, who for that end was sent into Denmark. Tychopolis is stoutly defended by Rantzovius; but the Forts on the River Store, which the French carelesly lost to the Cesarians, so kept off all provisi∣ons, that the Town Cremus after 13 months siege, was surrendred by Alefel∣dius the Governour, to Fridland, upon tearms of safety for himself, the towns∣men and Garison. But Tychopolis notwithstanding the plague was in it, held out so long, that in a short time Fridland lost above three thousand of his men, and was fain at last to burn his Huts, and raise the siege. The Cesarians August 18. are beaten at Colmaria, where they lost many men, besides a thousand wounded. In Stormaria, and Dithmarsia, all places far and near, are wasted by the Imperial Garisons there. A strange thing fell out at Itzeho; the Gate of the Monastery which the Cesarians took, flew open, with a terrible noise and clamour in the night. The plundred Oxen kept there, were suddenly strangled, their necks being turned round, their horns fastned in the ground. In the 29 year of this Century, the Danish King held a Diet at Hafnia, about 1629 reforming the Church Discipline, and making Peace with the Emperour. For this cause Embassadors are sent to Lubec. The Cesarians at first would  treat with them no other ways, then with a conquered people, but the Em∣bassadors stood upon the honor of the King and Kingdom. Five months were spent in Debates; in which time the Danes had raised an Army, and rigged out a strong Fleet, with which they took the Isle Stranda, with some other places. Hereupon Fridland and Tilly send to their Deputies, who were at the Treaties of Lubec, to hasten the Peace, for feare of greater mis∣chiefe. A Peace then is concluded, in which Cimbria, Slesvigia, Hol∣satia, and all Hereditary places, belonging to the Holsatian, taken from him in these last Wars, are restored to the Dane. The King renoun∣ceth all the other Provinces of the Saxons. The day before the Peace  was made, Wilstria is taken by the Danes, who by a messenger sent from the King, are commanded to lay down Arms. The news of Peace vvas joyfully welcomed by the people, and solemn thanks given to God; especially by the Dithmarsians, vvho the year
before, strove to vindicate their liberty, but  could not; for finding no end of their exactions, and other pressures, in a rage took Arms, broke in upon some Garisons, and killed above an hundred of them. The Country people rising, slew many of the Cesarians, which brought greater misery and servitude upon them; for the inraged soldier hackt some, drowned others, and shot divers with poisoned bullets, by which they vvere tortured to death. They were glad then to be eased of such cruel Masters, but sorry that the Saxons, Pomeranians, and Megapolitans, for whose defence they took Arms, did not enjoy the same happiness of Peace, for the Megapolitan Lands were taken from Adolphus, Frederick, and Iohn Albert, brothers, and deposited in the hands of Fridland at first; but now their in∣heritance is taken away, as if those brothers had been guilty of Treason, for  joyning their Forces and Councel with the Dane against Cesar: but they made it appear, they entred into League vvith the Dane, for defence of Sax∣ony only, and withall that they shewed their obedience to Cesar, by lea∣ving the Dane, when by the Emperours Letters, they were called away. The Protestants vvere much troubled about Cesars Edict, whereby he restores to the Roman Catholicks all Lands vvithheld and taken from them, since the transaction of Passavia, that is 75 years. The Hollanders seized upon 22 Spanish ships belonging to the Plate Fleet, and loaden with American wealth; these they spoiled, and brought with them into Holland so much plate and other things, as was esteemed worth 200 talents  of Gold. This loss disheartned the Spanish soldiers, as much as it encouraged the Hollander. The Prince of Orange layeth siege to Sylva Ducis, or Hertogen∣bosch, by the French called Bulduc, vvhich had been often heretofore attemp∣ted in vain; but now after 4 months siege, it vvas fain to yeild to the Prince, but not till some of the Gates were blown up by Mines. It was surrendred upon honourable tearms about the beginning of September. A little before this, Vesalia a rich and potent Town upon the Rhene, was taken by the Hol∣lander, with one thousand two hundred Foot, and eight hundred Horse in the night. Some bold spirits swimmed over the Moat, get into the Fort not yet  finished, and kill the watch; then they broke open the Gates, and let in the soldiers. Losanus the Governour, being suddenly surprised, was fain to deli∣ver up the keys. The Townsmen who had been dis-armed before, and were angry vvith the Spaniards for abridging their liberty of conscience, did not at all assist the Garison. There was taken much wealth; the soldiers were dis∣missed, but the chief Commanders detained prisoners. In Iune, Hein who seized on the Plate Fleet, had a Sea fight with the Dunkarkers, in which he lost his life by a Bullet, but got the Victory, which not he, but his Country injoyed. The Magdeburgers having studied to please the Cesarians in the Saxon War,  and permitted the bones of Norbert an ancient Arch-Bishop, to be taken out of his Tomb, and caried to Prague; yet they were wronged by the Cesarian soldiers, who seized on their Farms and Villages near the Town, and are kept off from all provision, even from the benefit of the River Albis. Hereupon some of the Townsmen in a rage bring away into the Town some Vessels laden vvith Corn, and put to flight the Croat Thieves, vvhich vvere driving away the Town-Cattle. Hence arose a War, though unknown to Cesar, as that vvas of Stralsound: Magdeburg is besieged, Fridland commands them to re∣ceive a Garison, adding high threatnings; but they behaved themselves so stoutly, and killed so many Cesarian by sallies, that by the intervening of some Princes and Cities, the Duke was quickly pacified, and the City restored to her liberty. Stralsound strives also to defend her freedom, though she was much weakned by sickness. Hatzfield makes an attempt upon the City, but is beat off again with loss. The King of Swedes having obtained divers Victo∣ries against the Polander, at last concludes a
Peace for six years with his Uncle,  he had the year before subdued Newburg, and Straisburg, with Leather Ord∣nance, the invention of one Elias Tripus. The Polander recovered Newburg, but was beat from the siege of Straisburg by Oxenstern the Chanceller, and from Meve by the King himself: For peace-sake the Swede restores to Poland, Straisburg, Dirsavia, and Frauberg, but retains what he had got in Livonia, and Borussia; some Towns were left in the hands of Brandeburg, as it were in deposito; so an offensive and defensive peace is made about the end of this year 1629. The Hollanders take divers places from the enemy; and drive the Spaniards out of Velavia: They take also Farnambuck in Brasil, with much bootie, and defeat the Spaniards at Mulheim, whose Commander Iohannes Nassovius was mortally wounded. Charls Duke of Nivern about this time, by the death of Vincentius his cou∣sin German, takes possession of Mantua, by right of consanguinitie, and by will also, but without Cesar's knowledge, who is Lord of the Fee. The Spaniard and Savoyen Storm at this, who have had old quarrels with the Dukes of Mantua about Monsferrat; so the old Factions between France and Spain are renewed. The Savoyen takes the Spaniards part. Genua in the in∣terim is full of intestin plots and treacheries, which lighted heavy at last upon the contrivers: To Mantua's side are joyned the Venetians, the Viceroy of Si∣cily and Naples, with the Vice Duke of Millan; these troubles were attended  on by terrible Earth-quakes in Apulia, which devoured above 17000 people, there were also prodigious innundations and blood gushing out of springs. Gasall the chief City of the Marquisat of Monsferrat was by Consalvus Vice Duke of Millan streightly besieged, till he was forced to rise thence by the innundation of Po, having lost above 6000 of his men; the Mantuan is content to refer his cause to Cesar, conditionally arms be laid down on both sides: This was rejected by the Spaniard, who could not endure that the French should have any footing in Italy: And by the Savoyen also, who had obtained almost all Monsferrat. Upon this Nivern supported by France, goeth on more coragiously: Mean while the Grisons submit to the Austrians,  slighting the Switzers friendship, at which they were offended; but afterward pacified by the Grisons Agents, shewing that Caesar acted nothing that was prejudicial to the ancient league. Merodius was Generall of the Imperial for∣ces; which went from the Grisons to Monsferrat, but the Plague consumed a third part of them; yet recruits came daily out of Germany, by which they subdued a great part of Mantua, and besieged the City it self; but the Citi∣zens 1630 being strengthned by the Venetian Auxiliaries, made a sally upon the Cae∣sarians, of whom they killed about 3000, so for that time the sieg was raised. But returning afterward in Iuly, they took Mantua for the Emperor, after that the French King had subdued Savoy: The Plague at this time raging throughout all Italy. Transylvania upon the death of Gabor, seemes to be more inclined to the Sultan, then to Caesar. The French, English, and Hollander, urge earnestly for the restitution of the Palatin. The Belgian Forces increas still, and in∣croach more and more upon Germany. The Swede is angry with the Caesari∣ans, for making war upon him; therefore by his Manifesto shews, he hath just cause to invade Germany: He inhibits all importation of victuals into the Sea-Towns of Pomerania and Megapolis, being possessed by the Caesarian Sol∣diers. At Dantsick, a Treaty for peace was begun, but before the Ambassa∣dors could meet, it was broke off: The Famin in Pomerania and Rugia, was also great, that some like Caniballs fed on mens flesh. Whilst things were  in this condition, the Swedish King enters upon Rugia, having defeated in some battels the Caesarian Forces, and Garrisons: Then having seised on some Ports, with his fleet comes to Stetin; the Governor delivers up the Town to him, complaining how Pomerania had suffered by the Cesarian
Soldiers, ta∣king  no care of the safety of those that were under them. Cesar drove Pro∣testanisme out of Bohemia, Austria, Moravia, Glogovia, many Principali∣ties of Silesia, Stiria, Carinthia, Croatia, Iuliers, Cleve, Grisons; Bavare doth the like in both Palatinats. The Spaniard having deluded King Iames, retains Frankinthal to himself, which was depositat in the hands of Isabel, Archdutchesse; thence Calvinisme is banished, and Manheim destroyed. The Towns of Iuliers, Westphalia, and the Grisons under the Spaniard, receive Poperie; The Lutheran Cities are spoyled and plundred by Cesar. Episco∣pall rights possessed by the Protestant Princes many years, are demanded by the first owners: A way is making for creating Ferdinand 3d, King of the Romans, he being Cesar's eldest son by his Lady Mary of Bavaria; and two years before this was Crowned King of Hungary and Bohemia. Cesar's o∣ther son Leopold is made Bishop of Magdeburg, Christianus Gulielmns being thrust out. In this distempered condition was Germany, when the King of Sweden came into it. The King of Denmark had 3 ships in the River Albis, or Elve, which with the great Ferrie-Boat, were seised upon by the Hamburgers, preten∣ding that the King had begun to exact a new Custom at Tychopolis from the Sea-men, trading in that River, which they held to be theirs by ancient right; whereas indeed the Dukes of Holsatia are Masters of that River, as Princes of the Empire, and Lords of Hamburg: The King also declares that he imposed no Tribute or Custom upon Ships, but required satisfaction for the hurt done by the Hamburgers against all right, upon the Holsatians, by exacting a new Excise for vendible commodities and victuals. Shortly after this, the King foughts 3 battels on Albis with the Hamburgers, in which he had the victory, and drove them out of that River, the benefit whereof they had kept 4 months from the Tychopolitans. CHAP. XX. A continuation of the Affairs of Turky, Persia, Aegypt, Greece, Armenia, and other adjacent parts under Mahumet 1st, Amurath 2d. Mahumet 2d, Baiazet and Selymus, from the year 1412, till 1520. WE have clearly shewed that Baiazet the Turk, whom Ta∣merlan 1412 overthrew, had 5 sons, some say 6; and some but two: However, the Histories record they destroy∣ed one another, the last surviver was Mahumet 1st, who in a battel defeated his brother Moyses or Musa, drove  him into a bogg, where he hid himself awhile, at last found him out and strangled him; this Mahumet made a perpetuall peace with the Greeks, by whose assistance he obtained the Empire. He imposed a Tribute on the Transylvanian, in his war with the Venetians for the Islands of the Ionian Sea, he was worsted, and forced to part with Lamp∣sacum. The Walachians were defeated by him, he regained many places taken by Tamerlan. Adriannoclis the chief City of Thracia was his seat. To him succeeded Amurath the 2d, son to Mahumet: His chief care was to 1418 suppress the Christians; but the Byzantins to hinder his proceedings, take Mustapha his Uncle out of prison in Lemnos, where he had been kept by the Greeks, after his escape out of his brothers prison, and furnish him with an Ar∣my: But in his incounter with Amurath, he was deserted by the Turks, who revolted to Amurath; so he fell alive into his enemies hand, by whom he was strangled, the 3d year after he had raised this war: Upon this bad success the Greeks Petition for peace, which being refused by Amurath,
they send for  Mustapha his brother, now 13 years old, and an exile in Cilicia under the tuiti∣on of Alibaus Bassa, to whose care he was committed by his father Mahumet. The Greeks having furnished him with an Army, he takes Nicea of Bithynia, where he was betrayed to Amurath by his Guardian, and then strangled: These competitors being gone, Amurath resolves to be revenged on the Greeks their abertors; having therefore overrun Thracia, and taken the remainder of those Towes which belonged to the Greek Emperor, he layeth siege to Thessalo∣nica committed to the Venetian care and protection, which he takes by storm and utterly defaces; presently upon this, he subdues with incredible celerity, Phocis, Attina, Boeotia, Aaetolia, Acannania, and the whole Countrey from Pelo∣ponnesus to Corinth. Iohn Castriot did then reigne in that part of Macedon  which lieth upon the Adriatick, at this day known by the name of Albania; he considering his own weakness, and the Turks greatness, makes his peace, by delivering up the Town Croia, and giving for hostages his 3 sons, Constan∣tin, Reposius, and George, who for his comely personage, and other excellent parts, was in high account with Amurath, who gave him the best breeding Turky could afford, and called him Scandorbei, or Scanderbeg, that is, Alexan∣der the great; before he was scarce fit to bear Arms, he is imployed against Carmannus the Cilician, which war he managed with great dexterity, and with∣all, killed two of the chief Combattants, who provoked him to a Duell:  The one was a Scythian Foot-man, the other a Persian Horse-man, relying on the Turks favour, upon the newes of his Fathers death, he Petitions Amurath for his ancient Inheritance, which was granted him. But George doubting the Turk was not reall, makes an escape into Epirus, where by counterfeit Letters he gets Croia, with other places of Epirus and Macedon. For many years together he so defended his Dominions against Amurath, and Mahumet; that still he defeated the Turkish Armies. Amurath having subdued partly, and partly wasted Illyrus, Albania, and Bofna, marcheth against the Bulgarians, Walachians, and Servians, upon hopes to subdue Hungary. George Despot of Servia humbly Petitions Amurath for peace, proffering his daughter to him in marriage, which he accepts, and makes peace; which shortly after he breaks, and drives him out of his Kingdome, taking from him his chief towns, and his two sons, whose eye-sight he barbarously put out; by holding near them a hot burning brass bason: George flyeth into Hungary to Albert of Au∣stria, who having raised an Army died of a dissenterie: Hungary being full of intestin broyls, calls in Laudislaus of Poland. The Turk sets upon Belgra∣da, but is beat off with great losse. Amurath by his two Bassais wasts the places about Belgrada, and makes in∣cursions into Transylvania; both these were defeated and cut off by Iohn Hunniades, who recovered a good part of Servia and all Moldavia. The Turk also is beat in Panonia, so that he is forced to sue for peace, and to restore George Despot of Servia. Then he marcheth against Carmannus in Cilicia, but is called back into Europ upon the breach of the 10 years peace by Ladislaus, who by the perswasion of Iulian the Cardinall, in the Turks absence had inva∣ded his Europian Dominions: The Christian Army was defeated, and Ladi∣slaus slain, as we have already said. Amurath puft up with this Victory, marcheth into Peloponnesus, to be revenged on the Greeks who animated La∣dislaus against him, there he breaks down the strong wall Hexamilium, built by the Greeks and Venetians, with 5 Castles on it, to divide this Isthmus (6 miles of length between the two seas) from the main land of Greece. The Empe∣rors brother of Byzantium, with his whole Army appointed to guard this wall, are overthrown by the Turk. After this Constantin Paleologus the Greek Em∣peror, repaired this wall, which shortly by command from Amurath, he pulls down again. Here divers Forts and Towns are taken by the Turk, who upon a Petition for
peace, made the Countrey tributary, and withdrew his Army thence to their winter-quarters. George Castriot so manfully maintained the Epirotick war and his fathers patrimony against Amurath, that during this space, he overthrew seaven severall armies sent thither under the command of so many Bassaies, and at last forced Amurath himself, who had Beleaguered Croia with a formidable army, to raise his siege, having lost multitudes of his Turks. After this disaster they write that Amurath vow∣ed a solitary life, with a few Priests in a Cave of Bithynia, where he gave himself to Contemplation, committing the care of his Dominions to Hali Bassai. But, he was quickly called off from his Contemplation by Huniades and Scanderbeg; The one having raised a vast Army of Hun∣garians, Bohemians, and Germans to repay the loss of Christians at Varna; The other had subdued all Macedonia, and restored to Bosna, Rascia, and Illyris, their Despots, and thrown out the Turk's Garrisons, which Plunder Illyricum and Istria, to the affrighting of Venice. George that perfideous Despot of Servia, forgetfull of the help Hungary afforded him, betrays all the Counsells of Huniades to the Enemy, so that by this means he lost two battels, yet was strangely preserved himself; for being taken by two Turks, he killed one, and made the other fly; and when he was inter∣rupted by the same George, he was restored by him to the Hungarians, which occasioned a new war between the Turk and him; but Huniades to shew  his gratitude, came and assisted him when he was almost defeated, and obtai∣ned a signall victory over the Turks. Afterward in Epirus, Amurath received so many losses, that he fell melancholy and sick, then being removed from the Camp to Adrianopolis, he became mad, and so died, having reign∣ed thirty two years, and lived seventy five. He was the first of the Ottomans 1450 that instituted the Praetorian Guard after the example of the Macedonion Pha∣lanx: This Militia as the Mamalucks of Egypt, was made up of Christian children taken violently from their parents, brought up in the Turkish disci∣pline and superstition, and forced to renounce Christianity, by receiving circucmision; these the Turks call Janizaries, they guard the Sultans person:  At first they were but 8000 armed with arrows and spears, now they are al∣most double that number, and their arms are musquets. He left behind him three sons, Mahumet, Tursin, and Calepin, Mahumet be∣ing spectator himself, made Moyses Bassai choak Tursin (being but 18 months old) in the water, when the child's mother cried out upon the barbarous Ty∣rant, uttering many curses against him, he to please this his step-mother, delivers into her hand the author of this paricide bound; she in the presence of the Tyrant, thrust a knife into his heart, and ripping up his body, pulls out his liver, which she flung to the doggs: Amurathes had committed Cale∣pin his third son, to Hali Bassai, a man of great esteem with him: Mahu∣met caused the childe delivered up to him by Hali, to be strangled. Afterward Hali himself was stranged, being first tortured by Mahumet, upon pretence that he held corespondencie with the Christians; but indeed he was excessive∣ly rich, which is crime enough to a covetous Prince. Some think that this Calepin whom Mahumet killed, was supposititious, and not the son of Amu∣rath, who was conveyed to Byzantium, and from thence where it was taken, to Venice, thence to Rome by the Order of Pope Calixtus, who caused him to be baptized, to take a Christian name, and to be instructed in Christian doctrin; afterward he went to Frederick the Emperor, who used him honora∣bly: The rest of his life he spent in Austria. Mahumet then the second, began his reigne with parricid, after the exam∣ple of his Ancestors, and continued in his barbarous cruelties; his mother who was the Despot of Servia's daughter; had instructed him in the Christi∣an faith, but he adhered more to Mahumetanisme, at last turned plain Atheist, scoffing at providence,
and acknowledging no other deitie but good luck: He  was most addicted to Militarie parts; and first of the Ottomans that made use of sea-fights, and ships of war, by which he strove with Venice for command of the sea; his first and most terrible warlick exploit was that a∣gainst Constantinople, which after fifty four days siege he took the 29 of May: Within the walls besides the Townes-people, there were but six thou∣sand Greek Soldiers, and three thousand Venetian and Genuan Auxiliaries; whereas Mahumets army consisted of four hundred thousand men, most of which were gathered out of the Christian Territories, he assaulted the City both by land and sea, he made three severall breaches in the walls, where the Turks gave furious assaults, but were stoutly resisted by the Christians, till 1453 they were overpowred with multitudes: The Turk had brought out of the Aegaean and Euxin seas two hundred and fifty ships, to block up the har∣bour against these seaven ships of Genua, three of Crete, and some of Chios were imployed: The Harbour also was chained against the Turkish Fleet; which the Christians set on fire and so spoyled, that it was useless a great while, till by main strength the chain was burst, and so the Turks got within the Harbour, and battered the walls on all sides. The Tyrant stood upon a hill hard by, exhorting his men to be couragious; and sending some Troops of his own Guard to slay such as were faint-hearted, promising that he who did first venture upon the breaches, should have command of the greatest Province in Europe, and if the City be taken, the Soldiers should  have the pillaging of it for three days: And withall he threatens death to any that did turn their backs: Mahumet had provided great battering pie∣ces of brass, one whereof was so big, that it could not be drawn but by 70 yoke of Oxen, and 2000 men: With these Ordnance he played against the walls forty days together; then having injoyned a fast for three days, he bids them all be ready to live or die together: Constantin perceiving small hopes of defending the City against so great a power, desires a parly, which was granted, and peace proffered, if he would pay yearly to the Turk one hundred thousand crowns, or else presently surrender, and depart with their goods. These conditions were disliked; therefore they fall to battering again: Iustinian of Genua, who with three hundred stout men sustained the first brunt, was sorely wounded, so that he gave back, and with him the rest also; notwithstanding Constantin earnestly laboured to have him hold out, his wound not being mortall: Upon his going away, (by vvhich that Tower vvhere he stood vvas left naked, Constantin and those about him began to fly; The Turks perceiving this) rusht furiously into those places; the gates vvere so barricadoed vvith dead bodies, and the, keyes purposly flung away, that fevv or none could escape: Palcologus vvas slain, or troad upon in the presse, striving to get out at one gate, vvhere vvere found eight hundred dead bodies. Iustinian escaped to Pera, and thence to Chios,  vvhere he died of his vvounds and grief together: The Victorious Turks rage like bloudy Wolves through the City, sparing neither age nor sex. The murthers, rapes, plunderings, and insolencies committed, both a∣gainst the living and dead, against the Pictures and Images of our Saviour, and his Saints, and other Monuments of Christianitie, are inexpressable. Above sixty thousand Gentle-women, Matrons, and virgins, vvere carried away for slaves. Isidor the Cardinall vvho had been sent thither by the Pope, to reconcile the Greeks to the Roman Church, vvhich he had ef∣fected but too late, vvas taken and solde; yet disguising himself shortly after made an escape. Pera over against Byzantium, vvhich the Lattins had in pos∣ssession, is surrendred to the Turks. Three days after, Mahumet enters the City, and pacifieth all Tumults: Hee made search for some Prime men who had concealed themseves, these he
commanded to be cut in  pieces. In their feasts, they abused divers matrons and virgins, and then bar∣barously murthered them: This end had that famous City wherein the Go∣spel flourished from the first, to the last Constantin, about eleven hundred and twenty years; that light went out, being overwhelmed with Mahumetan darkness, which was presaged by that flame from heaven, shining one night o∣ver the City, and the next vanishing away, as the Turks in their siege obser∣ved. Yet Mahumet invited the Christians to dwell there, and to use their Re∣ligion, for that cause he confirmed their Patriarch which they had chosen, by delivering to him the Pastorall staff openly: This he did that so great a City might not lie desolate for want of Inhabitants. Three years after, Mahumet (but not with the like success) attempted Bel∣grade, where after two days fight he received a wound under the left pap, and was carried for dead out of the camp, which the Turks lost with all their bag∣gage 1456 and Ordnances, besides 40000 of their men slain there; when he came to himself, he was so inraged at this loss and disgrace, that he would have murthered himsef: After this he provides to invade the Aegaean Islands, but he was taken off by Ussumcassanes of the Assimbeian Family of the Turks, Lord of Cappadocia and Armenia, who having lately killed Demorus the Persian King, and seised on his Kingdome; puft up with this success, he sends rich Persian presents, to shew the fruits of his Victory, to Mahumet, and by his  Ambassadors, desires that the Turk would not meddle with Trapezund and Cappadocia, which he had in marriage by his wife, Despina daughter of David Comuenus. The Tyrant offended that an inferior Lord should give him the Law, and envying his new obtained happiness, provides an Army both by land and sea against him: A part of his fleet he sends before to Pontus, and Synope towards Trapezund, and follows himself by land; he overruns a great part of Asia with wonderfull celerity, and before he was dreamed of, pitch∣eth his camp near Usumcassanes: Two great battels are fought near Euphrates, Amurath Bassai the Turks Generall, a Greek born, was here killed, and the Turks Forces much weakned; but the third battel that Mahumet fought, was  more successfull, for in it the Persians, with the unacquainted noyse of the Ordnance were dispersed, and Usumcassanes forced to flye, having lost his son Zeinald who was shot there: Shortly after this Victory Mahumet subdues Sy∣nope, and all Paphlagonia, then he besiegeth both by Sea and Land, Trape∣zund the Royall City, and takes it, with the Kings Treasure; King David himself, his two sons, and Cousin German Calo Iohannes, whom he sent before to Byzantium, and there in his triumph cruelly murthered, and with them the whole race of the Comueni: Then having of these Kingdomes made Provinces, he subdues Caramannus, and takes Cilicia from him, thence returned to Byzantium; 1459 by his fleet he takes the Islands of Lemnus and Lesbes, destroys the City Myti∣lene, and transplants the Islanders. Catalusius Prince of Lesbos a Genuan, was by his command cruelly put to death: Then by his Land Forces, he invades Dracula, Prince of Walachia, by whom he was like to have been surprised and his Army, but that Mahumet Bassai, who succeeded to Hali Bassai in Of∣fice and dignity, got off the Army, but with great loss. Then having recrui∣ted his Army, he falls upon the upper Mysia, and Illyricum, and drives Steeven King of Bosua out of his Kingdome, and kills him: But this Kingdome was shortly after recovered by Mathias Corvinus, with divers other places in Dal∣matia and Croatia, possessed by the Turks. Before his Asiatin expedition, he entred Peloponnesus, where he took away the Principalitie of the Paleologi  from the two brothers, Thomas and Demetrius, being then at variance: Deme∣trius complied with the Enemy, to whom he married his daughter: Thomas having lost all, fled to Rome; In the interim the Venetians repair the wall Hex∣amilium, to keep their possessions in Peloponnesus from the Turks incursions; which he perceiving, breaks in upon them with 80 thousand men, wasts all
the Countrey about defeats the Venetians, takes in the whole Peleponnese, and throwes down the wall; shortly after he casts the Venetians out of Lesbos, having slain 5000 men, for they had lately recovered it with Lemnus. He takes also the Isle Eubaeo from them, having made a bridge over Eurypus, then takes Chalis the 30 day after it was besieged, the Venetian Gallies not daring to give assistance, who having the winde favourable, might have seised on, or demolished the bridg; the Tyrant being enraged at the loss of 40000 of his army slain this siege in divers skirmishes, commanded that all in the Town above 20 years old, should be put to the Sword. This Tyrant not yet glutted enough with bloud, sends Homaris and Malre∣cius,  2 armies into Dalmatia, Homaris being a Genuan by his father, naturally hated the Venetians. In this invasion Novellus the Venetian General was slain: Stiria and Corinthia are not free from the Turks fury. The truce being ended between Mahumet and Scanderbeg; he sits down before Croia and Scodra, and after a long siege, takes them both. Scodra was surrendred by the Venetians, at which time Solyman Bassa takes Capha the head City of Bosphorus, and a Co∣lony of the Genuois in Tauraca Chemsonesus, he makes also the Praecopit Tar∣tars (who had thence driven out the Goths) tributarys to Mahumet: He cut off the heads of two Gothish Princes that were brothers; the rest of that Nation afterward Baiazet subdued. Scanderbeg being driven out of his Countrey,  went to Italy, where he took part with Ferdinand King of Naples against the French: After this he died of a Feaver, as he was consulting with the Veneti∣ans about renewing the war against the Turk; he died the 63d year of his life: On his death-bed he commended the care of his young son Iohn to the Se∣nat of Venice. It's recorded of this Scanderbeg, that out of the vehemency 1467 of his Spirit, still when he was going to fight, his lips would cleave and burst out with blood, he never turned his back, never was wounded, but once in the foot with an arrow: His army never consisted of above 3000 foot, and 6000 horse; he killed with his own hand above 2000 men, his strength was such, that with one blow, he could cleave a man to the Navil. Machmet be∣ing  freed from the fear of Huniades and Scanderbeg, having also subdued his neighbour Princes of Peloponnesus, Mysia and Illyricum, makes peace with the Venetians on these conditions; that they should deliver up to him Scodra, Fe∣narus a promontorie of Laconia, with Lemnus, and pay yearly 8 thousand crowns, for their trading in the black Sea. After this he undertakes three ex∣peditions at the same time, gaping at an universal Monarchy; to wit, against Rhodes by Mesithes Bassai of the race of the Palaeolegi, by Acomathes Bassai, against Italy and Rome, he himself marched into Asia. Mesithes after many and bloody attempts (but in vain) upon Rhodes, returned with the loss of 30000 and disgrace: Acomathes onely affrighted Italy, and made the people flye out  of Rome. Mahumet himself at Nicomedia, fell into tormenting fits of the Colick, which in three days put an end both to his life and victories, the 53d year of his age, and of his reigne 31: He subdued the two Royal Seats of 1481 Byzantium and Trapezund; 4 Kingdomes, Syria, Peloponnesus, Armenia, and Sclavonia. He took from the Christians 20 Provinces, and two hundred Towns, he was a most cruel and bloody Tyrant; For when he took Hydrun∣tum in Apulia, he caused the Arch-Bishop of that place to be cut with a woo∣den saw, and tortured many to death; he was a notorious whore-monger, and Sodomit; it's thought he caused above twenty thousand to be put to death at times, besides those that were killed in the wars; at last he was poysoned, who himself was the greatest poyson of mankinde, chiefly of Christians and  Christianity. The Turkish Garison in Hydruntum, understanding Mahumet was dead, delivered up the Town to Matthias Corvinus and the Italians that besieged it, upon condition they might have their lives; though they knew Acomathis was returning with 25 thousands Turks: The Greek Muses which
were banished by these barbarous Scythians, found an habitation for them in Italy, and other Western Countries, being transplanted thither by Chrysoloras, Trapezuntius, Gaza, Argyropilus, Chalcondyles, Lasearas, &c. To Mahomet succeeded his son Bajazet, who was when his Father died, at his charge in Cappadocia, being their Governour. His Brother Gemes also was then at Iconium; the chief City of Lacaonia, that Province being under his command. The elder brother Mustapha, who had been employed by his Father against Vsumcassanes, and had put to flight Ioseph the Persian General, the great supporter of King Carmannus, was dead at Iconium, by intemperance and letchery. Some difference arose among the Bassaies and Ianisares, about the succession, so that the quarrel broke out into blowes: at last the Ianisares or Praetorians proclaimed Bajazet Emperour, by means of the Beglerbeg of Graecia, and the Aga or Captain of the Praetorians, Bajazets sons in Law. Some of the prime Commanders of the Horse set up Corchatus Bajazets son, by pla∣cing him in the Throne, and delivering to him the Treasures and Castles of the Empire. Achmet Bassa, who lately took Hydruntum, joined with these. Bajazet rides post from Cappadocia, complaining with tears, of the wrong done him, by debarring him of his right. But he could not prevail till his young son of his own accord submitted the Government to his Father. The Ianisares whom the Bassais out of malice had stirred up, were pacified by large bribes. Gemes also makes haste out of Lycaonia, a neer Province, but being preven∣ted by Bajazet, is kept out of Bizantium; wherefore he makes War, being as∣sisted by Carmannus, and the Egyptian Sultan, against his brother; who over∣threw him in three Battels: whereupon out of despaire, he fled to Rhodes, leaving at Carrae his mother, and his son and daughter, that were Twins, whom Bajazet put to death. The Knights of Rhodes sent Gemes to Rome, upon the desire of Pope Innocent 4. Lewis 11. of France, and Matthias King of Hun∣gary, in hope of some great Victory against Bajazet. He lodged in the Vati∣can, and was given as an Hostage to Charles 8. of France, with Valentin Borgi∣as, the Popes son, by Alexander 6. when Charles marched out of Rome to the siege of Naples. But Gemes died by the way, being poisoned by Pope Alex∣ander,  fearing lest Charles in delivering him up to his brother, should thereby obtain Bajazets favour. Achmet Bassa, who had preserved the Empire for Bajazet against his brother, was for his good service strangled by the same Ba∣jazet, pretending that he meant to advance Gemes to the Throne: but indeed Achmet had great Treasures, which caused his ruine, but to the good of Chri∣stians, whose mortal Enemy he was. This Bajazet delighted more in Scholarship, then Arms; yet to maintain the power he had got, makes war first against the Christians, and in the third year of his reign subdued Walachia. Afterward transfers his War into Asia, to punish the Sultan of Egypt, for aiding his brother Gemes with Victuals, Men, and Money, against him. For Carmannus of Cilicia was already subdued, and his Country made a Province. Caithbaeius at this time was Sultan of Egypt, by birth a Circassian, and by condition a servant. From his childhood he was instructed in the Arts, and Manners of the Mamalucs, and by the Law of Mahomet was made free. These Mamalucs were Christians of the Muscovite, or Roxalan profession. Out of them the Sultans were chosen out of the Circassian slaves, who dwelt upon the Fuxin Sea, and were chosen after the extirpation of Saladius posterity. Now, these Mamalucs are the children of Christians, and must be baptized, and educated in Christian Religion, which they are to a∣band  on and forswear, before they can be Mamalucs. This Caithbaeius was made Sultan for his Valour; the Egyptians standing in need of such a man, for suppressing the Arabian Thieves, and curbing the Persians, who made divers irruptions upon Comagene and Syria; and keeping the Turks from breaking out of Cilicia upon the Egyptian
Territories. All these Wars he happily un∣dertook;  for he subdued the Arabians, and made them Tributaries. Then in two battels drove back the Persians beyond Euphrates, and mastered the Turks twice in Cilicia by the help and councel of two Italian Mamalucs, the two chief Turkish Commanders, Mesithes Palaeologus, and Cherseogles, were taken. This was the son of Chetsechius, Prince of Illyricum, who took away his sons wife from him, which so exasperated his son, that he renounced Christianity, and betook himself to Bajazet, whose daughter he married. In this Battel of Tharsis, scaree the third part of an hundred thousand Turks escaped. Bajazet being weary of the Asian wars, returns back into Europe, where he takes Dyrrachium, and in the large fields of Liburnis, in Croatia, over∣threw the united Forces of Illyrium, Panonia, and Croatia. Then he made 1493 War against the Venetians, for defending the cause of Iohn Castriot, Scander∣begs son, who had defeated the Garison soldiers of Bajazet in Croatia, and driven the Turks out of his Territories. Besides, the Venetians had prohibi∣ted Bajazets ships in his Syrian Expedition, to harbour in Cyprus, though he earnestly intreated them. Also Lewis Sforsia, a great Enemy of the Veneti∣ans, egged him on. The beginnings of this war succeeded well to the Turk; for Schenderus Bassa, by Land made excursions as far as Tarvisium, and Deu∣ches the Turks Admiral, by Sea, entred even to Iadra in Dalmatia, and ca∣ried thence a great multitude of captives. He was once in danger to have been 1498 taken by the Venetian Fleet, about Peloponnesus, among the Sporade Isles, but Grimannus, the Venetian Admiral, either for want of courage, or skill, suffe∣red him to escape to the Bay of Corinth, where he took the Town Naupactum, or Lepanto, within the Bay of Aetolia, having a little before taken from them Dyrrachium in Epirus. Two years after Bajazet with an hundred and fifty thousand men, brake in upon Peloponnesus; he divided his Army into three parts about Methon. After divers Skirmishes on both sides, he gets within the Town, when unhappily the Townsmen spying three Venetian Gallies, coming towards them with Arms, Men, and Provision, forsook their station, and went down to the  shoar, to receive the Supplies sent them. They were all taken prisoners, be∣ing above a thousand of them, and in the presence of the Tyrant massacred, except some patricii, whose lives were begged by Cherseogles, Bajazets son in Law. Some other places being affrighted at this cruelty, yeilded to the Tyrant, one of those was Pilus, where Nestor of old lived. Bajazet after this, returns as a Conquerour to Byzantium, but Spain and France resolve to aid Venice. Pisaurius the Venetian Admiral, by the advice and courage of Consalvus the Spaniard, took Cephalonia, in the Ionian Sea, having a double Harbour, and a rich Soil. He took also by storm Leucade, and Nericum, and put the whole Turkish Garison to the Sword. But the French Fleet at Lesbos, attempting Mitylene, had not the like success, for the ships were so torn, scat∣tered, and wrackt by a storm, that much adoe they had to escape to Tarentum. At last a Peace is concluded on these conditions, that Cephalonia should conti∣nue in the Venetian jurisdiction, as it was before the Turkish Empire. Leu∣cas and Nericum should be restored to the Turk. This Peace was the more easily obtained, because in Persia Ismael the Sophi, descended from Usumcassa∣nes by the mother, had made himself King upon the death of Iacuppus, the son of Usumcassanes, whom his libidinous wife perfidiously murthered. This change of the State came in with the change of Mahometan superstition, which by the wavering and credulous multitude, was greedily embraced. These  new Sectaries, with great success, over-run Cappadocia, and Lycaonia, kills Bajazets two Nephews, Orchanes and Mahumet, two Bassais, the Beglerbeg of Asia, and Hali, and overthrows two Armies, before Bajazet knew of the danger. Ismael was the son of Harduellis, a Persian Prince, and of Martha the daughter of Usumcassanes, who was the first
of the Assimbaean Turks, that  after the murther of Malconches, the Persian King possessed himself of that Kingdom. Harduelles the Father, would have the Mahumetan Law expoun∣ded after the mind of Hali, that was Mahumets Interpreter, and Companion; and not after the way of Homer, whom the other Turks followed. Harduelles by his affected holiness and strictness of life, above all other men, drew admi∣ration, and innumerable Disciples after him, which eagerly maintained his Dictates, rejecting the ancient Rites. Usumcassanes being yet scarce warm in his Kingdom, began to suspect those great Meetings, and Assemblies of peo∣ple, who many times under pretence of Religion, plot Innovasion; when therefore he finds, that by force he could not suppress Harduelles, he makes him his son in Law, by marying him to his daughter; of which mariage came this son Ismael: but Iacuppus Usumcassanus his son, after his Fathers death, by some Assasins murthered Harduellis, and banished or killed his fol∣lowers, thinking this way to free himself of fear and danger. Ismael being yet a child, got out of his Uncles reach, into Hircania; and one of the chief Disciples Techelles, (called from his red Cap, or Turban Cuselbas, which he wore for distinctions sake) escaped over Euphrates unto the lesser Armenia. These two overthrew the posterity of Usumcassanes, and so busied the Turks, that they could have no leisure to prosecute their Victories in Europe. Ismael by maintaining his Fathers Doctrine, obtained no less love and admiration,  then he; so that Iacuppus being poisoned by his wife, he resolves to recover his Fathers patrimony, and his Mothers Dowry; to this purpose, he arms his Followers, and procured Auxiliaries from Pyrchales, a Prince of Hircania, to whom he had fled. So in a short time he recovered his Fathers Estate, and daily increasing in strength, took by storm Symachia, on the borders of Media. Then upon hopes of obtaining the Kingdom of Persia, marcheth with his Army to Taurisium, or Taura, a flourishing City of the Persians in the greater Armenia, where Alvantes the son of Iacuppus (who drove his bro∣ther Miratchamus out of Armenia and Persia) dwelt. He was hated by the Citizens, because he murthered many of them for adhering to his brother. This City upon the flight of Alvantes thence, yeilded without blowes to Is∣mael, with the Kings whole Treasure. Then hearing that Alvantes had rai∣sed an Army, he fights him. Alvantes lost both his life and his Army. Upon the fame of this Victory, the neighbouring places and people submit to his Law and Government. Thence he marcheth into Mesopotamia against Morat∣chamus, the other brother, who had an Army at Babylon, but he fearing Isma∣els power, and his own weakness, flies with his wife and children, and all the wealth he could convay, into Arabia. Ismael having with his conquering Army over-run a great part of the East, he marcheth out of Assyria into Media, where he takes in some Garisons of Alvantes, and returns into Arme∣nia.  The Albanians, Iberians, and Scythians, beyond the Caspian Sea, being Tributaries to the Persian, had not paid their Tributes in four years, nor had they sent all this while any Embassador to congratulate the Sophies Victories, therefore he reduced them to their duty by force of Arms. 1499 In this mean while Techelles by Preaching and Prophecying, drew Cappa∣docia to join both in Arms and Doctrine with him; and by the Persian help, he breaks in upon Lycaonia, a rich and populous Country, where he overthrew Orchanes and Mahumet, Bajazets Nephews; then he marcheth through lesser Asia, where Corchutus, Bajazets son, was with an Army, but refused to fight: then through Galatia, he breaks in upon Bithynia, where  he met with Caragius Bassa, Commander of the Asiatick Horse, whom they call Belerbei, him Techelles put to flight, and pursues him to Cauthia, a town in the midst of Asia minor, and there beleaguered him. At last he takes the town, and Caragius alive in it, with his wife. From thence he intended to take in Prusia, the Metropolis of Bithynia,
but was hindred  by Bajazets new Forces under Halt Bassa, the Maceaontan Eunuch, whom Techelles unexpectedly meets, and to keep him off from fighting, took Caragius the Beglerbeg, whom he caried about in chains, and paled him in the High-way, that they might be affrighted at this sad spectacle; but indeed Hali Bassa was so inraged at this sight, that because he could not overtake him with his whole Army, pursues him eagerly with eight thou∣sand Horse, and fights him. In the first encounter, Techlles was worsted, but shortly after, he got the Victory, and killed Hali Bassa. To whom succeeded Iunus Bassa, of Epirus, whom Achmet, Bajazets son, furnished with Forces. He at last drove Techelles out of Asia: Thus doe the Ene∣mies of Christ destroy each other. Bajazet being much troubled with  the disasters of this War, with the Gout, and old Age, likewise with the great calamities of that time, caused by Earth-quakes, and the plague, began to consult with his Bassaes about his successor, which oc∣casioned Civil Wars; for Bajazet had three sons alive, Achmet, Corchut, and Selymus, besides divers grandchildren. Achmet was beloved of his Father, but the Bassais and Ianizaries inclined in their affections most to Selymus, by their incitation and assistance of the Praecepit Tartar, (whose daughter Selymus had already maried against his Father Bajazets will) Se∣lymus takes Arms most unnaturally against his Father, but was defeated, and by the Bassais intercession, reconciled again to him: yet afterward  in spight of his Father, he was proclaimed Emperour by the soldiers, who swore Allegiance to him: He began his Government from Paricide; for having thrust his Father out of his Empire, poisoned him by one Ha∣man a Iew, the 66 year of his life, and of his reign 32. he was a better 1512 Philosopher then Soldier. Selymus began his Reign, not only from the murther of his Father, but of his two Brothers also, and their children. He strangled Achmet and Corchut, his two Brothers, having first overthrown Achmet in a battel, and treacherously seized upon Corchut, thinking no hurt, but following his privat study; onely when he heard that his life was sought after, he  endeavoured to escape into Rhodes. Mustuphus Bassa, by whose help Se∣lymus had got the Empire, was for this his good service, first strangled, and then flung to the dogs; his crime was, that his affections seemed to incline more to Achmet, then to himself. Achmets two sons, Amurath and Aladin, both fled; Amurath to Ismael the Sophi, and Aladin to Campso Caurius the Egyptian Sultan; whence arose new Wars, which kept Sely∣mus off from invading Christendom. Amurath with a Persian Army, breaks in upon Cappadocia; Ismael coming softly after, and was like to have caried all this Country, the people came in so fast to him, had not Chen∣demus Bassa, Governour of Asia, suppressed them with a great power.  Whereupon Selymus passeth over into Asia, where he fell upon the uni∣ted Forces of Amurath, the Turk, and Ustaogle the Persian Commanders, with whom also Ismael joins his Army. When he heard that Selymus was come, a bloudy battel is fought, in which Ismael was shot in the shoul∣ders, and so was forced to withdraw himself out of the Army, whom the soldiers followed; by which the Turk obtained the Victory, but to the loss of thirty thousand of his men, whereof many of them were of 1514 great accompt with him; the Persian Army consisted but of thirty thou∣sand Horse, whereas the Turks were an hundred and fifty thousand Horse and Foot. After this Victory, Selymus besiegeth Taurisia, the Persi∣ans Regal Seat, which being by the Citizens surrendred, he wasted and plundred. Shortly after, he brings back his Army into Cappadocia, fear∣ing that Ismael was returning with a fresh Army of Iberian, and Alba∣nian Horsemen, who at this day are
called Georgians and Mangrellians,  In Cappadocia the surk takes up his Winter. Quarters, at Trapezund, and Amusia. The next year understanding that Ismael is troubled with inte∣stine Wars, and that he was gone against the Hyrcanians, and Bactrians, and some other places upon the Caspian Sea; though he was willing to weak∣en the Persian, yet he intends to act nothing in Armenia, till he have first droven King Aladolus out of that Country, for the wrongs he suffered by him in his former Expedition against Ismael. The Kingdome of Ala∣dolus bordered upon the Egyptian Sultan at Alepo, on Ismael the Sephi by Armenia the less, on the Turks by Orpha, or Edessa, famous for its Springs against Leprosies, and for the Tombe of Balowin, Godsry of Bullions  Brother. First, then Selymus takes the Town Cyammassus, the Key of Ar∣menia, on the farther Bank of Euphrates. After that, he subdues the Ga∣risons that kept the narrow passages between the Hils, then he fights Aladolus, who being affrighted with the multitude of Musqueteers, flies with his Forces into the next Woods. Aladolus was betrayed by his neighbours, and a kinsman of his to Selymus, who caused him to bee drawn out of the Cave where he hid himself, and his head to be chopped off, which he caried about upon a long Pole, through Asia, in ostenta∣tion of his Victory; then transmits it to the Senate of Venice. Aladolus his eldest son escaped to Egypt. Selymus divided his Kingdom into three  Lieutenantships. Then he returns into Europe, to defend the borders of his Dominions from the Hungarians, whom he quickly suppressed, in two incursions he made upon them. The same of his Victories, and prepa∣rations he was making for subduing of Christendom, caused Maximilian, Cesar, Laudislaus of Hungary, and Sigismund of Polonia, to call a Diet for raising an Army through all their Dominions for the defence of Christi∣anity. But the Turk understanding, that the Christians meant only to stand upon their own defence, and not to invade, returns to his Army in Lycaonia, with a resolution to prosecute the Persian Wars, and utterly to overthrow Ismael. The Egyptian Sultan being sollicited by the daily prayers and tears of  the exiled Princes, chiefly of Aladin, the son of Achomat, and Aladols eldest son, had raised a great Army of Egyptians and Iews, and was now on his March neer the River Orontes, ready to join with the Persian. The Turk sends Embassadors to desire either his amity, or at least neutrality. At this time Campson Gaurus was Sultan by the Votes of the Mamalucks, after divers tumults and slaughters raised by Caithbei and his Arabian wife Dultiba, who would have had the Kingdom confirmed on their son, a∣gainst the Mamaluc Laws, which made the Sultans Elective, not Heredi∣tary; this Law Caithbei abrogated, after whose death his son Mahumet invaded the Kingdom, whilest two prime men Achbardin and Campso, dis∣puted for it. The Mamalucs being offended that their Law and Privi∣ledge  was thus infringed, caused Mahumet at a Feast to be murthered. Up∣on this divers slaughters of the prime men ensued. At last the Mama∣lucs conferred the dignity on Campson Gaurius, a man of great worth: He remembring the Victory he had over the Turks at Tarsus, answers threat∣ningly to the Turks request, that he would not lay down Arms, except Selymus would restore the son of Aladolus, to his Kingdom, and forbear to meddle with any of Ismaels Provinces; he also desires to be Arbitrator of the differences between him and the Sophi; this so exasperated Selymus that he diverts his War from Persia, and falls unexpectedly upon Coma∣gena,  an Egyptian Province, and incamps himself not farre from Alepo. Campson brings his Army from Damascus, and encounters with the Turks; but Cajerbeius Governour of Alepo and Comagena, not only per∣sidiously forsook, but also pursued Campson, so that the Mamalucs were
defeated, and Campson himself being heavy with arms, and troubled with a rupture in his belly, fell with his horse, and was troad to death in the dust. Of the Turks 3000 were killed, of the Mamalucks 1000, among which were the Governors of Damascus and Tripoli, but a great slaughter was committed in the flight, whilst the Peeres and Gentry were posting towards Hierapolis, fin∣ding 1516 themselves betrayed by Caierbejus; these Selymus persues, who under∣standing they were got to Damascus, takes in Hierapolis, and sends Iunus Bas∣sai with a partie of horse to Damascus, but the enemy was gone thence; where∣upon the Turk marcheth thither with all his army, to whom the gates are pre∣sently opened; Tripoly, Berytus, Sydon, Ptolemais, and other places did sub∣mit to Selymus. Selymus having obtained Syria so suddenly, resolves to pursue the remainders of the Mamalucks, who having escaped to Memphis, had made Tomumbejus the Circassian Sultan there in the place of Campson. The Arcadian high-way robbers are suppressed by Sinan Bassai, who opens a way to Gaza. Tomumbejus had sent Gazellus thither with an army, who were defeated by Selymus, all the Egyptian Colours were taken, the Governor of Alexandria, the Praetor of Memphis, one thousand horse, and great numbers of Arabians were slain, Sinan Bassai lost 2000 horse,. and many prime men. But the Arabians recruiting fell upon the Turks at Gaza, and killed many of them, till Selymus brought  his whole army into Iudea, where he joynes with Sinan Bassai, and takes Gaza upon surrender: Then he marcheth within six miles of Memphis, where he is encountred by Tomumbejus, whose Counsels were betrayed to the Turk by some Fugitives; so that Selymus got the victorie, most of the Egyptian prime men being lost: The choicest of their horse affrighted with the Turkish Ca∣nons, fled and got into the City, the streets whereof they Barracadoed with great pieces of timber; but this could not keep out Selymus, who breaks through all impediments, and in three days fight destroys in a man∣ner the whole race of Mamalucks: Some that had escaped into a Church and submitted themselves to the Turks mercy, were all by his command  cut off. Tomumbejus beyond Nilus recruited his Forces, another battel is fought, and in it the Egyptians quite defeated, Tomumbejus was found lurking a∣mong reeds up to the middle in water, after the Turk had a long time tortu∣red him, to make him confess where his treasures lay; he set him on a poor Jade which carried him about the City; then he causeth him to be strangled, and hanged up on an iron hook in one of the Gates, for a spe∣ctacle to all passengers, of the one's Victory, and the other's miserie: And 1517 thus ended the Kingdome of the Mamalucks in Egypt, which from the extir∣pation of Saladins Posteritie in Melechlala, had continued about two hun∣dred  forty three years. Egypt and Syria being subdued, Caierbejus for a reward of his Treacherie at Alepo, is made Governour of Egypt; and Gazelles, who upon the overthrow of the Mamalucks, submitted to the Turk, is set o∣ver Syria: Out of Memphis or Alcair, above 500 of the chiefe Fami∣lies, besides multitudes of Women and Children of the Mamalucks Progente, and all that could be found of that race, are at Alexandria cut in peeces by Selymus his Command. Then he returnes in Triumph to Byzantium and threatens Christen∣dom; But in his preparation for Warre, he is arrested by a Cankering Ulcer in his Kidneys, which spreading, putrified his whole body, so that he died miserably in that same place of Thracia, where he endevoured to intrap his Father Bajazet. He lived forty six years, and reigned eight. As he was breathing out his cruel soul, he commended his son Solyman to the care
1518  of Pyrrhus Bassa, of Cilicia, injoyning him to forbear the Persians, and to make war upon the Christians. He was a most barbarous Tyrant, who spa∣red neither Father, Brothers, nor any of his kindred, nor his chief Com∣manders, that did him best service; nor his own son, whom he would have murthered with a poisoned Coat, which the mother suspecting, gave it not to Solyman, but to one of his Chamber, who by it was quickly killed. CHAP. XXI. The Turkish History under Solyman, Selymus, Amurath 3d, Mahumet 3d, Ach∣mat, Mustapha, Osman and Amurath 4th, from the year 1520, till the end of 1636. SOlyman the only son of Selymus, succeeded Gazelles, Governour 1520 of Syria, thinking himself now freed from his Oath by the death of Selymus, revolted, intending to make himself Ma∣ster of Syria; for this cause he entertains all the remainders of  the Mamalucs, and the inhabitants of that Country, which flock to him in great numbers. He insinuates himself also in∣to the affections of the great Master of the Rhodes, from whom he desired some Artillery, Arms, and Gallies. He sends also privately to Cajerbeius in Alir, Governour of Egypt, exhorting him to joyn, and to revenge the blood of the Circassians, and to re-establish in the destruction of the Turks, the old government by Sultans. But Cajerbeius considering the difficulty of this business, and that no credit was to be given to an old Enemy, kills the Agent, and makes the Turk acquainted with the plot. Whereupon So∣lyman sends Fardtes Bassai, with an Army into Syria, which so affrigh∣ted  Gazelles, that though he had taken Tripoli, and other Garisons from the Turk, yet he betakes himself into Damascus; hither Farates repairs, with all speed. Gazelles resolves to hazard all in one battel, and either to get the vi∣ctory, or else to die honourably: both Armies joyned; in this conflict, both he and his Mamalucs were cut off by this victory; Syria is recovered, and the fidelity of Cairbeius is confirmed. The next year after this victory, by the perswasion of the Ianizarles, Soly∣man resolves to fall upon Belgrad in Hungary, where were set up many Tro∣phies taken from the Turks; Solyman sends an Army to Sophia, a City in Ser∣via, and he hasteneth after, so that he was come before the Hungarians knew any thing. Eudovick the young King, was totally ruled by others, so that he was in effect but a titular King: Hence an Army could not be suddenly raised; whereupon Solyman took Belgrad without opposition; who after this victory rested a year, then he resolves to try his fortune upon Rhodes, though he was disswaded by his friends who were not unmindful of the losse, disgrace, and repulse Mahumet received there, besides the danger that might ensue to the Sultans own person by the Christian Fleet. Notwithstanding Solyman would in this be ruled by none, but by his own Genius▪ therefore about the end of Iune, he repairs thither with 400 ships, and 200000 Turks, with great Rore of 1522 Brasse Ordnance placed upon two Hils, which the Turks made themselves,  shoveling up Earth for the space of two miles from the City into a wonderfull height. So great was the multitude of workmen, that in a short time they came to the Towne-Ditches, working under ground for springing of Mines. Villadam the great Master, a French man born, behaved himselfe stoutly, playing continually upon the Turks with his great Ordnance, that
the Ditches were filled with dead bodies; yet Solyman would not give over, though he had lost above thirty thousand of his men by the bloody Flux. At last the Towres and Walls being overthrown, the Turks seize upon the remote parts of the Town. Then with their Mortar pieces, they batter down the hou∣ses within the City, to the terrour of the inhabitants. All this while the Rho∣dians had no supply from Christendom, though the Turk had received Re∣cruits from Egypt and Natolia, for Cajerbeius sent forty ships with all manner of Warlike provision. Mean while Pope Hadrian arrived out of Spain into Italy, with some ships and Gallies, and about three thousand Foot. These he was advised to send to Rhodes, and joyn with the fifty Venetian Gallies rea∣dy  at Crete, but he refused to send them: wherefore the Rhodians having nei∣ther help, nor hope, surrendred themselves to the Turki, conditionally they might enjoy their lives and goods, except the brass Ordnance; which was granted, and carefully observed by Solyman, who would not suffer the soldiers to touch any consecrated thing belonging to Saint Iohns Church, when he en∣tred Rhodes with thirty thousand men; there was not a word heard spoken a∣mong them, but as silent as Carthusian Monks. When Villadam took his leave of Solyman, he was dismissed with all courtesie, so that Solyman turning about to one of his Bassais, said, It grieves me (saith he) to see this unfortu∣nate old man driven from his habitation, and to depart hence with so sad a  countenance. So this Bulwark of Christendom, to the honour of Solyman, and dishonour of Christendom, was surrendred after six months siege. In Egypt Cajerbeius did, to whom succeeded Acomath Bassa, who thought to have made himself Sultan, but his plot was detected, and he justly punished with death. Habraim Bassa, Solymans Favorite, is sent to quiet Egypt, which he did with great wisdom; wherefore he was shortly after called home to Con∣stantinople, by Solyman, and honoured with the Title of Beglerbeg, or Lord of Lords. After this, Solyman proclaims war against Hungary: King Ludowic raises an Army of twenty four thousand Horse and Foot, of raw and unskilfull men; 1526 neither had he any supply from the Christian Princes, except from the Pope, who on his own charges raised for him some German and Bohemian Foot. The Turkish Army consisted of two hundred thousand men, which made So∣lyman admire the Kings folly, that would with an handful of men oppose him∣self to such a mighty Army; but the unfortunate King was advised to fight by Paul Tomor, Arch-Bishop of Collocen, who had heretofore in some light Skirmishes, beat the Turk, but never encountred him before in any set Bat∣tel. In the end, this unfortunate King, as we have said already, was drowned in a Bog, not being able by reason of his heavy Arms, to get out from under his Horse; the thousand Horse, his Life-guard in defending the Waggons and  Baggage, were cut off, the Arch-Bishop, with the other Bishops slain, and the whole Army utterly defeated, so that few escaped with their lives, notwith∣standing that the Turkish Ordnance did no hurt; for the Gunners being Chri∣stians, shot purposely over their heads. The Battel being fought, Solyman marcheth to Buda, where the Castle was surrendred to him, the Garison dis∣missed with life and goods. Two brazen Statues set up by Matthias, were caried thence to Constantinople as a Trophy of Solymans Victory, who stayed not long after in Hungary, because of the Winter, but returned home; nor 1569 did he after this make any more War upon the Christians, only he laid siege to Vienna, which with losse and dishonour he was fain to raise again. He also beat the Spanish Fleet, and took from them the Isle Meninges, over against  the African Syrtes, the Castle whereof was defended by the Duke of Medina, Viceroy of Sicily. Pialis Bassa, defeated the Spanish Fleet, that besieged Tri∣poli, and forced the Castle to surrender, for want of water and victuals; about 18 thousand Christians were slain and caried away prisoners to
Constantino∣ple,  where at that time Busbequius Ferdinands Embassador was Resident and relieved many of them with necessaries. But as Solyman was happy in his Vi∣ctories abroad, so he was unfortunate in his affairs at home; for he commit∣ted Paricide upon the false accusation of Rossa or Roxelana, his beloved wife, who hated Mustapha Solymans son by another venture; this Mustapha had done excellent service for his Father against the Persian, and was generally well beloved for his excellent parts, especially by the Ianizaries, wherefore he was accused for affecting the Empire, wch his Father was too apt to believe, therefore marcheth towards him with an Army: sends for Mustapha into his Pavilion, who trusting to his own innocency, came boldly. Solyman gave order to some Mutes that were strong men, but dumb, to fall upon him, and strangle him, which they did at last not without much strugling; for Musta∣pha being young and strong, made resistance a long time; the cruel Father, Authour and Spectator of the execution, caused his body to be laid before the Pavilion, for the Ianizaries to behold, that they might see in what condition he was now, whom they meant to make Emperor. At which sight they were much struck with terror and sorrow, but knew no way to help it. Solyman also was much afflicted by his other son, which he had of Roxolana, his name was Bajazet, he partly hated, partly feared his elder brother Selymus, who was to succeed in the Empire: These two brothers had the command of two  Provinces, which lay neer together; this neighbourhood gave occasion of quarrels, which coming to Solymans ears, with complaints of some who ha∣ted Bajazet, that he intended to invade the Empire, to destroy his brother Selymus, that he might not be destroyed by him, when hee should come to reign, and that he meant also to depose his old Father. Presently command is given by Solyman, that the two brothers should be removed from their Pro∣vinces, and two other assigned them, that might be of a greater distance. Se∣lymus in obedience to his Father, accepted of his new Province, which Baja∣zet refused to do, and withal set up a false Mustapha against his Father, where∣by he incurred his Fathers displeasure, and danger of strangling; but by the inreaty of Roxellana, he was reconciled to his son, who sending for him, checkt him severely for his insolency, both against him and his brother, wish∣ing him not to use any sinistrous means to obtain the Empire; which if God had appointed for him, it should be his in spight of all the world; but if God had otherwise determined, all his labour in attaining to it, would be in vain: with this Stoical Doctrine, did he work upon his son a while; then after he had acknowledged his fault, and begged pardon, a cup of liquour was pre∣sented to him which he was fearful to drink, thinking it had been poison; yet perceiving his mother looked cheerfully on him, did drink thereof, and his Father pledged him in the same cup. But afterward this Bajazet flew out a∣gain in rebellion, and was forced to flie into Persia for shelter, where he was  apprehended and imprisoned; and at last upon the Turks intreaty, the Persian having received satisfaction for the hurt he had sustained by Bajazet, with a rich present from Solyman, delivers him up to Halsan, the Turks Agent, who caried him thence away by a Turkish Garison, and strangled him. The same fate of the Father fell upon his four sons also, who were all slain. This Solyman also having had good success against Rhodes, attempts Malta with a Fleet of 205 Sail; but Iohn Valet the great Master, so stoutly with his forces defended it, by the assistance of Garcas the Spanish Admiral, that the Turks after six months siege, and the loss of twenty three thousand men, were forced with shame to depart, who wrackt their anger upon the Isle Chios, which had been in he pos∣session of Genua, above 200 years; now it is brought under the Turkish yoke by Pialis Bassa. And though Solymans body grew weak by age, being now almost fourscore, yet his ambitious thoughts were not at all weakned, but even then being solicited by the Transylvanian, besiegeth Sigethum, a city in
Hungary,  vvith 200 thousand men, but in the midst of his vain hopes, death cuts him off, having reigned 47 years, he vvas a Prince temperate in his diet, comely in personage, carefull of his vvord, and generous in his actions: his death vvas concealed by Mahumet Bassai from the Soldiers, least they should be thereby disheartned. About this time the Tartars beaking in upon Hungary, kept Lazarus Suendius from relieving the besieged Towne vvhich at last vvas taken, but not without the loss of 30000 Turks in a sally made by Nicholas Serinius, vvho in that action was cut off with his Garrison. To Solyman succeeded his son Selymus 2d, he also sends aid to the Tran∣sylvanian against Hungary; mean while Suendius takes divers Townes  from the Tartar, whom he beats quite out of Panonia, then takes some Townes from the Turk, and enlargeth the Territories of Caesar Maximi∣lian, with whom Selymus makes a peace for 8 years; about which time Cy∣prus submits to the Turkish yoke: For Selymus pretended that this Isle was a member of the Kingdome of Egypt, whereof now he was supreme Lord; and that the Venetians in that regard paid a yearly tribute into his Exchequer; but now having falsified their faith to the Turks, they were bound to make restitution. The Venetians though much troubled at the burning of their Arsenal lately, yet resolve not to loose that noble Island which had now been one hundred years in their possession; therefore  they enter into league with Pope Plus 5th and the King of Spain, who rigg out a strong Fleet into the sea; but the ambition and quarrels of the Commanders staying at Crete, lost all opportunity of doing good; for in this interim Cyprus is wasted by Mustapha and Plalis the Turkish Generals: Then the City Nicosia, after a months siege is taken. Famagusta, called 1570 Salamis of olde, having for eleven months stoutly sustained all the Tur∣kish assaults, at last yeilded upon honorable conditions, had they been as honorably observed by the barbarous infidel Mustapha, who though he promised life, liberty and goods, yet most wickedly murthered those whom by his Oath he should have protected; he caused Antoninus Bragadi∣mus his ears and nose to be cut off, his body to be flead alive, and his skin  to be stuft with straw, and hanged at the main yard of his Galley: Of the Venetians that were bound for Crete, he made Gally-slaves, the chief prisoners and spoiles are sent to Selimus, but a Cyprian Lady appointed for the Sultans lust, set fire by some barrels of gunpowder on the two ships, that neither she, nor the other prisoners, nor spoiles, were ever seen or enjoy∣ed by Selimus. This Island the Turks bought at a dear rate, for they lost about 60000 men in this War besides what they lost the year after, in the battel of Lepanto, at the Islands called Echinadae, fought by the Christian Fleet, under the command of Don Iohn of Austria, Charls the 5th^'s bastard. Sebastian Venerus, afterward Duke of Venice, and M. Antonius Columna, 25 thousand Turks were then slain, and 4000 taken; 14 thousand Chri∣stian slaves were released, the whole Turkish Fleet of 250 Saile, was either torne or taken; onely Uluzal with 30 Gallies escaped. And 1576 the year ensuing the Turkish Armado appeared whole and intire; so that a Turk compared wittily the loss of Cyprus, to the loss of an arm, which could never grow again; but the loss of Lepanto to the shaving of ones haire, which will increase the thicker. Not long after the Turks take Goletum in Africa, from the Spaniard by Sinan Bassai, besides the new Fort, 500 pieces of Ordnance, and rich booties, upon the report of which  good newes at Constantinople, Selymus died, having reigned 8 years; a lit∣tle before his death he took Moldavia by treason, killed the Vayvod and annexeth it to Walachia. To Selymus succeeded his son Amurath 3d who
began his reigne with  the parricide of his 5 brothers, whom he caused to be murthered in his own presence: He intends to make War upon the Persians; over whom reigned Ismael the son of Techmases, who also slew his brothers: He for his crueltie is poysoned by his own sister, and so Maumet Hodabandes ob∣tained his fathers Kingdome. Against him Amurath was incensed, be∣cause he fomented and maintained the Assyrians against the Turks; Be∣sides, Amurath had some Dreams animating him to raise arms against the Persians as Hereticks. The Tartars and Georgians, or Iberian Christians took part with the Parthian against the Turk. These Iberians aided by the Colchs, Armenians and Medes had divers and doubtfull incounters with Mustapha that cruel Turkish Generall: The first year of this War 70 thousand Turks lost their lives by the sword, famin, and water, besides the Europae∣an Tartars, the Turks Auxiliaries were all cut off; wherefore Mustapha is removed from his Generalship, and Sinan Bassai is made chief Visier or Counceller, whose success in this War was no better then Mustapha's, who fearing publick punishment, put violent hands on himself, his e∣state by this, fell to the Sultan. Sinan Bassai also for his bad success is put out of his place and banished; neither was the luck of his successor Fe∣rates much better. About this time also the Praecopit Tartars, who in∣habit Taurica, Chersonesus, of the Turks confederates are made their slaves, vvhich is the effect commonly of the Turks friendship. For because Ma∣humet  the Tartar, vvould not upon Amurath's perswasion assist Prince Os∣man in his Wars, but went home pretending to suppress the Cossacks, wa∣sting and robbing by the Euxin sea, therefore by Osman Bassai, and Islan the Tartars brother, now let out of prison, he deprives Mahumet both of his life and Kingdome, and caused both his sons to be strangled with their father; So Islan is made Fiduciary King of these Tartars. But this Mahumet had one son vvho escaped, he raised an Army and re∣covered from Islan a good part of his fathers Kingdome: Amurath in the interim sends Osman against the Parthians, who in his journey had many disastures, at last he escaped into Taurisium, which he fenced, and 5 days  after died of a Disenterie, whilst in the mean while Amurath being ta∣ken vvith a fit of the falling Sickness, to vvhich he vvas subject, had al∣most brained himself by the beating his head against the stones. In Car∣neola, Amurath is beaten by the Christians, therefore is forced to renevv the peace with Caesar. The Turks also in a battel vvith the Parthians which lasted 3 days and 3 nights, lost about 80 thousand men, and Taurisi∣um, one of the Parthian Regall Seats is recovered again by them: After this Victory, the Parthian King betakes himself to a privat life, and shortly after died. Ibrahim the Aegyptian Bassai, subdues the Maronits of Libanus, and the Trusi of the Christian profession, vvho vvere never till now brought under the Turks yoke; but the Panonian Turks, whilst they break 1587 in upon Croatia, are all cut off by the Christians: Near Sisseca 12 thou∣sand Turks vvere killed or drowned; but the Grecian Praetor to be reven∣ged, came before Sisseca with a great Army and took it: Divers other places are taken by them from the Christians, and divers from them by the Christians: Whilst Matthias, Tiefeubachius and other Christian Com∣manders in Hungary make War against the truce breaking Turks under Se∣rinius and Sinan, Amurath weakned with leachery and fits of the stone, was conveyed by death to Mahumets Paradise, there to satiate himself with all kinde of carnall pleasures; he reigned 21 years, in his time the  Turks break the league twice with the Hungarians, for which the Bassai of Buda is strangled, and Sinan his successor displaced. Poland also was by them invaded, with whom a peace is concluded. In a mutiny among the Janisaries at Constantinople 15 thousand houses are burned: Rascia, Vala∣chia and Moldavia fall off from the Turk.
To Amurath 3d succeeded his son Mahumet 3d, who was circumcised by his father: He initiated his reigne with the murther of 18 of his brothers whom he strangled. The Valachians who had revolted, fought succes∣fully against the Turks, Strigon and Vicegrade are taken by the Christians: Feratus was strangled for his wealth, and bad success together. Lippa is taken by the Transylvanian: Sinan in a sharp conflict is beaten, and loseth 10 thousand of his men; at last after many disastures he is driven beyond the river Agrius, where he died with age and grief: Upon whose death, Mahumet the Sultan marcheth toward Hungary with a great army, where he takes Agria, and defeats Maximilian at Cassovia, this great victory was obtained 200 years after that other at Nicopolis: After this he returns triumphing to Constantinople; this victory cost him 50 thousand Turks. Maximilian lost 20000 with 120 pieces of Ordnance and all the baggage. Omat Bassai with 60 thousand Turks besiegeth Varadin, from whence he is beat off by the Christians with loss; Mahumet being informed that his Sultanesse did enquire of some Sooth-sayers what should be her sons fate, first caused his son to be strangled in her presence, and then commanded 1604 her to be flung into the sea, with such as were conscious of her curiositie; but the next year he paid dearly for this his crueltie; for the Persian took Taurisium from him. The Knights of Malta destroyed Naupactum and Pa∣trae:  Rusvormius having cut off the Turks at Pestum, recovered Hatuana: The Sultan with his over-grown bellie, and goutie leggs, amongst his concubins and Catamits was surprised by a pestilentiall feaver, of which he died the 34 year of his age, having reigned 8 years: He had caused before he fell sick, all the wines in Constantinople to be staved, except those that belonged to the French, English, and Venice Ambassadors, upon a sedi∣tion of the Janizaries. To Mahumet succeeded his son Achmet being yet under age. Upon intestin Wars between the Hungarian and Transylvanian, raised by George Basta; Pestum is regained by the Turks, and so is Strigonium which had been 10 years in the possession of Rodulphus. Achmet made 20 years peace with Caesar: Matthias having obtained Hungary, confirmed the peace. 20000 Turks are overthrown by the Persians at Babylon; they have divers encounters, and various success in the Mediterranean sea with the Florentins and Maltesses; Batorius being accused before the Sultan, that he held cor∣respondence with Caesar, and purposed to deliver up Datia to him; there∣fore 1613 the Turk resolves first to set up Andrew Gretzius, then Bethleem Gabor as Fiduciarie Prince of Dacia; then he makes a truce for a time with the Parthian He also renewes the 20 years peace with Caesar, that he might be without disturbance, revenged on the Cossacks, who having wasted  the chief Cities of Muscovia, and many places in Tartary, they burned 24 Turkish Gallies in the Black sea: And being threatned by the Sultan, grew more insolent; so that they over-run Thracia, plundring all, even al∣most to the Walls of Byzantium; they waste also Bithynia and Paphlagonia, and destroy Trapezund, with it's Harbour, Gallies and Arsenall; they burn Sinope of Pontus, and so laden with rich bootie, return to Sarmatia or Poland. Achmet sends to the King of Poland to have restitution for these losses, whose answer vvas that he vvas ignorant of those passages: But that the Turk could not revenge himself upon the Polander, vvas, by rea∣son of the Persian, vvho prevailed mightily in Asia, for by the revolt of a Turkish Bassai, he did waste vvith fire and sword the Sultan's Territories  far and near; and had almost driven the Georgian King out of his Domini∣on, for adhering to the Sultan. In the sixteenth year of this last century, the Turks had many disa∣sters both by sea and land; for in the Mediterranian they vvere
beaten by  the Spaniards, Florentins, and Maltesses in Moeotis by the Cossacks, in Asia by the Persians, where they lost 40000 by the plague and the sword: But being assisted by the Tartars, hey invade Podolia, and drove thence great booties. Af∣ter 1616 this Achmet died in the 14 year of his government: In his time there died of the plague in one year at Constantinople 200000. The Florentin put to flight and took 42 Turkish Gallies; In one of which taken by them were 00 slaves. A Dervisiar is slain for throwing a stone at the Sultan: The Castle of Lango was taken by the Florentin: The Iews expelled Pera, Traffique granted to the Hollanders out of the Turks ill will to Spain: 7 Turkish Gallies taken by the Viceroy of Sicily. The Bassai of Siden for favouring the Florentin, is pursu∣ed by Achmet, whereupon he flyeth to Florence with 1400 weight of gold. Nassuff Bassai is executed for holding intelligence with the Persian. Iacaia, the supposed son of Mahumet 3d, joyned with the Asiatick rebels, hoping there∣by to recover his right: Achmet besides his Circasian Sultanesse, maintained 400 Concubins, he died the 30 year of his age. Achmet dying, resignes the Government to his brother Mustapha, who had been shut up in a Cell to follow his devotions; so being preferred to his brother Achmets sons performes his Funerall Ceremonies, but he was en∣vied 1617 for his austerity, and held unfit for so great a burthen as the Govern∣ment of that Monarchy, therefore after three months is sent back to his old  Prison: And Osman being now twelve years of age, is made Sultan; a youth of a fervent spirit. The Turks to be revenged on the Cossacks, break in upon Podolia, where they defeat the Governor of that Countrey with three thousand men. In 1618 Asia they had a great battel with the Persians, which was so bloody to both parties, that though the Persian had the better, yet was contented to sue for peace, which was granted upon the payment of an yearly Tribute of silk stuffs to the Turk; who now being secure of the Parthian, falls up∣on Valachia and Moldavia, by the assistance of the Tartars, because the Vayvod Gratian, had conspired with the Polander against the Turks, there∣fore Osman endeavoured to destroy him; for this cause he sends Campagius as his Lieutenant. Two battels are fought, in the first the Polonian prevailed, and Campagius is killed; In the second the Turks have the better, and Gra∣tian with his Auxiliaries cut off: Hereupon Osman turns the Poland Am∣bassador out of his Court, and denounceth open war against him, who at the same time was like to be murthered by a Villain. In Moldavia a battell is fought, wherein the Turks defeat the Polander: But the next March 1620 Prince Ladislaus with fifty thousand falls furiously upon the Barbarians, and utterly defeats them: Osman being highly inraged at this, brings an army of three hundred thousand into Moldavia, but against the will of his friends. Ladislaus with sixty thousand Polanders and Germans, defends the borders of his Kingdome, untill his Father Sigismund should bring the whole body of  the Polonian horse: The two armies facing each other, Osman assaults the Polander, and strives to shut up the Cossacks: So great was the slaughter on both sides, that the Turk being out of hope to proceed any further, propo∣seth peace upon equall conditions, which the Polander gladly accepted of, all his provisions being spent, so that he had scarce enough left for one day. Of the Polanders and Germans were slain about 12 thousand, besides many that died of the sickness: Of the Turks were killed about one hundred thou∣sand, and as many more that died by other accidents. About two years after Osman the Sultan being suspected that he would change the Militia and undertake a tedious pilgrimage to Mahumets Sepulchre, is forsaken by his Janizaries, and his Uncle Mustapha restored to the Government; who fea∣ring least he might be deposed again as before, caused Osman presently to be 1622 strangled; which done, he sends to
Caesar an Embassador for confirming  the peace; and assists Turren the elder to waste and plunder Moravia, but shortly after he is forced by the Janizaries to quit his government, and to give place to Amurath 4. Osmans brother being 16 years of age; so in the space of 16 months, Turkie saw three Sultans, whose large bribes exhau∣sted the treasury: For the Spachi and Janizaries esteem their Emperors according to their bribes and donatives. The tumults of Turkie fell heavie upon the greatest and wealthiest men, whose baggs were emptied and estates plundered. Arzironius Bassai to punish the Janizaries insolencies, in offering to put their Lord to death, raised a formidable army in Asia, with which he threatned and affright∣ed the Royall City: The Persians laying hold on this opportunity, brake  in upon the Turkish dominions, seiseth on Babylon, layeth siege to Edessam 1625 of Mesopotamia. Arziron besiegeth Prusia and Augeronia: A great army is sent against the Parthian, which by him is much weakned and shaken. The Tartars to be revenged on the Cossacks, for the wrongs done by them to the Hungarian Turks break in upon Podolia: Their first expedition suc∣ceeded wel; but in the second they were drawn into an Ambuscado by the Polander, who killed multitudes of them. The Sultan understanding that Sias Abas the Parthian King, and husband of 800 Concubins was dead, resolves to make a lasting & firm peace with the Parthians: therefore cau∣sed Arzironius to submit, whom he made Governor of Bosnia then he sets Iambetus Girain at liberty from his prison at Rhodes, and having defeated his competitor, makes him again King of Tartary. The French Ambas∣sador who was imprisoned by Mustapha upon the escape of Prince Coresky the Moldavian out of the Black Tower, was released by Osman. About which time the Turks take Manfredonia in Sicily, and Vats in Hungary, not∣withstanding the peace; Prince Coresky is apprehended and strangled in prison: After two years of durance, he was a Lord of Poland, taken pri∣soner in the last war. The Turks Gallies return from the Black Sea with 170 poor Cossacks in triumph: The great Defterdar or Treasurer of Tur∣ky is strangled and flung out in his shirt into the streets; for being too rich. The Sultan flatters the Tarter to enter Poland, but could not pre∣vail: The Georgians defeat the Persians, and send many of their heads to the Port; wherefore presently a league is made with those Georgians: 8000 Persians defeated by the Turks neare Mosul, or Ninivie; at the siege of Babylon were killed between 5 and 6000 Turks: Newes also comes to the Port from Babylon, that the Persians had besieged the Viziers camp 1626 now in great distress for want of provision, which caused at Constantino∣ple great distempers; the Janizaries also mutinie against Bostangi Bassai, for beating one of their order by the Sultans command, who could not be appeased by the Sultans intreatie, till the Bassai was displaced. Tar∣tarian by the Turks instigation invades Podolia; but returning thence with much bootie, is defeated, with loss of his army. The Cossacks upon this prepare 703 Frigots to fall upon the Sultans armado, which caused great fear in Constantinople; but by the mediation of the King of Great Britains Ambassador, who had made a peace between the Polanders and Turks, the differences were taken off: Another mutiny this year is raised a∣mong the Janizaries against the old Chimacham George Mehemet Bassai, whom the Sultan (who would fain have protected him) was forced to de∣liver up to their fury, who first strangled him, and then cut off his eares and nose, carrying them about in Triumph; some other great Officers also they execute in spite of the grand Seignior; nor were they yet paci∣fied,  for those Janizaries who had no hand in the death of these men, in a tumultuous way flock to the Seraglio petitioning with threatnings that the Sultan would do Justice on Segman Bassai, Lieute∣nant to their Aga, and others who
had bin authors of the last murthers and  mutinies, the Sultan is brought out into his Court, and placed in his Throne, who at last with good words and wholsome advice pacifieth the tumult, Seg∣man Bassai's head is cut off before the Court doore, by the Sultan's command, afterward divers Spachi and Janizaries, were strangled and flung into the Sea. About this time the Prince of Dacid to make his credit the greater, pro∣cures the Sultan to write a Letter to the King and Princes united for the li∣berty of Germany, that they would persevere in the union, and hold cor∣respondencie with Bethleem Gabor, and the Visier or Governor of Buda. The King of Great Britain also sends a Letter to the Great Turk, concerning the  Treaty of Algier and Tunis, complaining also of divers wrongs done to his Subjects, and requiring Justice. To which the Turk by his Letter answers, that there shall be nothing wanting in him towards the maintaining of peace and union between themselves and their Merchants, that satisfaction shall be made for wrongs done, and prevention used for the future: Overtures of peace are made by the Viceroy of Naples in the King of Spaine's name with the Great Turk, and promises to set free all Turkish slaves, to secure the Sul∣tan's Subjects in the Mediterranian Sea, to serve Turky with East-India Com∣modities, by the Red Sea, and to procure the King of Poland to re∣strain the Cossacks, from making excursions into the Black Sea; but this ne∣gotiation  came to nothing, being found fraudulent, and onely to affright Gabor, and to divert the Turks Forces from aiding the enemies of the house of Austria. At Babylon the Turks fled in the night, burned their Tents, and flung their Artillery in Euphrates; the Persian pursuing, killed multitudes of them. 1627 The next year Gemon in Arabia revolts from the Turk: A great fleet is sent in∣to the Euxin Sea to shut in the Cossacks, in the interim six Gallies of the D. of Tuscany took a Gallion with some lesser Ships of the Caire fleet with rich bootie, which caused 12 Gallies to be recalled from the Black Sea, to pursue the Tuscans; which they did, overtook them, and recovered their Ships with the bootie: A Persian Ambassador arrives at the Port with overtures of peace,  and complaints are made against the English for some wrongs done by them to some Turkish Ships in the Red and Persian Seas; whereupon the King's Ambassadors sent Letters to the English for restitution: Mean while the Per∣sians besiege Achisca, take it, and kill 3000 Janizaries. The newes of the King of Denmarks defeat, the Cesarians hastned both the Turk and Gabor, to make their peace with the Emperor, it was articled that Gabor should be true and faithfull to the Emperor; that he with his Army shall depart out of Cae∣sar's Territories, that restitution be made to Caesar of places, goods, and per∣sons taken lately by the Prince; and that the Princes Subjects shall do ho∣mage to the Emperor. In the peace between Caesar and the Sultan, it was a∣greed  that the new Forts built on the confines of Croatia should be demolish∣ed, that all complaints be laid aside, no wrongs offered, satisfaction for los∣ses made, and captives to be restored, and Merchants to have free trade. Ha∣lil Bassai, Generall of the Turk's Forces in Asia is raised from the siege of Ar∣zirum, with the loss of his rear Canon and Baggage, and with a mutiny in his Army: This defeat was given by Abassa Bassai; the Sultan was much dis∣contented at this report; yet resolves to prosecute the war; therefore sends a new Generall, and causeth new Ordnance to be cast in his own presence, ho∣ping 1628 now to bring Abassa Bassai the revolted Turk to obedience. Not long after the Tarta Han is openly declared a rebell and enemy to the Turkish Empire: Sir Thomas Roe the English Ambassador at the Port is called home, after some contestations between him and the French Agent, about the Jesuits, which by his procurement, and the other Romish Orders in Turky were banished the Turk's Dominions, except two which the French Ambassador retained for his own Familie: The Jesuits order had been 25 years at
Galata, they first quar∣relling  with Cyrillus Patriarch of Constantinople, for maintaining the Doctrine of the Greek Church, (which the Pope by his Emissaries out of the Greek Colledge in Rome, erected by Gregory, endeavoured to subvert) procured the deposition of Cyril, and the instalment of another. Then Cyril being resto∣red to his place, they got him to be banished and imprisoned, who afterward clearing himself, was re-established; upon this the French Ambassador, got the stamp brought from England, for Printing of some Bookes of the Greek Faith, to be plundred: but this being restored again by the Vizier, upon com∣plaint made by the English, the Jesuits are seized on, and sent away in ships, with all their books and goods. The new erected Vizier Husseruph Bassa, in the place of Halil Bassa, passeth 1629 over with his Army into Asia, where his success was so bad before Bagdat, that he lost the third part of his Army; whereupon a new Vizier, Halis Achmat Bassa, is made: some contestation fell out this year between the English and Turks, at Sea, which procured some intercourse of Letters, and Comple∣ments between the Turk and King Charles of Great Britain; and so the diffe∣rences were reconciled. The old Vizier is displaced, and a Cessation of the War with Persia for two years, is published. Halis Achmat Bassa is made Vizier, to the discontent of the Ianizaries who hated him, therefore one day they knockt him down from his Horse with stones; and though the Sultan 1630 came in person and interceded for him, yet nothing would satisfie but his life;  which in the Sultans presence, they barbarously took away, by tearing him in pieces. And the next morning they enter the Seraglio, and demand the Muffti, with some other of their Officers of State, to be delivered up to them, whose lives by the Sultans intreaty, were spared, but their places taken away. These tumults were raised by the instigation of Husreff Bassa, who was discon∣tented for being deposed: He was well beloved of the soldiers for his bounty, therefore Mortesa Bassa hath secret instructions given him by the Sultan to strangle Husreff, and to send his Head privately to the grand Seignour; which was done accordingly, yet not so secretly, but that the knowledge thereof came to the soldiers ears, who presently assemble, and rudely enter the house  of the Vizier Regeb Bassa, who shewing that he had no hand nor knowledge in the murther, is forced to go with them to the Sultan, and to know of him who were the murtherers of Husreff: they stay all the while in the outward Yard; he in the Evening returns and assures them, that the Sultan would sa∣tisfie them the next Morning. Then they gave out that the Sultan had mur∣thered 1631 his third Brother; but when they were brought forth alive before them, they were for that night quieted. The next morning they assemble again, and demand the Sultans Favorite to be delivered to them, which was done; him presently they tore in pieces, because the Sultans affection was greatly towards him: then they fall into a new suspition, that the Sultan had caused his three brothers to be murthered, after he had presented them to the soldiers; and up∣on this they break into his Chamber, expostulating with him for the death of Husreff, and desiring the sight again of his three brothers, whom when they saw, they rejoyced, recommending them to his favour, and the care of his Officers. The next Morning, the Aga of the Ianiaries, who had hid himself, being found, was delivered by the Sultan to them, who tore him in pieces, and hanged up divers of his limbs in several places of the Town. All strangers during this storm, lay close within their own Houses. The Dutch Ambassadors House was assaulted, and so was the French, about some Turkish  ships taken and made Prizes, but the matter after some debate, is referred to a 1632 Trial in Law. About this time Fleas Bassa rebelled against the Sultan, and spoiled all the Country near Smyrna, so that the Consul and Merchants were forced to Transport themselves, and goods to
Scio. This Rebellion was sup∣pressed  by an army sent thither from the Sultan. Regeb Bassai the Visier, who was thought the first acter in these troubles, is strangled in the Seraglio, without any mutiny of the Soldiers, because most of them were abroad upon service. The year following was memorable for the fight between two En∣glish ships in the Bay of Cassandra, and 30 Turks Gallies. In this fight the English Ships took fire and were burned, divers were killed; the two Masters, Harris and Wilde with 60 more, indeavouring to get to shore, were taken and put to the Oare. Of the Turks were slain 1700. the 1633 Captain Bassai hurt, and many Gallies made unserviceable. King Charls up∣on the earnest desire of the English Ambassadors, wrote to the Sultan in be∣half of the Captives, and for punishing of the Captain Bassai, but to little purpose; the King therefore to pacifie the Turk, ordered that no English should trade in corn within the Levant: Mean while the two Captains died. A great fire this year hapned in Byzantium, which consumed some thousands of hou∣ses; and the Persian war is renewed: The great Visier is sent forth with a part of the Militia, who durst not encounter the Persians, but withdrew himself by the way of Aleppo, where he shewed his Justice upon a corrupted Judge or Cadee, whom for his wealth and briberie he sent in fetters to be a slave in Cyprus; having first cut his haire, then he confiscates his great estate for the Sultans use: A great fear fell upon all the strangers in Byzantium this  year; for their houses were suddenly sealed up: A Venetian Merchant was carried up to the Turret on his house, and there hanged, a red Flag being put out to let the Sultan know that execution was done: The 4 Ambassadors of France; England, Venice and Holland, were carried to the Arsenall, and accu∣sed for building new houses with Chappels without the Sultan's leave; where∣fore the French Chappel is commanded to be pulled down, which was done the next day: The Merchants are imprisoned, and are forced to pay 2000 dollars apiece for their ransome: The English payment came to 20000 dol∣lars, the 4 Ambassadors are again convented, and desired to deliver up what arms they had in their houses upon pain of death; all other sorts of people were exacted upon, but at last the Sultan perceiving his error, and danger he was brought in if this Tyrannicall act should be known abroad, promised to make restitution of other arms, though not of the same that were taken (this not consisting with his honor) and satisfaction for the monys seised on, excusing his fact, as being done of want, urged to raise money for his necessitie. These troubles at last were known to proceed from the French Ambassadors debts, which they neglected to pay, though money was raised in Marselles to that pur∣pose; this made the Creditors call to the Sultan for Justice. The Sultan fearing a new insurrection of the Janizaries, caused the Muffti who had all this while protected himself under the great Turk, from their fu∣ry, 1634 to be put to death; whereby they were quickly appeased. The Sultan prepares a great Army against Poland, for some outrages committed by the Polacks and Cossacks; this great army marched to Adrianople, where they staid 40 days, till the messenger returned from Poland, whom the Sultan sent with certain Articles of peace; which were hearkned to by the Polander, and so the Army is disbanded. The French Ambassador for some misdemeanors is sent home by the Sultans command, with his Declaration that he meant to keep all fair correspondency with the French King, and the other Princes, whose Ambassadors lay at Constantinople. The Captain Bassai is preferred and sent Bassai to Buda: The Sultan resolves with all the strength he could 1635  make to weaken the Persians greatness, therefore goeth in person with a nume∣rous army; intending also by this to weaken his unruly Ianizaries, and to keep them from mutinies by such imployments: In this expedition he took Reivan, a place of consequence; then marching as far as Tauri, rageth with fire and sword without resistance; so having lost divers men with want and
sickness, returns with more triumph then conquest. The Sultan was no soon∣er returned, but news came that the Persian with a great Army besieged Rei∣van. An Army is dispatched to raise the siege, but before they came, being hindred by their Byram, or lent, the Town is taken, and the Turks in it put to the sword, or ransom. The Ianizaries finding that the Sultan was not affect∣ed 1636 to them, by employing them against the Persians, from whom little was to be had, but blows; and that by these means he meant to weaken and wear them out, they resolve soon to depose him, others to put him to death. The Sultan perceiving this, flings a sop among them to keep them from biting or barking. He distributes large sums, and so mitigates their anger, and pro∣cures  his own safety. CHAP. XXII. The Affaires of France under Charls 6th Charls 7th, and Lewis 11th, from the year 1407, till the year 1483, enterwoven with the History of Burgundy, and other bordering places. WE have shewed how during the indisposition of Charls the  sixt: The Duke of Burgundy caused the Duke of Orleans to be murthered, and how he fled into his own Coun∣trey of Flanders, where he found an Army ready, which he conducted against the Ligeois, because they would not receive the Bishop, who being of a great house, and 1407 near in kin to the Duke of Bavere, and brother to the Earl of Henault and Holland, would not receive any higher order, then of a Sub∣deacon, abhorring the title of Priest, upon hopes of attaining some rich possessions, which so troubled the Ligeois, that rather then they would ad∣mit him, they gave battel to the Duke of Burgundy, who killed 17 thou∣sand of their men upon the place, and utterly defeated them. Mean while the Duke of Orleans his widow makes her addresses to the King for Justice on the Duke of Burgundy, for the murther of her husband the Kings brother: Burgundy hearing of this, repaires to Paris with a great train of armed men, where he pleaded for the Justice of his act in killing him, who endeavoured to kill the King, and had by witchcraft or poyson brought him into this dis∣temper, purposly that he might attain the Crown; The King though he disliked the murther, yet pardons the murtherer because of his greatness, which was so much the more in that the Dolphin had married his daughter; 1409 wherefore in a manner he governed both King and Kingdom. The young D.  of Orleans fortifies Burges, which Burgundy attempts to take, but could not, a little while after, a peace is made between them and the English who came to aid Orleans, are dismissed without their pay: They in anger caried with them the young Count of Angolesme, Orleans his brother into England, where he was kept 32 years. Mean while France is full of troubles by reason of the King's weakness, the Duke of Burgundie's greatness, the heavy taxes laid on the people, which the Duke promised to take off, and the English Forces in 1412 Normandy, who had already taken Caen, and Cherbourg, and were now before Rohan. Burgundy having got one of the gates of Paris by the treache∣ry of Iohn de Villiers, to be opened to him, enters with a party of horse, and seiseth on the King; the Dolphin escaped, a great massacre is committed,  for all those who had not the Saint Andrews Cross (which was the badg of Burgundy) were murthered, among which were Count Armignac Constable; and Henry de Marle Chanceller; who there lost their lives: This taking of Paris caused almost all the rest of the Kingdome to side with
Burgundy. The  Dolphin finding the troubles of France could not end without the death of the Burgundian, made means to have a Parley with him; which being granted, the Duke is presently murthered by the Dolphin; whereupon Philip, Burgun∣die's son, to be revenged for his Father's death, enters into league with the King of England, who at that time had taken Rohan by Famin, after 7 months siege, and withall delivers up to him Paris, Charters, Troy in Champa∣nie, the King, Queen, and their yong daughter Catherin; then he cites the Dolphin to appear at Paris, there to be tried for this murther, but he not ap∣pearing, 1418 nor any for him, is declared unworthy to succeed to the Crown, ha∣ving treacherously murthered so great a Prince against his Oath, and under  pretence of friendship and union; besides he married Princess Catherin by her Father the King's consent to King Henry of England, and was contented that if King Charles die, King Henry should succeed to the Crown of France, and his sons by Katherin after him. King Henry as Regent of France takes in some Towns, and leaves his bro∣ther 1420 the Duke of Clarence, to guide the kingdom, till he should return from England, whither he was going; the Duke upon this, marcheth out of Roven, with an Army, and sits down before Angiers, which he could neither induce to fight, nor to yeild. At last setting upon some Troops of French and Scots, who held with the Dolphin, is slain in the place by them, and many  of his men taken prisoners, the rest fled, and saved themselves by carying the White Crosse, the Colours of France, till they came to Normandy. King Henry upon the news of his brothers death, returns into France, where he shortly after died, and King Charles followed about fifty three days after. Katherin King Henries Widow, maried with Owen Tudar, a Welch Gentle∣man. In this Charles his time, the French reduced the Millanois that had rebelled, to obedience of the Dutchess his brothers wife. This King gave the Dutchy of Nemours to the King of Nevar. The Dolphin and Iohn his Brother died, and Charles the youngest succedeth. This mad King reigned forty two years. To him succeeded Charles 7. at the age of 21. He contained himself some∣time 1422 within Berry; wherefore in mockery, he was called by his adversaries, King of Berry: yet he used the Title and Seal of France, though not as yet conseorated at Rhemes. Whilest he was in his chief troubles with the Eng∣lish, a maid eighteen years of age, born in a Village of Lorrain, where she used to keep Sheep, came to him, shewing him that she was sent by God to raise the siege of Orleans: the King wondring at this, caused her to be exa∣mined by his Clergy, who perceiving her constant and resolute, perswade the King to give her Arms, and some Troops of Horse, which was done accor∣dingly; with these she relieves the Town, raiseth the Siege, which had con∣tinued  seven moneths, and defeats the English, after they had taken divers 1423 Towns, and in sundry Skirmishes beaten the French. About this time the Burgundian marieth with Isabel, daughter to King Iohn of Portugal; and King Charls of France at Rhemes, is consecrated, whence he marcheth with his Army to Paris: the Duke of Bedford did good service for England, but lost his life before Orleans with a shot from the Town; the Maid also received a wound in relieving the Town. After this, she was taken by the English at the siege of Compend, which she had relieved; but as she sallied out, fell into the hands of her Enemies, who burned her for a Witch. After this, the English are 1427 defeated by the Bastard of Orleans; but the next year they take Pontarson, and the French Turnay, the Masculine Prophetess, that was burned by the English is honoured by the Orleanois with a brass Statue on their Bridge. The Eng∣lish to countenance their cause, sends for Henry the sixt, son to Henry 5, of Ka∣therin, and Crowns him at Paris, being twelve years old. Mean while King 1432 Charles takes Carnutes, or Chartres, by a Stratagem. An Ambuscadoe was
made in the dark, close by the gate: in the morning a Carter is sent with Fish, who offering to sell them to the Town, got the Porter to open the gate; in break, they that lay in Ambush, and made way for the rest of the Army, who put all to the Sword that bore Arms, even the Bishop of that place, because a Burgundian. Charles being nothing dismayed at the English proceedings, goeth on in ta∣king in of Towns, and the rather because he finds Duke Philip grow slack in maintaining the English cause. France in the interim is in a miserable conditi∣on. Multitudes fall off from the English to the Burgundian, whose anger was now pretty well satiated with blood and misery. A Peace therefore is now propounded at Artebates, or Aras, the French Gentry remonstrating that 1435 they had no hand in the death of the Dukes Father, and that France had now sufficiently smarted for that murther. The Duke was willing to hearken to Peace, but the English in regard of their Title to France, could not be satisfi∣ed; so their Ambassadors went away without effecting any thing: it was then agreed between the King and Duke, that the King should build a Church in the place where the Dukes Father was killed, should place Ca∣nons in it, to do service, and appoint sufficient maintenance for them. Besides the King bestows on him and his heirs, the Cities of Mascon, and S. Gengon, with all their priviledges and dependances; The County of Auxeure to him  and his son Philip onely, for which they were to swear fealty, and do Homage to the Crown of France. Upon the same conditions, he and his son should have the Towns above the River of Somme; so low was the French King brought, and so Potent a Prince was this Duke, that he was glad upon any tearms to disjoin him from the English; divers also of these places were in the English possession. Upon the report of this agreement, the Parisians un∣der-hand, send to the French Commanders abroad, that if they would pro∣cure their pardon, the City should be delivered up to them; which being promised, and at the time appointed an Army ready at the Gates, the chief Ci∣tizens crying aloud in the streets, France, France, all the people presently takes  Arms: the English being amazed at this, and seeing the French Army break∣ing in all the Gates, presently fly for shelter to the Bastile. The streets are chained, all the English, and their adherents, that could be found, men, wo∣men, and children, were massacred. These in the Bastile yeilded upon promise of life, and safe conduct to the next Towns held by the English. Burgundy besiegeth Calice, but could doe no good, because of the unruliness of his own soldiers, and some differences that fell out between him and his subjects at Bruges; wherefore he brings his Army straight thither. He was let into the Town, and so many as they thought they could master; the rest were excluded: but the soldiers within, breaking open one of their Gates, got out  again, and so kept the Town from all provision, that they were forced to beg pardon of the Duke bare headed, and bare footed, and withall to pay him a great sum of money. In the interim, the French are now in case to send Forces into Italy, for recovering of Naples, albeit the English as yet were not quite driven out of France. About this time Lewis 3d, whom Queen Iane of Naples adopted, died, and Iane her self the year after. Ferdinand of Arragon, is advised by his friends to go for Naples; but they who stood for Anjou, counsel the Duke of Bar, Brother to the said Lewis, is wished to hasten thither, upon hopes he might prevail before the rest, because Queen Iane had named his Brother heir to the Crown. But he was prisoner to the Burgundian, who had raised his ran∣some  to a greater sum then was at first demanded, because now he was Duke of Anjou, and Earl of Province, by the death of his Brother Lewis. There∣fore that he might take the speedier order for his ransome, is set at liberty up∣on his Parol, which he was careful to perform.
But his wife Isabel, a Princess  of great courage, goeth into Province with her two sons, raiseth men, and pro∣videth Vessels for her Transportation to Naples; from whence Alphonsus was repulsed by the contrary Faction to the Isle of Ischia. But recruting himself with more supplies, he besiegeth Cajet both by Sea and Land. The Genuois who had great store of wealth in that Town, and who stood for Anjou, de∣sire help from Philip Duke of Millan, under whose protection they were. Philip sends help by Land, the Genuois by Sea: Alphonsus raiseth all the strength he can in Spain, Sicily, and Naples; to wit, nineteen great ships, three Gallies, and one Gallion: the Genuois were scarce half so many, either in number, or greatness of Vessels: the fight was sharp, and doubtful at first, but at length, some of the Genua ships getting the wind of the Enemy, fell so furi∣ously  upon the Arragon Admiral, where the King and his Brother, the King of Navarre were, with six hundred soldiers; that both the Kings were forced to yeild. So the siege upon the report of this defeat, is raised from Naples: the two Kings and three hundred Donns, are led away prisoners to Millan, where they are most magnificently received, entertained, and dismissed with rich Presents by the Duke, to whom King Alphonsus sheweth reasons why Millan should rather hold with Arragon then Anjou, because at last France will become Masters of Millan, whose dispositions doe not sort so well with the Millanois, as those of Arragon do, as was observed by Iohn Galeas the  last Duke of Millan. Mean while Isabel Dutchess of Anjou, arrives at Cajet, and from thence at Naples, where she assembles all the chief of her Faction; but Burgundy would not release Duke Rene her Husband, till he had delivered up Cassel for his Ransom. At which the Genuois stormed, who were in good hope the two Captive Kings should have paid the Dukes Ransom, therefore were mad, that they should obtain a victory to their great cost and pains, and Duke Philip should have the honour of it; of whom they complain for dismissing the prisoners without Ransom, and for using the Genuois (hitherto a free people, and who had made the remote Princes, and Kings of the East afraid of them)  as slaves. Hereupon they revolt, and assume their former liberty; then with their Gallies they accompany Duke Rene to Naples, where they made him to be Crowned presently. Which Act was approved and ratified by Pope Eu∣genius, for which cause he was hated by the Duke of Millan, and Alphonsus King of Arragon, who besiegeth Naples again, and in it Duke Rene of Anjou; but the City was so stoutly defended, that Arragon was fain to raise the siege, having lost his brother by a Canon Bullet from the walls. But before the siege was quite raised, a Runegado out of the City shews Alphonsus a pas∣sage through a common shoar or kennel; by this the Arragonians enter the City, Anjou flies to the Castle where having little hopes, makes his Compo∣sition with Alphonsus, and so returns by Florence, where he saluted the Pope into France. There he finds his brother Prince Charles in so great favour with the King, that the whole Kingdom was ruled by his Councel, which of∣fended 1440 divers great men, who advised the young Dolphin to take Arms against his Father; but this plot was quickly quashed, the Counsellors punished, and the Dolphin pardoned, who not long after caused the English to raise their siege from Deep. The Duke of Burgundy to take away all occasion of future broils in France, resolves to reconcile himself to the Duke of Orleans, now a prisoner in England twenty five years; for this cause he imploys his wife, the daughter of Portugal, who made means by her Ambassadors, to have a par∣ley  with the King of England, on the borders of Flanders. An overture was made of Peace, but could not take effect: At length she obtains so much fa∣vour as to see the Duke of Orleans who was presently sent for to Calice. There she wrought upon him to forget all by-past injuries, and to marry with Mary daughter to the Duke of Cleve, and one of
Burgundies sisters: by which  means Orleans recovered four hundred thousand Crowns to pay for his Ran∣som and a perpetual friendship is procured between these two families. About this time Rene, or Renatus of Anjou, returns from Italy, whose daughter Margaret is maried to the King of England, and a three years Peace concluded between the two Nations. The County of Main is restored again by the English to the French, and some other places: during which Truce, sup∣plies are sent to the D. of Millan against the Venetians, and the County of Ast is first promised, then rendred by the Duke to his sisters son the Duke of Orleans: and the same day Duke Philip of Millan died, of sickness and grief; the Duke of Orleans claimed the next succession to Millan, by his defunct Uncle, Duke Philip. The Millanois aimed at their liberty; Regnauld the French Comman∣der there, before supplies could be sent him from France, besiegeth Bosto, but being beaten by the Millanois, was forc't to rise and retreat to Ast, with loss and disgrace: but Francis Sforsa, who had maried Blanch, Duke Philip of Millans daughter, and received with her the City and Principality of Cre∣mona, who defeated the Venetians, enemies to Millan, doth now fall off from Millan to the Venetians, and taking opportunity by the divers Factions of the Citizens, besiegeth the City, which for want of victuals yeildeth, and recei∣veth Sfosra for their Duke, before France could send any Forces thither, for their Truce with England was now broke by the English, who took Tongeres.  Upon this the French took divers places from the English, and Rouen among the rest, with the Duke of Sommerset in it, who to have his liberty was forced to deliver up five French Towns, which were in his possession; and upon the surrender of Falaise to the French, Talbot is delivered out of prison. A Bat∣tel is fought between Bayeux and Carenton, in which the French beat the Eng∣lish, and by degrees got all Normandy again from them. Then the French King marcheth with his Forces into Guien, where he layeth siege to four Towns at one time. Mean while Burdeaux sends to capitulate with the King, and is surrendred on their own conditions, which occasioned the other Towns to surrender also. And so all Guienne returns again to the French, except Bayon∣ne; which at last upon the sight of a white Cross in the Clouds, or a Meteor like a white Cross, which is the Arms of France, as the red is of England, they deliver up themselves to the French, preferring the white Crosse to the red. Not long after, Bourdeaux falls off again from the French, and sends to Talbot, who coming with five thousand Foot to the gates, was let in. Up∣on this report the King sends Prince Iohn, the Duke of Burbons son, with an Army: A battel is fought, in which both Talbot and his son, lost their lives, and Burdeaux withall, which the King by building two Castles, did so bridle, that they could not afterward revolt to the English, who were-all dismissed by the King, and suffered quietly to return home, having lost all their holds in 1453 France, except Calice, and some places thereabouts. Presently after this, the Dolphin upon some discontent, takes leave of his Father for four months, but intending to return no more again to the Court, whilst his Father was alive, because he more hearkned to his Favorites, then to him. About this time the Gantois rebelled against their Duke, because he ex∣acted of them a new Gabel of Salt, and incroached on their liberties; there∣fore they cruelly kill their Governour, but they were defeated by the Duke in a battel, having lost twenty thousand of their men, and were at last content to pay a great sum of mony, and to accept what Laws the Duke would im∣pose on them. In France, the King was forced notwithstanding the wars were ended, to maintain in Garisons five thousand Foot, and fifteen hundred  Horse, to suppress the rambling soldiers, who went to and fro plundring the Country people. At this time King Alphonsus made war in Tuscany, upon the Florentins, for their aid; the King raiseth two thousand Horse, intending that if Alphonsus were worsted, to march to Naples for the claiming a title to that
Kingdome: the Duke of Savoy at first denyed him passage through his coun∣try, because he was in League with Alphonsus and Venice, against Millan, and the Florentins; but the Dolphin, his son in law, wrought so upon him, that at last he yeildeth a passage. But this Expedition came at length to nothing, For upon the sad news of the loss of Constantinople, the Italian Princes made Peace among themselves. Iohn Duke d' Alanzon is declared by the King guilty of High Treason, for solliciting the English to return into France, but afterward is pardoned: The Dolphin was now in stead of four months, ab∣sent four years from the Court, carying himself like a King in his own Coun∣try, by making Laws, and receiving Ambassadors; the King sends an  Army with command to bring him to the Court; the young Prince fearing the worst, flyes to the Duke of Burgundy, who excuses himself to the King that being his Vassall, he could not refuse to intertain his sonne. Peter Fre∣gose Duke of Genua, being crossed by the contrary Faction, and fearing the greatnesse of Alphonsus, King of Arragon, conveys himself and his estate into France. Mean while Alphonsus dieth, and leaves his Fathers king∣domes to his Brother Iohn, but Naples to his Bastard son Ferdinand; but 1456 Pope Calixtus would not yield that a Bastard should be King of Naples. Ferdinand alledgeth that Pope Eugenius on this condition crowned Alphon∣sus, that Ferdinand might succeed him, which was confirmed by Pope Ni∣colaus. Pope Pius who succeeded Calixtus, to avoid further trouble, fearing lest Sforza and Ferdinand, who were very intimate, should joyn their Forces, and raise a new War in Italy, Crowns Ferdinand King of Naples, conditio∣nally that this should not prejudice those that could shew Title to that Crown. Upon the report of this Coronation, Iohn son to Rene of Anjou, pro∣cures a great Fleet from Genua and Province, to make War against Fer∣dinand at Naples, complaining against the Pope for Crowning his Enemy. Not long after Iohn obtains a great Victory upon Ferdinand, so that he was like to conquer Naples, had he not delayed too long till Ferdinand had recruted himself. In the Interim the Genuois revolt from Duke Iohn, and the French, who had nothing now left them but the Castle with Savonne. Upon this King Rene marcheth with a French Army against Genua; but being defeated, and two thousand of his men cut in pieces, was fain to retire to Savonne. Upon report that the Turk had taken Trapezund, that great and rich City in Pontus, the people sends to the Christian Princes for aid against the Turk, bewailing the miserable condition of Christendome. The Dolphin being in the Burgundians Countrey, resolves to goe against the Turks: His  Father sends first to have him come and speak with him; which hee refu∣sed to doe, wherefore the King sends to the Pope, to know which way he might disinherit this disobedient son; the Pope commends the Dolphins real, and reproves the King; he also animates the French to stand by the Dolphin in this his noble intentions, shewing to them the valour and devo∣tion of their Predecessors, in subduing these barbarous Infidels: the Duke of Burgundy also protests to make a Voyage himself, or to send an Army against the Turks. The Dolphin had then a son born to him, whom hee called Duke of Normandy: The King mistrusting he had been poisoned, re∣fused to touch any Victuals; At last being importuned to eat by his friends,  tried, but could not swallow, the passages were so narrow, and clung so together. And in this case hee died, thanking God that hee would take him away out of this wretched life, on that day which was kept in memory of Mary Magdalen, that great sinner, desiring a share in her 1461 Repentance, as hee had in her
Sinnes. Hee Reigned thirty and eight  years. This was he that confirmed the Pragmatical Sanction, by which the Popes power was much weakned in France. In his time the Parliament of Tholose was erected for Languedoc, and another was set up at Grenoble in Dol∣phiny. To Charles succeeded his son Lewis 11. who had been a long time out of France; he changeth all the Governours and Officers of the kingdom, and is made Umpire of a difference between the King of Castile, and Bland, daughter and heir to the King of Navarre, and wife to the King of Arra∣gon. To obtain the Popes favour, he renounceth the Pragmatical Sanction, and labours to make the Duke of Millan his Vassal; he demands of the Duke of Britany, that he forbear the title of [By the Grace of God Duke of Britany] and that his subjects acknowledge the French King for their Soveraign and Lord. War also is threatned, if the Duke should refuse: he being astonish∣ed at this, desires of the King some time to assemble and consult with the States of his Dutchy, about such weighty matters. Mean while he sends his Agents disguised in divers habits, to the King of England, and other Fo∣rain Princes; he makes also a strait alliance with Charles Count of Charolois, Duke Philips son of Burgundy, to whom the King sends Ambassadors, accu∣sing his son for allying himself with the Duke of Britany, a great friend to England; and withall they cast divers foul aspersions upon him: the Duke  suffered not his son to speak, fearing his rashness, but spoke himself, excu∣sing his sons actions, and accusing the Kings breach of promises. The next day the Count spoke for himself; that though he had entertained amity with the Duke of Britany, yet it was not to prejudice France, but to advance the publick good. But shortly after it appeared, that the Princes were much discontented, among the rest Charles Duke of Berry, the Kings brother, who had all conspired to restore the Gentry and Clergy of France, and generally 1465 the whole people, now groaning under heavy pressures, to their ancient privi∣ledges and freedom. For this cause the Count of Charolois enters Piccardy with an Army, as Lieutenant General to the Duke of Berry; he marcheth  towards Paris, and by Boats on the River Seine, seizeth upon the Bridge of Saint Cleve. The Duke of Burbon chaseth away all the Kings Officers out of that Country, and seizeth on the Mony, that was raising for the King; who was nothing dejected at all this, but raiseth what Forces he can, and en∣counters with Count Charles at Mont l' Hery, where a sharp Skirmish is fought, to the loss of above two thousand; the Count was wounded in the stomach and throat: it was given out that the King was slain, upon which the Count d' Main fled, but that report was false; for when the King uncovered his Head, and shewed himself, his soldiers took courage again, and fought stoutly. After the Battail was fought at Mont l' Hery, the King returns to Corbeil, and from thence to Paris, where he ingratiates himself by fair words and pro∣mises, with the Citizens; for so Sforsa Duke of Millan, who had sent him some Auxiliaries of Horse and Foot advised him. By his affability he got the good will of the Parisians, and then he goeth into Normandy to raise strength there also. Mean time the Dukes, Counts, and Barons, had sate down in three several places before Paris, whether they sent some Heraults to desire them to send some of their wisest men, to know the reasons why this Army sate down there; and withall to deliberate about a way of Accom∣modation. The City having met, and advised upon this, sends the Bishop  of Paris, with some other prime men; to whom the united Princes shew, that the Kings insolent Government, his changing of the Laws and Customs, his despising of the Nobility, and oppressing of the people, moved them to take Arms, that things might be righted, which would be done the sooner, if Paris the chief City, would by joyning with them, shew good example to
others. Hereupon the Parisians thought it sit the City Gates should be opened to the Princes, conditionally that their soldiers would doe no wrong, but pay for what they take; and that the Kings consent may be required in this matter. The King being advertised of this, extream∣ly was iraged, and repairs to Paris with some Foot Forces, where hee reproves the City in general, and particularly the Bishop, for offering to entertain a Parley with his Enemies: For this cause the King hated him ever after, and caused his Epitaph over his Tomb to be taken down. The Princes failing of their intentions, and of the Cities assistance, resolve to give the King Battel, which he altogether declined, not willing to  hazard all upon an uncertain Battel, as Sforsa advised him; but he mans, and fortifies all the Gates, Walls, and Towns of the City; great hurt was done at Charenton, by the Ordnance; some Sallies and Skirmishes were permitted by the King, and Fortifications are raised on both sides. Charolois makes a Bridge of Boats, for Transporting his Army, which presently after feizeth on some of the Suburbs, and drives away the Kings men from thence. Then a Truce for two days is agreed on; the King sends his Chancellor to know the Duke of Berries minde, whom nothing will content but the Dutchy of Normandy; then the King desires a Parley with Charolois, whom he flatters, and makes believe, that he was sorry  his Chancellour, whom he sent to his Father, had used any distastfull words, having no such Commission. By this he gained more of Charo∣lois, then he could doe by force. The Truce is from day to day renued; so that now there is intercourse between the City, and the Camp, and revolting on both sides, chiefly from the King, whose pretences were not so specious, as those of the Princes, which aimed at the publick good; therefore the King gives order to shoot all such as should either come from, or go to the City without leave. A false report was brought to the Princes, that the next morning the King meant to give them battel, which presently alarumed them, so that all night they stood in battell  Aray, for fear of surprisal; but this was only a false fire. It was also given out in Nermandy, that the King and Princes had made a Peace; and that Berry the Kings brother, should be Duke of Normandy, which gladed the Normans hearts, who longed to have a Duke. Mean while the Duke of Burbon enters Rohan, and takes it in the name of the Duke of Berry. Upon this, the King desires another Parley with Count Charolois, vvhere∣in he offers Normandy to the Duke of Berry, satisfaction to the other Prin∣ces; the payment of his sisters mariage portion to the Duke of Burbon, and assistance to the Duke of Lorrain, for recovering of Naples; so a peace is agreed upon, which the Princes vvillingly accept, because of  Winter drawing on. Sforsa's Forces understanding that the Peace was concluded, returns home, having done much hurt in Burbons Country: thus the begun War ended, but not the private grudges. The Duke of Britain grew angry at this peace, by vvhich Charolois ob∣tained all the chief Towns on the River of Some, and the Kings brother, Normandy for Berry; vvhereas he who had been at more charges in this War, then any other, except Charolois, had nothing advanced himself, either in his estate or honour; therefore he with divers Lords, begin to look on the new Duke of Normandy, as a rising Sun, and to expect ad∣vancement by his means. The King who was cunning to sow the seeds  of discord among the Princes, caused a report to fly abroad, that whilst the Duke of Normandy was lodged upon S. Katherins Hill neer Rohan, till the City was fitted for his reception in State; the Britains meant to cary him away into their Countrey, whereupon the Rohaners before the day appointed for solemnity, brings in the Duke without any state at
all, save onely that the Clergy waited on him with the Cross. Britany fearing that this people would be moved against him, returns home, ta∣king some towns of Normandy by the way, which he fortified with Ga∣risons: Mean while the King comes with an Army against his brother in Rohan; who now being forsaken by Brittany, and Charolois employed in a war against the Liegeois, was forced to submit, and part with both his Dutchies of Berry and Normandy, and to retire again into Brittany, where he had his first assistance in this late war. The Government of Brittany is restored to Burbony for his good ser∣vice in recovering Normandy to the King: Lorrain having received men  and mony from the King towards the recovering of Naples, did wave that enterprise, in regard his father and other friends, had so bad success in it heretofore; he intends therefore to recover the right his ancestors pretended to the Kingdome of Arragon, having crossed the Pyrenians, he began to prosper well in Spain, till the Plague seised on his Camp, of which disease he died: The King presently upon this calls back his Ar∣my, and imploys it against the Duke of Brittany, whilst Charolois is hin∣dred by the Liegeoian war; for upon the death of his father Duke Phi∣lip of Burgundy, who held the Liegeois in great awe, imposed a tribute on them, and took divers places from them, for refusing to obey their young Bishop Lewis of Burbon, the Duke of Burgundies Nephew, whom 1467 the Pope had confirmed in that rich Bishoprick upon the intreaty of his Uncle, and promise he made to raise an army against the Turk; wch young Bishop could not in a long time be induced to take on him the Order of Priesthood: I say, Duke Philip being dead, the Liegeois began to reassume their liberty; therefore they turn the Burgundian Garisons out of their Towns, which so exasperated Charls, that he enters their Countrey with fire and sword, defeats them in a battell, takes Leige, and dismantles it, and imposeth on them heavier burthens and taxes then ever his Father did. In this mean time King Lewis forceth his brother Charls and the Duke  of Brittany to make their peace with him, promising his brother an year∣ly pension of 35 thousand crowns, conditionally he quit his claim to the Dutchie of Normandy; at which time the Duke of Burgundy, having quieted Liegeois, and Gantois, prepares to assist his antient friends, Berry and Britanny. As he was on his march, newes came that they two were reconciled to the King, which he did not at first believe, supposing this newes had been given out by the King, to hinder his march; but at last by Legats from the King and these two Princes, he was assured of their reconciliation: The King desires Burgundy to meet him at Peronne, for finishing this last peace with all the Princes: They met according∣ly, and as they were in treaty about the peace; newes came that the Liegeois had again taken arms: Most of the banished men being retur∣ned half starved, and like savages in their overgrown haires: They first take Tongres an antient City, where Lewis of Burbon their Bishop, was with the Pope's Legat, who so asswaged the furie of the Soldiers, that little blood was shed. When Duke Charls understood that this re∣bellion was raised by the French King's Ambassadors; in a rage he accu∣seth the King of his treachery and hypocrisie, and causeth the Gates of Peronne to be shut, and kept with a strict Guard, that none might goe out or in, pretending that a Budget with Letters of consequence was lost: So the King was kept prisoner two days in great doubt, what would become of him; for he had both in his minde and eie, the Tower close by him, where Charls the simple King of France was fain to renounce his right to the Crown. The Duke sat in Counsell two days to know what
should be done to the King: Some thought it fitting that he should de∣clare himself an enemy to the Liegeois, and ass the Duke with an Army; others would not have him to be released at all, fearing he would re∣venge this wrong; a third sort would have his brother sent for, to have a confirmation of the Conditions in the peace of Conflans: The Duke was content to let the King goe free, if he would send his Ambassadors to Liege for a peace; which the King swore to do, and promised also to give the Counties of Brie and Champaigne to his brother, which pleased the Duke well, because these Counties joyning to his, would make him the stronger, to resist future quarrels with the French King. The King accompanies the Duke to the siege of Leige: The Citizens  at first made some sallies on the besiegers; but perceiving their present dangers, and strength of the enemies, send their young Bishop to his Cousin, to mediate for them, with condition he should return if he could not prevail; but the Duke was so incensed, that neither would he hearken to any pardon, nor would permit the Bishop to return, though he was tied by his Oath: Then the Pope's Legat intercedeth, desiring the Duke to remember the Pope's goodness, who upon the earnest re∣quest of his father, conferred this Bishoprick on young Burbon; that therefore he would be pleased to bestow this City upon the Pope, and spare their lives: But this the Duke refused, accusing the Legat for pre∣tending  to the Bishoprick of Leige: So at length the City is taken, plun∣dred, and burned, and all the inhabitants that could be found, cut in pie∣ces: Immediately after this, the King returns into his Kingdome, and deals so cunningly with his brother, by such as had an interest in him, that he got him to refuse Brie and Champaigne bordering upon Burgundy, and in lieu thereof, to accept of Guienne farther off. Not long after this, a son 1470 is born to King Lewis, Charls by name: The King willing to pick a quar∣rell with Burgundy, got some discontented persons to Petition him a∣gainst the Duke's injustice and oppressions, shewing also that he had in∣croached upon the King's Territories, and broken the peace: The  King upon this, calls a Counsell, where it is declared that the Duke had violated the peace; wherefore he is summoned to appear, which he took so hainously that he imprisoned the Messenger, but afterward sent him home: In the interim Amiens and Saint Quintins return to the Kings obedience: Who shortly after began openly to force other places. Here upon the Duke sends to his friends and allies for aid: The Duke of Guienne sends him Letters privatly, that he would send him supplies, the King perceiving how earnest Burgundy was to recover Amiens, and S. Quintins, sends to him, that he should have them again if so be he would renounce alliance with the Dukes of Brittany and Guienne, and not as∣sist  them so long as he had wars with them: To this the Duke conde∣scended. The King in the interim sends under-hand to the Governours of these two places, to keep off the Duke with fair words, and not to surrender the Towns: Burgundy understanding that the King meant to cheat him, and that he had already begun to make war upon the Duke of Guienne, enters France with his Army, and first besiegeth Beauvais, but could not take it; therefore he marcheth towards Normandy, to joyn his Forces with Brittany against Rohan; but on the way newes came that 1471 the Duke of Guienne was dead: And the Duke of Brittany would not now joyn with Burgundy. Seeing now Guienne was fallen to the King by the death of his brother, the Duke of Burgundy was so mad with the King, that he gave out the King had poysoned his brother by some of his servants; and surely the hatred he had towards him, might cause su∣spition. The Constable was the Duek's great enemy, and he was suspected
to  blow the coles for this flame, and to be the chief fomenter of this war; for he entring into Burgundy, caused all places to be set on fire, whether he came: At a meeting he gave the lye to the Duke's Ambassadors; which 1616 procured him much hatred. The King and Duke being both willing to be rid of him, conspire his death; but he was so potent and cunning, that he would trust neither of them, but stood on his own guard; therefore he turns the Kings Garison out of Saint Quintins, and puts in a Garison of his own. When the King sent to speak with him, he refused to come without his Guard, and assurance of safety; therefore a bridg was set up over a river, and a bar like a lattice in the middle, that they might have the sight and speech of each other; at last the bar was bro∣ken down, and they after privat conference departed good friends. A∣bout this time Purpignan one of the French Towns revolts to the Arra∣gonian; but it was surrendred again upon certain conditions. Peter of Burbon, Governor of Guienne, is taken prisoner by Count de Armignack, who not long after is put to death for incest with his sister, and they were hanged who betrayed Burbon. The Duke of Nemours is condemned for Treason, and beheaded. Anne the King's eldest daughter, is married to Burbon, and Ieane the younger who was crooked and deformed, to Lewis Duke of Orleans, afterward Lewis 12. About this time the Order of Saint Michael was instituted by King Lewis 11 which he sent to the Duke of Brittany, but he refused it, fearing to offend the King of England, and Duke of Burgundy, his true friends: This the King took ill, that a Duke should scorn to be his brother in that Order: This Duke of Burgundy helped to establish King Edward of England in his Throne, to make himself by this the stronger against King Lewis. The Duke of Gelders at this time is impri∣soned by his own son, but set at liberty again by Charls of Burgundy, wherefore Gelders disinherits his son, and makes Burgundy his heir: Who having obtained this rich Dutchie, sends a summe of money to Sigis∣mund Duke of Austria, the Emperors brother, who mortgaged the  Countie of Ferreste for this money: Then he endeavonrs to obtain all the land lying between the Dutchie and Countie; for this cause proposeth the marriage of his daughter to Maximilian the Emperor's son, and labours what he could to be Lieutenant of the Empire; but the Emperor perceiving his ambition and covetousness forsook him, at the meeting in Trevers without bidding him farewell: Yet the Duke prose∣cutes his designe. There was then great contestation about the Bishoprick of Colen; he strives to put in Robert his kisman, who had been driven out by his adver∣saries: This was not well resented by the Emperor, that a stranger  should meddle with the affairs of Germany. Then having called a Diet, he sends aid to Nuz, at that time besieged by Burgundy: In the interim King Lewis by his Ambassadors reconciles Austria and the Switzers, so Si∣gismund by their help recovers his Countie of Ferrette without paying the summe borrowed. At the same time also Rhenatus, or Rhene, grandchild to Rhence, King of Sicily had obtained by right of succession the Dutchie of Lorrain: He by the French King's instigation, declares war against Burgundy, and pillaged a party of Luxemburg which belonged to him. The Burgundian is now full of troubles, for the French King takes divers  of his Towns: Mean while the Constable of France lost his wife, the King's sister, by which he began to be more in danger of the King then before, who for his sisters sake winked at many things. Where∣fore to procure the Duke of Burgundie's favour, he desires the Duke to 1622 send him some Forces, to put
within Saint Quintins, which he promi∣seth  to deliver up to him; but he could not be so good as his word, though Forces were sent. The King invites the Constable to make war upon Henault, which he refused to do, because he knew King Lewis meant to take away his life; the King upon this desires to speak with him; he returns answer, that if the King would swear upon the Cross of Saint La. which is in the Church of Angers, to do him no harm by himself or any other, he would come. Now the Tradition was, that whosoever swore on that Crosse, and perjured himself, should die within a year after; the King would upon no tearms sweare, which increased the Constables jealousie. Mean while the King of England comes with an Army to Callis upon Burgundies invitation, who had now laid siege to Nuz a whole year, but at last he ri∣seth upon the perswasions of the King of England, and the Popes Legat; who procured that during the difference concerning the Bishoprick of Colen, Nuz should remain depositat in the Popes hands, then Burgundy sends his Army to quarter in Lorrain, purposly to vex Duke Rene. Burgundy is invited again by the Constable to seise on Saint Quintin; some English to this purpose are sent before, who being beaten off from the Town with great Ordnance, disheartned King Edward from any further attempt. In the interim whilst Burgundy was gone to Lorrain for his Army, to joyn with the English: a peace is propounded between France and England,  which so much disquieted the Duke of Burgundy, that he sends Letters to the King of England full of gall, accusing his ingratitude towards him, who of a poor banished man had made him King. The French King mean while Courts the Constable with smooth Letters: One time the Constable sent a messenger to the King, who being called into the Kings Chamber, where some of Burgundies chief servants were hid be∣hind the Hangings, told the King openly that the Constable had wrought so with King Edward, and Duke Charls, that they were quite parted, and 1483 that ill language had been given by the Duke to the King: At last the peace between the two Kingdoms is confirmed, in which Burgundy is also  included. After King Edward was gone home, King Lewis and Duke Charls plot together to be revenged on the Constable for abusing them both. He remonstrates to the French King how carefull and faithfull he had always been to preserve the Kings Towns: The King seemingly acknowledgeth it, and commends the Constable, telling his messen∣ger that in his Counsels he wanted the Constables head-piece; which the King meant otherwise then the Messenger understood it: For the King meant to have his head. Therefore it is agreed between the King and Duke, that the French should have his body, and the Burgundians his goods and Saint Quintin. So that the poor Constable is now for∣saken by all his friends, and knows not whether to goe, nor what to  doe. At last after long deliberation, he resolves to cast himself upon the Duke of Burgundy, as being easier to be appeased then the King, there∣fore retires himself into Henault to those that commanded there under the Duke, who was then before Nancy, hoping to take it, and to be Master of all that Dutchie: Thither came some Messengers from the King, demanding according to agreements, the Constable; the Duke who also understood that the King had now an Army upon the borders of Campaigne, was in doubt what to do: To deliver the Constable was Treachery, to retain him, dangerous, and a means to loose his hopes of Nancy, therefore sends order, that on such a day the Constable should be delivered to the French, hoping before that time, Nancy would be ta∣ken, and then he would recall his Warrant; but the
day being come,  the Constable is delivered up, and carried away; and within three houres after, Newes came that Nancy was taken: The Constable who had delivered up Saint Quintin, and other places to the Burgundian, is Beheaded at Paris; But after this, the Dukes affaires never pro∣spered. Sigismund Duke of Austria, had by the help of the Switzers reta∣ken Kerreth from Duke Charls: Wherefore he denounceth Warre a∣gainst them. They humbly desire peace, and promise all faithfull ser∣vice to the Duke, if he will entertain them; They assisted Sigismund, onely to recover his Right; they shew also the poverty of their  Countrey, not worthie to be Conquered; But he goeth on in his resolutions, and would not be disswaded from this Warre; he raiseth a formidable Army, hoping not onely to subjugate the Switzers, but also to make himself great in Italy, because Frederick, Prince of Taren∣tum, son to Ferdinand, King of Naples, was come to marry his daugh∣ter; besides old Rene of Anjou, King of Sicily, had promised to quit his right in Sicily to Duke Charles, and would also put into his hands the Countie of Provence, having now no sonnes of his owne. The Duke of Millan fearing the Burgundian greatness, sends to confirm his League with France. The King of Portugall nearly allied to Duke Charles, comes to France to procure a generall peace. The old King of Sicily also comes to see his Nephew King Lewis. Mean while the Duke of Burgundy takes Lausan∣ne from the Switzers; and shortly after Granson, where he hanged five hundred and twelve Switzers, which so inraged the rest of that Na∣tion; that they raised a great Army, fought and defeated the Duke, took all his Baggage and ammunition, regained Granson, unhanged and buried their Countrey men, and hanged as many Burgundians as they found in the Towne. The Duke having recollected his dispersed Forces, and raised new,  sends to Flanders for a supply of money, which was promised if the Dukes person or Dominions were in danger, but not on a Warre so re∣mote and needless: Notwithstanding he returns with a new Army, and besiegeth Morat. Rene Duke of Lorrain then in France, is made Generall of the Switzers, against Duke Charles their Common Enemy, having ob∣tained money and men from King Lewis; because he was to pass through the Burgundian Territories to the Switzers. A second battel is fought, and a second overthrow given to the Duke, 21 days after the first. The Dukes high spirit could not be broken with this misfortune, but swelled bigger, raging to be twice beaten by a young unskilfull Prince,  and a base beggarly people as he called them; whereas he had beaten so great Potentates heretofore, resolves to have the third incounter with them. In the interim, by the Switzers help, Lorrain is restored again to his own Countrey with great joy: Duke Charles could not be dis∣swaded by the King of Portugall, nor his other Friends, from fighting again with the Switzers, nor beleeve that King Lewis had all this while contrary to the peace aided Lorrain with men and money, obstinate∣ly goeth again with a Fresh Army, and besiegeth Nancy in the dead of Winter, where he lost both his Army and life. The newes of vvhich vvas so vvelcome to the French King, that he gave the Messenger one hundred and fifty Marks of Silver; after his death, the Prince of Orange beeing of great Power and wealthie, puts into the Kings hand, both the Dutchie and Countie of Burgundy, for the flower of the Nobility was killed in the last three
Battels:  so little resistance could be feared: The King comes with an Army into Pic∣cardie, and regains his Towns there, which the Duke had kept from him. Mean while Mary the Duke's heir and onely daughter, sends Ambas∣sadors to the King, desiring him to remove his Army from her borders, and shewing that by the Salique Law of France, she could not be exclu∣ded from the Counties of Flanders, Artois, and the adjacent places, that he ought to protect and not injure a young Lady and Orphan, who would make a fitter match for his son the Dolphin, then the daughter of England can. These Ambassadors having goods and lands in those places which the King had taken, in favour of themseves complyed in some things with the King. Philip Crevecure Governor of Artois is absolved by King Lewis from his Oath of Allegeance to Duke Charls; so that he becomes now servant wholly to the French, by his means the King recovers Arras, and Bou∣longue. The King sends to Princess Mary his Barbar, one Oliver, to per∣swade her privatly to put her self under the protection of France, from whence she is both by the Father and Mother: The Princess was then at Gaunt, of whom the Townesmen were so carefull, that they suffered none to speak with her in privat; wherefore the Barbar being suspected, was commanded to depart thence, who presently retired to Turnay, where he carried himself so cunningly, that he got thirty of the stoutest there to aid him upon all occasions, wherefore he writes secretly to the Captains of the next Garisons, that they fail not to be at Turnay by break of day the next morning, which was done; so one of the Gates was opened, they were let in, and the Town taken. Upon this the Gantois assemble the States of Flanders, who appoint a Counsell for go∣verning the Princess: Then they send Ambassadors to France, to acquaint the King, that the Princess had condescended to be ruled altogether by their Counsell. The King willing to make dissention between the Flemins and the Princess Mary's Counsellers, assures the Gantois that their  Chancellor Hugonet, brought him Letters from their Lady quite contra∣ry to what they said; wherefore when the Ambassadors were returned to Gaunt, the Chancellor Hugonet is accused of Treason, and of the loss of Arras, and so is beheaded. Shortly after this, the Gantois sets at liberty the Duke of Gelders son, who had been imprisoned there by Duke Charls of Burgundy, him they imploy to regain Tournay: But the King's Garison there sallies out upon him, defeats his Forces, and kills him on the place. Arras hoping to be ai∣ded by the Gantois, rebelled against the King, but he shortly reduced them again, and sends away the Inhabitants to another part of the Kingdome, and planted French men there. About this time, Maximilian the Empe∣rors son comes into Flanders, and matcheth with the Princess Mary: A little before the Prince of Orange who had hitherto complied with the French upon hope to recover by the King, his Grandfathers lands detained from him by Duke Charls; and now perceiving he was deluded, raiseth Forces, and fights the Governor, one thousand men are slain on both sides: hereupon a great part of the Countrey revolts from the King, but Charls of Ambois the new Governour sent by the King, recovers in a short time the Towns that had rebelled, and burned Dole; and now the King began to entertain the Switzers, 6000 whereof he kept in pay con∣tinually, and put down the Archers instituted by Charls 7. Great trou∣bles arise in Millan upon the death of Duke Gabeas, who was murthered in a Church: Hele one son very young, Robert of Saint Severin the Duke's next kinsman, labours to perswade the French King to attempt Italy, but he
was unwilling, because the French could never enjoy any thing they got there, nor could he ever send Forces to aid the Florentins his allies, but still they were set upon by Pope Sixtus, and Ferdinand King of Naples; yet to intimidat the Pope, he calls a Gallican Synod at Orleans, to advise about the reestablishing of the Pragmatick Sanction in France, and abolishing the power of sending money thence to Rome for bulls; but here was nothing concluded: The next year they meet again at Lions; mean while the Pope revokes his censures against the Florentins, absolves and makes peace with them. The Kings Ambassa∣dor returning from Florence, goeth for Millan, where he receiveth in the Kings name the homage due to him from Bonne, the Dutchess in behalf of her young son, for Genua, whereof he was then Lord, and which held of the Crown of France. At that time Province fell to the French King by the death of Rene King of Sicily. in whom the male kinde of the house of Anjou failed, where∣fore Anjou and Main return to the King and Province also, by the last will of Rene, of which young Rene Duke of Lorrain complained. In the inte∣rim Maximilian fights the French at Tervenne, defeats them, and be∣comes Master of the place: King Lewis not willing to hazard any more upon uncertain battels, desires peace, which was obtained by the death of Mary the Dutchess, Maximilians wife, who left two young children, Philip and Margaret, the Gantois who undertook the tuition of the young  children, offer the French King, that if he would quit his allyance with England, young Princess Margaret now three years old, should be conveyed into France to be betrothed to the Dolphin, with whom in marriage should be given the Counties of Artois and Burgundy: To this the King assented. The peace is concluded, and the banished Artoisuns returned again to Aras, which since the banishment was new-named French Town: Not long after this, King Lewis being sickly and 60 years old (an age which none of his predecessors since Hugh Capiel the first King 1483 of that race have exceeded) departeth this life, having acted the Fox rather then the Lion all his reign; he was desirous before his death to see  his son Crowned, therefore sends to Reims for the holy oyle, which ar∣rived at Plessis in the Suburbs of Toures, as he was giving up the ghost. CHAP. XXIII. The prosecution of the History under Charls 8. Lewis 12. Francis 1. Henry 2. Francis 2. Charls 8. Henry 3. Henry 4. Lewis 13. from the year 1483.  1633. wherein the lives of the Popes, the affairs of Italy, Spain, and o∣ther bordering Countries are touched. TO Lewis 11. succeeded his son Charls 8. at 13 years of age, whom his Father would suffer none to see, but his do∣mestick servants, nor learn any more Latin but this sen∣tence, qui nescit dissimulare, &c. He that cannot dissemble, cannot reigne. In the beginning of his reigne he calls a Parliament at Toures, where each man had liberty to speak, which was denied by the former King; here complaints are made against him (though dead) for infringing their Liberties, and antient Customs,  with the Taxes laid on them. Among other things that were desired, the Pragmatick Sanction is much urged, and received. It is ordered that Anne the Kings eldest sister should have the charge of his person, and a Counsell of twelve men to rule the Kingdome; some would have
had  Lewis Duke of Orleans, first Prince of the blood, to be Governour; but that mo∣tion was rejected, because he was too young, being twenty four years old onely, and under his mothers tuition: He thinking himself wronged by being re∣jected from the government, endeavoured to force it, therefore began to raise men at his own Town of Orleans, and to make that the seat of the War; which the Townsmen perceiving, shut their Gates against him: so he was forced to retire, and raise forces elsewhere, which when he had done, were present∣ly scattered by the Kings Proclamation: therefore this was called the foo∣lish War. In Britany Peter Laudais the Dukes great Favorite, was extreamly hated,  both for being suspected of the Chancelors death, and for his greatness with the Duke; therefore the Nobility of that Province conspire against Laudais, whom they thought to apprehend in the Dukes Bed-chamber, but he had e∣scaped by a back door; a great commotion is in the Town, thinking the D. had been slain; but it was appeased, by his presence exhibited to the people. Things being quieted, these Noble men that occasioned this uproar, are ba∣nished; and Laudais in greater favour then ever: So that an order is made for pulling down the Houses and Castles of all that had a hand in this conspi∣racy; For effecting of which, an Army is raised: The banished Lords un∣derstanding this, return to Britany, and raise an Army of their faction. But  when the two Armies met, they bethought themselves to be all of the same Country and Language, fling down their Arms in pity, and lovingly im∣brace each other, turning all their hatred against Laudais, whom they under∣stood was in the Castle of Nantes; they resolve then to pull him out of the Dukes Arms; yet by general consent they choose a new Chancelour, whom they sent to acquaint the Duke, that the peoples fury could not bee satisfied without the life of Laudais, yet promising that he should have a fair Triall according to Law. So he was apprehended, imprisoned, and attached of many hainous crimes, for which he was condemned, and hanged, before the Duke knew his Trial was begun, who otherwise meant to have pardoned him;  this exasperated the Duke more then before: so he chooseth a new Chancelor. About this time the Duke of Orleans comes into Britany, with a great Train, which so much dismaid the Lords, that they repaired to the French King; then went out a report, that Orleans meant to repudiate his crooked wife, the Kings sister, whom he was forced to mary, and resolved to have for his wife, Anne the Duke of Britains only daughter and heir. The exiled Lords striving to live securely in their own countrey, provoke the King to raise Arms against the Duke of Britany, promising their best ser∣vice and assistance, which they did so well, that suddenly entring Britany, they caused many Towns to yeild to the King, taking many prisoners, of  whom they exacted great ransoms. The Britains that were for the Duke, having made a Body of six hundred Horse, and sixteen thousand Foot, were marching against the Enemy, to relieve Plermel, then besieged; but in their march, one of the Army stood up, and wished them to consider that their Duke was altogether ruled by the French, and yet they were marching against the French; and that therefore it were best every man should return to his own home, and live quietly. Upon this they all disbanded. Plermel is taken; so is Venues, without blow. Nantes is besieged forty six days; from which they rise, having done nothing, and with fire and sword they rage over all the countrey, driving away all the cattle; at which the Britain Lords  murmure, saying, they were better return to their Duke, who had proffered pardon to them, and enjoyment of their goods, then to be thus used by the French. So then they began daily to fall off from the Kings army Divers Towns also revolt from the King, to the Duke; some of which are re-ta∣ken again by the French. This miserable condition of
Britany made the  Duke send Embassadors to the King, being then eighteen years of age. They found him at Angers, to whom Count Dunois remonstrates the miserable con∣dition of Britany, and that the Duke never intended any War against France, 1488 but was contented rather to suffer his countrey to be over-run by the Kings army, then to make resistance. They confess the Duke of Orleans, and Prince of Orange, had been in Britany, not to raise arms against the King, as was falsly given out, but to visit and comfort, the Duke being much afflicted for the untimely death of his eldest daughter, which they were bound to doe in respect of their near consanguinity. They grant also, that the Britains took Arms to relieve Plermel, but when they understood it was the Kings Army that besieged the Town, they presently disbanded: Besides they say, that the Duke had restored to the exiled Lords, all their Lands again, therefore the Duke humbly desired Peace; which the King granted; yet he put it off a while, till he saw what became of Tongeres, which was besieged by English Britains; the Town at last was surrendred upon Articles, that the Garrison should depart with their lives and goods. Then followed a Skirmish, be∣tween the French and Britains, in which one thousand two hundred on both sides were killed, the Duke of Orleans, and Prince of Orange are taken pri∣soners. At last the Peace is concluded, upon this condition, that the French shall retain what Towns they had taken in Britany. Shortly after, the Duke died, whose only daughter King Charles of France afterward maried, having 1491 first put away his former wife, Maximilians daughter, which was one wrong, and the other was, that he would mary with Maximilian's Spouse. About this time, Christopher Columbus, a Sea-man of Genua, understood by a Shipwrackt Mariner, that in the Western Sea there were some Lands; 1492 wherefore he on the King of Spains charges, undertakes a Voiage thither, where he discovers some Islands. Mean while King Charles is now in hope to ob∣tain Sicily, and Apulia, being heir by the last Will of Anjou, whose race was now extinct. The banished Neapolitans, Lewis Sfortia, and Pope Alexander, now angry with Alphonsus, incourage King Charles to make an Expedition  into Italy, which he undertakes, with an Army of twenty thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse, having no opposition; for Maximilians anger was pacified for the losse of the daughter of Britany, by marying with Blanca Maria, sister to Iohn Galeas, Duke of Millan. Ferdinand of Spain, was be∣holding to the French for restoring Perpenian; the cities of Italy were not a∣gainst him; the Florentins help him with mony; Iohn Galeas Duke of Millan was now dead, and his Uncle Sfortia succeeded, who made no resistance; only Pope Alexander being reconciled to Alphonsus, entertains his son Ferdinand, with his whole Army at Rome: But understanding that all things succeeded well with Charles, and that he had gotten Viterbium, he dismisseth the Nea∣politans,  and receiveth Charles into the city; having first for safety retired to the Castle of S. Anhelo, being guilty of his own crimes, which he redeems by large Bribes given, and promises made to King Charles, to whom all the 1494 kingdom of Naples submits, except the Castle, which held out a while. Al∣phonsus being hated by his people, resignes the kingdome to his son Ferdi∣nand, and betakes himself to a Monastic life: but the Italians could not brook long the French pride and rapacity; therefore Alphonsus and the Pope, soli∣cite Ferdinand, the Venetians, and Cesar, to make a League; in which, Lewis Sfortia is included, for he was now angry with the French for the loss of No∣varia, taken from him by Lewis Duke of Orleans. Charles hearing what pre∣parations were against him, hastneth out of Italy, having exhausted the king∣dom  of Naples; but before his departure, Ferdinand of Spain had fortified Rhegium in Calabria; and shortly after the Arragonians, with some Sicilian Forces, recover all Calabria, and Apulia. Charles his Army now consisted but of nine thousand, a part whereof he sent to Sena, for a Garison, and some
Troops he dismisseth for Genua. The Florentîns now were angry with him, because he would not restore the Towns they put in his hands; the Venetians and Sfortians fight him, but are worsted. Charles indeed got the Victory; but shortly after lost all his booty, being caried away by the Mercenary Greeks, under the Venetian: so the French return home, having brought nothing with them but the Neapolitan disease, which the Spaniards conveyed thither from America. Novaria is besieged by the confederates, where two thousand French lost their lives by famine. At last the Town is surrendred, upon con∣dition the besieged should have their lives, and peace should be made with Sfor∣tia, and the Venetians. A Peace indeed was made, but of no force; for Sfor∣tia  did not according to the Articles send aid into France, but rather assisted Ferdinand. Nor would the Venetians admit any other conditions then these, to wit, that Charles should make War against the Turk, and leave the King∣dom of Naples to Ferdinand, he paying an yearly Tribute. The French that were left in Italy, fell off to Ferdinand, to whom they delivered up their strong Holds; so that of twenty five thousand, few returned home, and those very infirm. Ferdinand at the siege of Cajeta, died of a Feaver, having lost his father not long before, whose brother Frederick undertook the government of Naples; so that in two years Naples saw five Kings; to wit, Ferdinand, Alphonsus, Ferdinand 2. Charles of France, and Frederick; many disasters befell the House of Spain in a short time. Ferdinand of Spain his onely son died, his sons wife, Maximilians daughter, is brought to bed of a dead child, his son in Law Alphonsus, the King of Portugals son, is killed with a fall from his Horse; his daughter, who was maried to Emanuel, cousin German of Alphonsus now named, died in child-bed: so the inheritance falls to Ioan, who was maried to Philip. Nor did King Charles prosper with his unlawfull mariage; for he left never a child to inherit his Crown: He died suddenly of an Apoplexy. At Amboise his death was foretold by Savonarila, whom the Florentins burned, for being too free in reproving the vices of the Clergy. At 1493 this time Pope Alexander 6. sate in Rome, who tyrannized over the Cardinals, which had sold him the suffrages; he made War upon the Ursins, and shortly after received them into favour. To Charles 8. succeeded his cousin German Lewis 12. who laid claim not onely to Naples, but to Millan also, by his Grandmother, the daughter of Iohn Galeas; therefore he makes a League with the Pope, Venetian, Florentin, and Ferdinand King of Spain, against Lewis Sfortia of Millan, and Frederick of Naples. It was then agreed, that if Lewis obtained Millan, Cremona should be delivered to the Venetians, and that Cesar Borgia, the Popes son, who by marying Carlotta, the French Kings Cousin, had laid aside his Cardinals Hat, should obtain Aemilia, Flaminia, Picenum, and Umbria, to the ruine of the  right and ancient owners, and that the King of Spain and France, should divide the Kingdome of Naples between them. Thus Charles, with a puis∣sant Army, drives Sfortia out of his Dukedom: so Borgia by turning out, or killing the Princes of Aemilia, and Hetruria, obtains a large dominion in Italy, under whose tyranny many execrable oppressions and villanies were perpe∣trated. This Pope Alexander bestowes on Ferdinand of Spain, the West, and on Iohn of Portugal, the East-Indies: to Iohn in Portugall, succeeded Ema∣nuel, son to his Uncle Ferdinand. Americus Vesputius, a Florentin, discovered then the continent of America, so called from him, for the use of Ferdinand of Spain. Sfortia with the Pope, and Venetians, desires Cesars help against  the insulting French; he upon promise of mony, marcheth unto Italy, but for want of pay, speedily returns again, and makes peace with King Lewis, who entring Millan, in great splendor, was called Duke of Lombardy; but Ascanius the Cardinal, Sfortia's brother, in short time recovers what was lost, by reason the insubrians could not endure the French insolencies. King
Lewis upon this raiseth a new Army, among which were six thousand Switzers Cesar counselled Sfortia to use no Helvetians, but Savoyens in his Army, which wholesome advice was rejected, and he thereby ruined; for when the two Ar∣mies met, the Sfortian Switzers would not fight against the French Switzers, their Countrey men, but shook hands, and left Sfortia for a prey to the French, who took him prisoner, as the Venetians did his brother the Cardinal, both these pined away in a French prison. 1500 Pope Alexander this year keeps his Jubilee, and sets up again the Angel on his Castle at Rome, which the Thunder had beat down: the next year after, 1501 divers Crosses were seen, some of a bloodie colour, upon the garments and  skins of people, fore-runners of the troubles of Europe, and of great sicknes∣ses, which shortly after followed, to the destruction of many thousands. Di∣vers Isles in the East-Brasil, and Calecut in the West are detected. The Sa∣racens are expelled Spain, and Ferdinand is honoured by the Pope, with the title of Catholic. Lewis of France, and Ferdinand of Spain, send Forces against Frederick of Naples, whom they quickly defeated; but the two con∣quering Kings could not accord long, they fell out about dividing, and boun∣ding 1502 their shares in Naples, till at last the Spaniards beat the French quite out of that Kingdom and City, having first overthrown them in a Battel, and starved the remainder in Cajeta. So the Spaniard obtains all, and for a Tri∣bute 1504  sends every year thence a white Horse to the Pope, who was not long af∣ter poisoned by a mistake of the Cup-bearer, who presented him that Cup, which he had provided for Adrian the Cardinal, and some others. Borgias by causing himself to be sowed within the belly of a Mule, lately unbowel∣led, discussed the force of the poison, but could not perfectly recover his health. Alexander died the 11 year of his Pontificate. Borgia seizeth upon all his Treasure, and besets the Vatican with twelve thousand armed men, to force the Cardinals to vote for him. Presently the people take Arms; Bor∣gias being yet infirm, is caried thence in a Litter, and Piccolominy is elected, and named Pius 3. who died the thirtieth day after his Election, as it is thought of poison. Borgias is detained in the Castle of S. Angelo. Cardinal Iulian is elected, vvho calls himself Iulius 2, a man fitter for Pauls sword, then Pe∣ters keys: He strips Borgias of all his Towns, Castles, and Wealth; and at last gives him his liberty, who going to Naples, was taken by Consalvus, and sent over to Spain. Thence having escaped prison, he goeth to the King of Navarre, and is killed in the Cantabrian War. Iulius desiring to enlarge the Churches patrimony, thrusts Beutivolos out of Bononia, and conspires against the Venetians with Cesar, Spain, France, Ferrara, and Mantua; but afterward upon their humble submission, vvithout Cesars knowledge, and against the French Kings will, he departs from the League and makes peace vvith the Venetians, and vvithall falls upon Alphonsus, Duke of Ferrara, for siding with the French. Cesar and King Lewis raging at the Popes insolencie, by means of the Cardinals, call a Synod at Pisae, whether he is cited to appear; and withall they take from him Bononia, and Mirandula. He again to cross these Cardinals, convocates a Synod at Rome, and excommunicates those that refuse to come; he stirs up also Ferdinand against Cesar and the French, and calls him off from his African Victories, who having imposed a Tribute upon the Numidians, transports his Army into Italy, where he took in some strong Forts; with him Henry 8. of England, is perswaded to join, being the Spa∣niards son in law; but Henry intends to recover his right in Guien: on the o∣ther  side the Spaniard thrusts Iohn of Navarre out of his kingdome, because being in League with France, he denyed passage to the Spaniard, and his Ar∣my. Pope Iulius also calls the Switzers into Italy, and makes Iohn Medices, banished out of Florence, his Legate; he caused a rumour to be spread, that Maximilian, and the Venetians, were agreed purposely that the Brixians, who
hated the French, might deliver the Town to the Venetians, which they did, not without a great massacring of the French: But shortly after, the French recover the Town again, kill the Venetian Garison, and make a sacrifice of the Townsmen. King Lewis finding his kingdome vexed on both sides by the Spanish and English, he resolves to make Italy the seat of the War; therefore he besiegeth Ravenna; the Pontificians and Spaniards come to raise the siege; a great battel is fought on Easter day, which proved victorious to the Cesari∣ans and French, who slew nine thousand of the Enemy, and lost three thou∣sand of their own party. The Viceroy of Naples fled, Iohn Medices is ta∣ken, Foxius the French General, was killed, in whose Funeral eighteen Co∣lours  taken from the Spaniards, were caried; divers Towns submit to the French. 1511 Not long after this, Pope Iulius causeth the League between Cesar and the French, to be broken. Maximilian sides with Iulius and Ferdinand, he rai∣seth an Army of Switzers, who were incensed against the French, for killing of their Agent; by their means the French lose Millan, which they had pos∣sessed thirteen years, and bring back Maximilian Sfortia, the son of Lewis. The French King is proscribed by the Pope, who notwithstanding returns to Millan with a fresh Army, which was utterly defeated by the Switzers, and the French driven quite out of Italy. The Fathers of the Councel of Pisa, for  fear of the Switzers, remove to Lions: Mean while the Pope and his party seize upon divers Cities of Italy, by the Helvetian help. But when Venice re∣fused to restore to Cesar, Verona and Vicentia, then the Pope makes a League with him against the Venetians, and they with Lewis against the Pope and Spa∣niard. But when Iulius saw that the Spaniard and French were like to agree, 1513 he died for grief; to whom succeeded Iohn Medices, the Popes Legat, who had been banished Florence, and taken prisoner in the late wars at Ravenna. He is now called Leo the tenth; it was this Iulius who flung Peters keys into Tibris, and drew Pauls sword. Leo gave way that the stones which were hewn by day, for repairing Saint Peters Church, begun by Iulius, should be cari∣ed away in the night for the great Palace of the Medices at Florence. He procured Lewis 12. to leave off all Reformation of the Church, and to subscribe to the Councel of Lateran; he reconciled the Cardinals that fell off from Iuli∣us; he was much indebted to his sister, but paid her out of the indulgence mony. About this time Lewis makes Peace with England, repudiates his wife Anne of Britany, and marieth another, and shortly after died. To Lewis succeeded by the Salic Law, Francis Valois, his next kinsman and son in Law: He enters into League with England and Venice, and obtains Millan, having first defeated the Switzers: the Pope having lost Parma and Placentia, makes peace with Francis, and condescends to confirm by his Bul,  whomsoever the King should name in France, for Bishop or Abbot. King Ferdinand the Catholick, being dead, and his heir Charles, Prince of Belgium; Maximilian knowing how needful the friendship of France was, gives off the Venetian war, and makes peace with Francis. The Pope takes Urbin from Francis Feltrius; causeth Petruccius the Cardinal for plotting against him, to be strangled, and those that knew the plot, to be deposed: For compleating the Senate, he makes at one time thirty one Cardinals, by which means he enriched himself. Upon the falling off of the Switzers from the French, Mil∣lan was re-taken, and restored to Francis Sfortia, Maximilians brother. The Pope recovers Parma and Placentia, with joy of which, or rather with poison,  he suddenly died; to whom succeeded Hadrian 6. of Utricht, Charls Cesars Tutor; but the next year after his Election, he died. King Francis upon the commotions of Spain, regained almost all the kingdom of Navarre, and sends great Armies into Italy, for recovering of Millan, which he took, and is not long after taken himself. Having besieged Papia, and separated his
1525  Army, by the advice of Pope Clement 7 who succeeded Hadrian, the Pope for his covetousness, is besieged in his Castle at Rome; his Palace in the Vati∣can is plundred; Rome by the Duke of Burbon, for the Popes perfidiousness to Cesar, is taken, and exposed with all her vvealth, Priests and Temples, to the fury of the soldiers. The Pope being famished, yeildeth to vvhat condi∣tions Cesar pleased: Mean time the Florentins made themselves free, by cast∣ing 1527 out the Medices. Genua submits to the French, who besiege the Viceroy of Naples, being then in Naples; the Viceroy of Sicily is defeated by Auria; but whilst the French vvere in hope to take Naples, they vvere so vvasted vvith sickness, which swept away 20000 of them, that they were forced to  be gone who vvere left; their General also Lautrecus died. To Pope Clemens succeeded Alexander Farnesius, who took the name of 1528 Paul 3. he excommunicated and proscribed Henry 8. of England; calls the Councel of Trent, and urgeth Charles the Emperour to suppress the Lutherans in his Dominions. To Paul succeeded Iohn Maria Montanus, who called himself Iulius 3d. King Francis holds a Treaty at Cambrey, vvhere his ran∣som is paid, and his hostages restored; he instigateth the Turk against Charles the Emperour, and about the same time advanceth Learning in Paris, by al∣lowing and maintaining new Professors in that University. He makes vvar 1529 vvith the Savoyen, and loseth his son the Dolphin, vvhom the Earl of Mon∣tecucullo poisoned, for vvhich he was drawn in pieces vvith vvilde Horses; then he makes Truce vvith the Pope and Emperour for ten years. The Rot∣chellers rebell against him, because he placed a Garison there; then he invades Piemont, Luxenburg, and Roussillon because his Ambassadors vvere killed as 1538 they were going that way, to make a League with the Turk. He takes many Towns in Piemont, having fought a great battel there vvith the Imperialists, of whom fifteen thousand were slain. He recovers Bollen, and invades England, with which at last he made Peace, and then died, about three months after the death of Henry the 8. of England, whose differences were reconciled a little before; he reigned 33 years. 1547 To King Francis succeeded his son Henry 2. by Katharin Medices: He falls  upon the Imperial Territories, and takes divers Towns; the Imperialists out of Belgium over-run and waste Campania; the Pope for grief that the Catho∣lick cause in England died with Queen Mary, falls suddenly sick, of which di∣sease he died; to whom succeeded Marcellus 2d, who the 22 day after his Ele∣ction, died of an Apoplexy. Petrus Caraffa succeeded, and called himself Paul 4. About these times Ferdinand Cortez in twenty years space, subdued 1551 all the parts of America about Mexico; Varga and Pizarus, all Peru, with the City of Cusco: so did the Portugals take divers places in the East-Indies. Charles the Emperour being dead, the French renue the war with his son Philip; therefore a great Army is sent under Francis Duke of Guise, into Campania and Naples: at S. Quintin a cruel battel is fought, in which the French are utterly defeated, and most of their Nobility taken, upon which the Town presently 1557 surrendred. Burdeaux rebels for the taxes laid on them, but the Constable forces them to submit, and to burn their priviledges. The ame Constable appeaseth a rebellion in Gascony, raised upon the custom of Salt. About this time died Henry of Navarre, vvhose son in Law Vendosme, feizeth on a part of Navarre. Mean while Casal is taken by the French, but are beat at sea by the Belgians. The French besiege Doway, but in vain, and are defeated at Grave∣ling: At last Piemont and Savoy being restored to the Duke, the Dolphin ma∣ried  to the Queen of Scotland, and peace made with Spain, by the mariage of Elizabeth, King Henries daughter to King Philip. In the Nuptial solemnities, 1559 King Henry at a Tilt, is wounded in the right eye by Montgomery, of which he died in great torture, God letting him feel some part of those tortures, with which he tormented the Protestants: he died the forty third year of his age,
and of his reign the thirteenth: not long after died Pope Paul 4th, who set up the Inquisition at Rome, against the Lutherans, but after his death, the people in a tumult, brake open the prison door, and let out the pri∣soners, burnt the house, and for three days together, abused the Popes Marble Statue, and all Monuments of the Caraffae in the City vvere de∣faced. To Henry 2d, succeeded his son Francis 2d, who though he was young, yet was beginning to be as cruel against the Hugonets, as his father was, by burning Annas Burgius his body, after it had been hanged: At which, the Protestants were so incensed, that they conspire to seize on the King,  then at Amboise, and to cary him away; but the plot was discovered and prevented. Lewis Burbon Prince of Conde, is suspected to have had a hand in this plot, therefore is imprisoned: But whilst at Orleans, the King and his Peers there assembled, were about to bring him to his Trial, the King fell sick and died, not having reigned full two years; his mother is made Regent. To Pope Paul 4. succeeded Iohn Angelus Medices, who took the name of Pius 4. King Philip of Spain, causeth 28 Gentlemen of great families, to 1560 be burnt for their Religion: He giveth 30000 Duckats towards the Prin∣ting of the Bible called Complatensis. To Francis 2d, succeeded his brother Charles 9. under whom the Protestants  enjoyed some quietness, till Beza, Martyr, and Marlorat, had exasperated the Pontificians by their writings; then Pens were turned into Swords. Francis of Guise stood up for the Papists, and Lewis of Conde for the Hugonets. A battel is fought, in which were slain on both sides about nine thousand. Conde was taken prisoner, and Guise shortly after killed by a Pistoll shot. Up∣on this, the Queen Regent gives way for the Protestant Nobility to exercise their Religion in their houses, and the people in the suburbs. Pius 4. died, to whom succeeded Michael Chisserius, called by the name of Pius 5. Conde 1562 against the promise made him when he was taken, is shot to death. Shortly after at Monconture, another battel is fought, in which the Hugonets were defeated, but not subdued; for they bore Arms so long in Gascony, and took so many Towns, that at last they forced a peace for themselves. Mean while the King of Spain marieth the fourth time, with his sisters daughter. The Duke of Alba tyrannizeth in Belgium, and turns out the English thence. The Netherlanders weary of oppression, begin to vindicate their liberty. Pius 5. dieth, to whom succeeded Gregory 13. France having rested a while from Civil broils, falls to Clandestin butcheries. At Paris the Nuptials of Henry of Navarre, with Margaret the Kings sister, are so∣lemnized and besprinkled with Protestant blood: The chief Protestants are invited to the Wedding; suddenly by command from King Charls the ninth, all the Protestants in Paris are massacred, without respect of age or sex. Caspar Castilios head is sent as a present to the Pope, and letters from the King, who writes, that in few days he put to death above seventy 1572 thousand: For this slaughter was not only in Paris, but also in other Towns of France. This Massacre was committed on Saint Bartholomews day, betimes in the morning. The next year after, Henry King Charles his brother, besiegeth Rochel, possessed by the protestants; but being elected King of Poland, he leaves the Siege, and goeth into Poland; where having reigned six months, he is called home to possess the Crown of France by 1574 the death of his brother Charles, who reigned fourteen years. Philip of Spain, understanding that his sonne Charles was grieved for the cruelties exercised on the Netherlanders, puts him in prison, where he lost his life, upon suspition that he intended Treason against his father. Pope Gregory reformed the Calender, which occasioned some troubles in divers places; but in France, by Proclamation, it is
commanded  generally to be received: Divers Colledges of Jesuits are erected under Pope Gregory, and in Rome for strangers; he was suddenly taken with the squinzy, which suffocated him in two howres. Henry of Navarre strives to have a Na∣tional Synod of Protestants, for settling of their differences; for this cause he sends his Ambassador to the Princes, who gave him good words, but nothing could be done by reason of the troubles of those times. The Cardinals of 1583 Burbon and Guise, with other Pontifician Ring-leaders, conspire against Henry of Navarre, utterly to destroy him. A great Army therefore is raised; Hen∣ry procures for his assistance, out of Germany, 20 thousand Foot, and five thousand Horse: but these were wholly overthrown by the Guisians, being first forsaken by the Helvetians. The same year King Henry 3d, was so curbed by the Guisian faction, that his subjects began to sleight him; wherefore to be rid of their power, he under shew of great friendship and serious business, in∣vites the Guisian brothers to a Conference, whom he presently caused to be slain, and the rest of their confederacy to be imprisoned. Katherin Medices, 1588 the Kings mother, called by some the fourth fury of France, as being the fo∣menter of seditions, died with grief. The Parisians declare Charles Main brother to the Guises, Governour of Paris, and of the Isle of France, leaving out the Kings name: but the Sorbonists were against Main. He having raised an Army, declares he will maintain the Roman Religion. Lions, Orleans, Ro∣han,  and other places, side with him. King Henry was assisted by the King of Navarres forces, and the Nobility; by which the Pontifician Army is defea∣ted, and Paris so strictly besieged, that they were like to starve within. When in the mean while Iacob Clement, a Dominican, under pretence of speaking with the King, run him in the belly with a poisoned knife, whom the King killed immediatly with the same knife. King Henry died of his wound with∣in fourteen howres, having first named for his heir Henry of Navarre; to whom the Nobility swore Allegiance, conditionally, that he would permit Liberty of Conscience; then he falls presently to weakning the Guisian fa∣ction, and taking in of Towns. In the time of King Henry the third, the  order of the Holy Ghost was instituted. The King of Navarre and Conde are by the Pope excommunicated: Conde at last is poisoned, and Navarre ex∣cluded from succession. The Battel of Courtrey is fought, in which Navarre was victor, and the Duke Ioyeuse slain. 1589 In Henry 4. King of Navarre, after seven Civil Wars, the Crown of France is transferred to the House of Burbon, which Henry as yet could not quietly enjoy; for De Main troubles him, till he was defeated at Arque. The Parliament of Rohan pronounce all those Traitors, who side with the King. The Popes quarrel with him for his Religion; to wit, Gregory 13. and his suc∣cessor Felix Montaltus, or Sixtus 5. who from obscurity, was elevated to this  high dignity: yet he woud be at no charges in relieving Paris, when it was again besieged by the King, fearing to make Spain, (which now gaped for France) too great. Yet King Henry out of pity to his people, permits Alex∣ander Farnesius, to cary in provisions. Pope Sixtus having procured the Spa∣niards displeasure, for not affording his assistance to them, fell into a deep melancholy, and so died, having before shewed great joy for the conversion of the Marquess of Baden to the Roman faith; which Marquess, Iames by name, shortly after died of a dyssentery, in the flower of his youth. Presently Iohn Baptista Castanaeus, is elected, and called Urban 7. whose election was 1590 accompanied with an Earthquake that shook Austria, Moravia, and Bohemia, with an extraordinary dry Summer, that the Rivers were like scalding water This Urban being taken with a feaver, died within thirteen days, leaving the Chair to Nicholas Sfondratus, or Gregory 14. he was born the seventh month after his conception, and died the tenth month after his election. About which time the plague and famin so raged in Italy, that at Rome in one year
there died sixty thousand people: yet this Gregory spent on the French wars, five hundred thousand Crowns of the publick Treasury, and forty thousand out of his own coffers. King Henry perceiving that Farnesius would not fight, caused his Army to take up their Winter Quarters all about Paris. Farnesius after four furious assaults, takes Corbilium upon Sene, which by the King is a∣gain retaken. The Spaniards are defeated by the Momorancies, and the Sa∣voyen prepartions in Province, hindred by Digvier. The Germanes plunder Lorrains Country, and are now on the borders of France. Parma returns to the Netherlands, having enough to do with Grave Maurice. The Popes Army under Sfondrat, the Popes Nephew, did no great matter; for Parma not be∣ing  able to come and join with them, they retreated, upon the report of Pope Gregories death; to whom succeeded Iohannes Antonius of Piemont, called by the name of Innocent 9. he sate but two months, and was of the Spanish fa∣ction: to him succeeded Hippolitus Aldobrandinus, or Clement the 8. King 1592 Henry besiegeth Rohan, which at last is relieved by the Duke of Parma. Di∣vers skirmishes and encounters there were, to the loss of much blood. Parma leaving the greatest part of his Army in France, returns to Belgium, and de∣ludes the King by delays. At last as he was returning now the third time to drive the King from the siege of Paris, he was taken in Artois, with sudden and sharp tortures in his body, of which he died: Maurice strives to take the Sluce but could not; yet he takes Steinvick, and some other Towns. King Henry sets out a Remonstrance, whereby he declares that he is no enemy to the Ro∣man Religion, as the world thought, but that his intentions and indeavours were to maintain and preserve it in all places, where hitherto it hath continued; for this cause the Parliament of Turon condemns the Popes Bull, in excom∣municating King Henry for heresie, and causeth it to be burnt by the Hang∣man, as a seditious and impious Libel: The Popes Legat is also commanded to appear before them, that he might be tried by Law, and receive due punish∣ment for his temerity. The French being weary of their Civil wars, an assembly of the Guisian fa∣ction,  or the holy Leaguers, is called, for electing of a new King. Some were for Isabella, the Infanta of Spain; but that election was against the Salic Law: others for Ernestus the Arch-Duke, Governour of Belgium, Farnesius the Duke of Parma being dead; which Ernestus was also appointed Husband for the Infanta: but this motion was generally rejected. Others again, will have him to be King, whom the Spaniard shall nominate, and that he shall mary the Infanta. Henry son to Guise that was killed, is nominated King by some; Main seeing they could not agree about the Election, procured three months Truce with Navarre, to gain so much time for settling the kingdom. This Truce was disliked by the Popes Legat. Upon this the Nobility perswade  the King to profess the Roman Faith, shewing it was against the Salic Law, that an Heretick should be King of France, and against reason, that he should be called the most Christian King, who was the chief Patron of Heresie, and an enemy to that Christian profession which hath continued in France hitherto since the beginning of Christianity. The King fearing all would forsake him, if he continued a Calvinist, desires a Conference with the Bishops, and other Doctors of the Church. At length after five hours discourse, the King in white, with a shining Taper before him, goeth to S. Dennis Church, where being asked by the Bishop of Biturix, what his desire was; answered, his de∣sire was to be received into the bosom of the Catholick, Apostolick, Roman Church, and to live and die in that religion: So being led to the Altar, he is absolved, to the great indignation of the Popes Legat; and the Monks, esteeming this reconciliation of no validity: but to the great joy, and con∣tent of the people. The King sends Lewis Gonzaga, Ambassador to the Pope, who in all humility and submission, desires the Popes Benediction:
who an∣swers,  that he shall never be perswaded the Kings reconciliation to the Church to be sincere, till an Angell from heaven come down, and tell it in his eare; but the Guisians to pacifie Pope Clement, cause the Counsell of Trent, purely, and without any condition to be proclaimed and obser∣ved, and strengthen their own side as well as they could; but some Monks suborne one Barterius to kill the King, who was prevented at Melodunum, 1594 and put to death: The Truce drawing to an end, the Pope, Spaniard, and Mayne, are devising new plots. Mean while Meux, Orleans, Bourges, and others fall off from the League to the King, who is inaugurate at Chartres by Thuanus Bishop there. In the absence of Mayne, Brissacus Governor of Paris openeth the gates and delivers the Towne to the King with such order and care, that there was no killing nor plundering at all; The Garrison is dismissed without the least affront offered them. Rowen followes the example of Paris, so doth Poictiers and many more Townes; but other places that refused, are forced by Arms to submit. Henry of Guise reconciles himself to the King, who perceiving that the Spaniard did still foment Factions in his Kingdome, upon the perswasions of Henry of Bullion, he sends supply of men and arms to Grave Maurice against the Spaniards. Shortly after one Iohn Castel being perswaded the King was yet an Heretick, and not true∣ly  absolved, gets into the crowd at Paris where the King was, whom he struck at with his knife, and beat out two of his teeth, intending to have stabbed him in the throat: The fellow is presently apprehended and examined, he confessed his intention, and that he was bred in the Je∣suits Colledg at Paris, but was sorry he had not killed that Heretick King; whereupon he is condemned and tortured to death. The Jesuits are banisht France, and it's made Treason for any to send their children out of the Kingdome to be instructed by them. The young mans father is banished for 9 years, and his goods confiscate, his house is levelled with the ground, and a Pyramide of Marble erected with a golden Cross,  and the 4 Cardinall vertues on it, as a perpetuall monument of this bold fact. The Protestants Pattent is also renewed, whereby they are made capable of all honors and dignities equally with Catholicks. Ernestus be∣ing 1595 dead at Brussels, Peter Gusman undertakes the Government of Belgium, and regains Hoi, lately taken by Henry. He fights a great battel with Bullion, near Durlan which he takes with divers other Townes. After this the King is entertained at Lions with all solemnity, and at Rome by the intercession of Bishop Perrone, and many other Prelats whom he had sent thither, he obtains the Apostolicall Benediction, and is absolved from his Curse; so being received into the bosome of the Church, is honored with the Title of [most Christian] Charles Mayne, Henry of Savoy, Ioyeuse, and other great men are reconciled to the King, who freely par∣dons them, and undertakes to pay their debts, but to the grief and op∣pression of the people. Cassal Consul of Marsylles is slaine, for inten∣ding to deliver up that Citie to the Spaniard: So all now is quieted ex∣cept Britany. 1597 A peace between France and Spain is at last concluded. Mercurian with his Spanish Faction in Britany submits to King Henry, to whom King Phi∣lip restores Callis, Capel, and divers other places, and he to Philip the Prin∣cipality of Carolotons; and so all old quarrels are composed. Savoy hereaf∣ter  is to remain free of it self, but whereas the difference about the do∣minion of Salusses between France and Savoy, was not yet decided, but left to the Popes arbitration; two years after the War is renewed, in which the Duke loseth his Cisalpin Jurisdiction, his Fort of Saint Catherin which 1599 threatned Geneva, is
demolished, and divers other Towns surrendred to  the French. A Divorce being made between the King and his Queen Margaret, sister of Henry the second, because of their consanguinity, to which Divorce she willingly assented, onely desiring that in stead of the Kings Wife, she might be called his Sister: I say, this Divorce being made long since, the King is desired to marie again for procreation. Therefore Mary the daughter of Francis Duke of Florence, is betrothed to him, by whom he had Lewis, with other children. The King was by Peronne accused of divers falsquotations in Philip Mornays Books, purposely to disgrace him and his profession: The edict of Nans concerning the Pro∣testants Priviledges, procured much hatred against the King, by the Pon∣tificats; 1600 therefore divers desperat plots against him were contrived, and  discovered, for which conceived and intended regicide Charls Ridicove of Gaunt, Peter Angere, and Nicholas English justly suffered death. At this time was seen in Paris, a Cornuted Monster, some Virgins also in France and Germany, were known to endure hunger three years and more, a strict Law is made against Duels, and death threatned to the challenger. To Clemens the 8 at Rome, succeeded Alexander Medices, called by the name of Leo, who died 25 days after, his successor was Leo Camillus, or Paul 5. Duke Ioyeuse entreth the Order of Capuchins, after a while takes arms, and then returns to his Monastery. Cardinal Aldebrandin comes into France to make the Duke of Savoys peace, whom the French had subdued for not resto∣ring  the Marquisat of Salusses, according to the Articles of peace at Ver∣vque. Marshall Byron intendeth Treason against the King, is sent for, and denieth all that Finus his accuser laid against him; but the proofs were 1602 so manifest, that he was condemned and privatly executed; on the Scaf∣fold he opened his breast, and shewed the wounds he had received in the Kings Cause. By Father Cottons means the Jesuits are restored to certain places. Count Avergne is imprisoned for new practises: After this the Duke of Orleans is born to the King, and the year after was born the Kings third son, the Duke of Anjou, and two years after, Mary was born, 1607 who married to King Charles of Great Britain. King Henry after he had setled his Dominions, and maintained them divers years in peace, ha∣ving placed a great Army upon the confines of Germany, which caused 1609 divers suspitions among the Catholick party, is at last murthered by Ra∣villiac in his Coach, as he was viewing the preparation that was making for his Queens reception, who was Crowned the day before: He was stabbed twice in the heart; the murtherer being apprehended would confess nothing; neither for faire words nor tortures, nor did he shew any signes of sorrow, affirming that he was set on by none but by inward 1610 motions, and the dictates of his conscience, having put on this resolution three yeare a goe: So he was put to death by exquisit tortures of bur∣ning pincers, and his body torne in sunder by horses: In this Kings time  the making of silk Stuffs was brought into France. The Jesuits Pyramid was demolished, and a fountain erected in its place. The Order of Car∣melit Nuns is set up by Catherin of Longevil in the Suburbs of Saint Iacob. A French Colonie is transported into Canada in America. King Henry the fourth of France being dead, his Queen is made Regent during her sons Minority, who is publickly proclaimed heir to the Crown of France, and so the great Army is disbanded, which some thought had been intended for Cleve,, others for Artois, others for the Empire. The Queen Regent brought much obloqui and envy on herself, by preferring  Marquis Ancre her favourit; and of the Florentin Familie, before all the Princes of France: It was said he used inchantments, he held indeed the young King, the Queen, and the whole kingdome in subjection: Hee exhausted the
Exchequer, made Laws, and unmade them as he pleased: Which caused Henry of Burbon, Prince of Conde, Henry of Bullion, Nivern, and others to forsake the Court in discontent, and to raise Tumults. The Decrees of the Counsell of Trent at last are divulged, by the impor∣tunity of the Italian and Pontificiall Partie; but the Parliament of Paris ordered that the writings of Mariana, Suarez, Belarmin and others con∣cerning the Popes power of deposing Kings, should be suppressed. Cardi∣nal Perone with the Clergy, and most of the Nobility stand up in defence of the Counsels Authority; but King Iames by his writings declared he 1614 was of a contrary minde. Conde's and Ancres Forces had a sharp encoun∣ter, but Ancre prevailed, which Victory was at last his destruction, and Conde's captivity: For when Longueville, Bullion, Mayne, and other Princes  understood that Conde was detained as a prisoner in Paris by Ancres means, they suddenly depart the Court, and are proscribed by the King: The Parisians being madded at this, fall presently to plundring of Ancres trea∣sures, and spoyling his house, so that with much adoe were they pacifi∣ed at last by the Kings Guard. The Princes publish a Remonstance, to let the people know what corruptions were now maintained, both in Court and Kingdome, and that therefore they were necessitated to take armes to suppress these abuses; they also by their friends, privatly ac∣quaint the King of the dangers that would fall on him and his Kingdome, 1615 if such abuses were tolerated, and Ancres treacherous actions countenan∣ced; therefore they humbly beseech him that he would not hazard his own fortunes, and the welfare of a most florishing Kingdome for one mans sake. Upon this, Order is given to Vitrius Captain of the Guard, to dispatch Ancre, who one day stops the proud and great Favorit, as he was entring the Palace. At this, Ancre presently began to draw upon the Captain, but before he could pull out his sword, he is shot dead on the place with a Pistoll: When his death was known in the City, the people exceedingly rejoyced; and to shew their hatred on him, (though now dead) they found out his corps which was privatly buried, this they  draw out of the grave, and having with all manner of disgraces abu∣sed it, at length they flung it in a great fire, and turned it into ashes: His wife being condemned for witchcraft and other diabolicall arts, is han∣ged, and her body burnd; thus by the just punishment of a few, the whole Kingdome is preserved, the Kings anger appeased, the peopls fury satisfied, and the Princes willingly reduced to obedience: But the Queen in displeasure, having laid down her Regency went to Blois; and Conde for his unruly tongue is detained in custody. After these sad passages, some joy follows in France upon the marriage of Victor Amadeus, the Duke of Savoys eldest son, Prince of Piemont, with Christina the Kings sister, the King was married already to the Infanta of Spain. The Queen-Mother being weary of her abode in Blois, got Duke de Espernon to convey her thence to Angolesme without the Kings knowledge, who took this ill, and as a slighting of his Authority, there∣fore he raiseth an Army purposely to be revenged on Espernon; but be∣ing at last pacified by divers messages from Espernon and the Queen-Mo∣ther to him, she is permitted to stay at Andes; and Conde is set free. A cer∣tain Italian being found teaching of Atheisme at Tholouse, is by the Kings 1620 command apprehended, his tongue cut out, and he burnt alive. Mean while the French King is courted by Ambassadors from the Emperor,  and likewise from Frederick Count Palatin, now in contestation for Bohe∣mia. King Lewis sends Ambassadors to Spain for opening the Valtelin, which being the mouth of Italy, was now stopped and shut up against the French and Switzers, divers contestations were held about this business, but still interrupted. At this time de Luine
the Kings Favorit, was in great  power on whom he had conferred all Ancres estate: This was ill resen∣ted by the Peers, chiefly by Longuevil, Nemours, Mayne, and Rohan, who betake themselves to the Queen Mother; but the King preventing them by the faithfull service of Conde, possesseth Cain in Normandy, before the Princes could unite their Forces. More of their towns submit to the King: At length the Queens army being defeated, the Princes were brought to such a strait, that they were fain to Petition for pardon, and the Queen Mother to acknowledge her sons milde Government: then the Kings ar∣my is turned upon Gascony; those of Bearn were commanded o restore to the Roman Clergy, their old Rites and Revenues, which they refusing to do, were suddenly surprised by the King, who having changed their Garisons, restores to the Catholicks their Churches, Honors, and Reve∣nues, and so annexeth that Province which hitherto had enjoyed much freedome, to the Crown of France. This put the Protestants to new shifts and consultations, divers meetings to this purpose were had; a Sy∣nod is called at Rotchel, which contrary to the Kings strict and perempto∣ry command is held, to the undoing afterward of that town, and the Pro∣testant cause in France; for the King subdued the Town of Saint Iohn af∣ter a hard siege of 20 days, and beats down the Walls; the like he did to Clerak in Gascony, and many other Protestant Towns to the number of 60.  he brings under his subjection, not without great slaughter of such as made resistance, for many skirmishes were fought. Montalban also is besieged a long time, but in vain; for sickness and the winter floods for∣ced the besiegers to rise and be gone: Among divers that lost their lives here, Henry of Mayne, Viceroy of Gascony was one. After this, whilst the King was beleaguering Mugurt, Duke d' Luin, Master of the Horse (which place Ancre had before) in the midst of his honors and wealth, which was exceeding great, died in December: A sudden fire having in October before burned down the two bridges of the goldsmiths, and the exchange, to the great loss of the Merchants. 1622 Pope Paul 5 died of an Apoplexie the 69 year of his age, and the 16 of his Pontificat: K. Lewis, the pacification being broke, besiegeth and taketh Montpelier with some other Protestant towns, at last upon the sight of so much bloud shed, and so many slaughtered men, he comes to a new a∣greement, at which divers of the Pontifician side were offended. At Rome Gregory 15. called before Alexander Lodoisius, who succeeded Pope Paul 5. died of a Palsie: To whom succeeded Cardinall Maphaeus Berberin, he took the name of Urban 8. In France things being somewhat quieted, King Lewis enters into league with the Venetians and Savoyens against Spain, for 1624 regaining of the Valtelin, which after many skirmishes and towns taken, falls wholly into the power of these Confederates, whereupon the French & Savoyens enter Italy, and make war against Genua, for furnishing the Spani∣ard with money and provisions; but a new fire of civil war breaking out in France, calls home the French forces out of Italy. The Duke of Sonlize with the Rotchellers had defeated the Kings fleet in a sea-sight; whereupon un∣der Montmerancy the King renewes his sea-fight, and beats Sonlize, who pre∣sently fled into England. Rotchel is besieged both by sea and land, divers Forts being erected against it, divers eruptions are made from the town, divers Petitions are exhibited for peace, but all in vain; the Protestants complain that the Articles of the last pacification were not kept by the  King, that they had not as was promised the free use of their Religion, that the Forts set up against Rotchel, were not as yet demolished, that the Synodicall meetings of the Ministers were hindred; hereupon the two brothers, Rohan and Sonlize, the chief of the Protestant Party in France, implore the assistance of England, which now stood
not upon good  terms with France, since the sending away of Queen Maries French Clergy, for being too busie about her confessions and penances; the English also had taken some French Ships carrying provision for the Spaniard, and the French had made a stay of all English goods there, for satisfying their los. ses: Hereupon a fleet under the Duke of Buckingham is sent to the Isle of Ree, lying over against Rotchel; at first he drove the French into the Castle, but afterward out of carelesness he suffered his forces to be cut off, and so returns home with loss and dishonor. Vendome the Kings bastard brother is imprisoned. Diguiers laty converted to the Church of Rome, is made Master of the horse, Cardinal Richelieu being Admirall of France, is imployed against Rotchel. Conde rageth with fire and sword against their  Protestant towns of Gascony, putting all ages and sexes promiscuously to death; but at last hath a defeat given him by Rohan; the Rotchelers stoutly re∣sisted the siege, so long as their hopes of English aid, and their provisions 1628 cōtinued, but when both failed them, & famin began to prevail, their stout hearts were forced to yeild, for the harbour was so stopped and barrica∣doed, that ships could not get in to relieve them, nor return the provisi∣ons which Buchingham had borrowed from them, therefore they surren∣der the Town, promise to pay the fine laid on them, and to maintain the Kings Garrison there, till they build him a Castle within the walls,  on their own charges; upon this they obtain their lives, estates, and Re∣ligion: In this siege there died by famin and the sword, 15 thousand of the besieged, the plague also raged in the Kings camp: Rohan and Son∣lize are both comprized within these articles of Rotchel conditionally they restore what they yet withhold from the King; Montalban also with some other places are included in the same peace, if within 3 months they lay down arms, and submit to the King; upon this peace between the King and his Protestant subjects: a peace also is concluded between England and France, by the death of Buckingham, who began and fomen∣ted this war. France being now at peace with England, is better able to assist the  Duke of Niverne, Charls by name, to recover his right in Mantua, which 1629 he claimed (his cousin German Vincentius being now dead) as his due both by will and propinquitie of blood: this Principality he seised on with∣out acquainting Caesar Lord of the Fee; the Spaniard and Savoyen stormed at this, who had an old quarrel with the Dukes of Mantua about Monts∣ferrat; so now France and Spain renew their old strife. The Savoyen sides with Spain, the Venetians with Mantua; Naples, Sicily, Millan prepare for war. The quarrel in France between Gasto Duke of Orleans, and Cardi∣nal 1630 Richelieu, took rise from the desire the Monsieur had to coyn money with his own stamp, as being next heir to the Crown, and a priviledge equally belonging to him, and to the King; this was denied and  refused by the Cardinall, wherefore the Duke in anger leaves the Court. The King by the Cardinalls advice, set a Guard upon his Brother; this the Duke considering to be both dangerous and disgracefull, with∣drawes himselfe privately thence, and raiseth an Army of Malecon∣tents: A battel is fought, in which the Duke is defeated, and Mont∣morancie taken in the skirmish; the King to appease all civill differen∣ces, is content to pardon his brother, and his Courtiers; he com∣mands 1632 all foraigne Souldiers to depart the Kingdome, Montmorancie is  required by the King, to be left to his mercy; pardon also is pro∣mised to the Gentrie and Judges of the Dukes partie, upon their humble Petition; the Bishops of his Faction are put over to the censure of the next Synod, so peace upon these terms being setled, the Duke enters Lyons in great State; but
Montmerancie, with whom the King  was more implacable, is condemned of High Treason. Much intercession was made for him, but in vain. His head is cut off at Tolouse the thirty fifth year of his age. Gasto being struck with this rigour, departeth the king∣dom, and wrote back to the King, that he was not now tied to any Articles or Covenants, yet promiseth that he will act nothing to the prejudice of his Native Countrey. CHAP. XXIV. A Prosecution of the English History, under the reigns of Henry the 4th, Hen∣ry  the 5th, and Henry the 6th; from the year 1399. till the year 1460. con∣taining divers passages of the French and Scots affairs. HEnry the fourth of Bullinbrook, Duke of Hartford, son and heir to Iohn of Gaunt, the yonger brother of Lionel D. of Clarence, is elected and Crowned King, his prede∣cessor 1399 King Richard being deposed as is already said. Which deposition is condemned by Iohn Bishop of Car∣lisle, in that first Parliament assembled by King Henry 4.  wherein he shows the King was worse used then ordinary Malefactors, because they are not condemned (as the King was) before they have answered to the objected crimes. But the Bi∣shop for this speech was attached by the Earl Marshal, and imprisoned in the Abby of S. Albons; then was the Crown intailed to King Henry and his heirs, and forthwith Henry the Kings eldest son is made Prince of Wales, D. of Cornwall, and Earl of Chester. After the Parliament was ended, the K. is invited to Oxford, where solemn Justs were to be holden, by Edw. Plantagi∣net Duke of Aumarle, Thomas Holland Duke of Surry, Iohn Holland his brother Duke of Exeter, both half brothers to King Richard, Iohn Monta∣gue Earl of Salisbury, Hugh Spencer Earl of Gloucester, with others, who pre∣tending a Triumph, intended the Kings destruction privately, by Indentures under their hands and seals. All these plotters met at Oxford, attended with a strong guard of Archers, only Aumarle was absent, because his father the old Duke, having found out the plot, by the Indentures, which by chance he spied in his sons breast, made haste to acquaint the King therewith, which the young Duke perceiving, being well mounted, out-rod his father, and came to Windsor Castle, where the King then was, preparing for his Oxford journey, which he diverted by revealing the Treason, and so obtained his pardon. The King presently raiseth an Army to suppress those conspirators,  who being informed that their plot was discovered, they disguised one Mag∣dalen (who was one of the plotters, and much resembled the deposed King) in royal robes, giving out he was King Richard; and so with all their Troops 1400 they march towards London, against the King, who was now on his march with twenty thousand men towards them. The noise of the Kings approach so disheartned the companions of these traiterous Lords, that they ran away and left their Lords helpless, and comfortless, who shortly after in their flight are taken and executed. 1401 The King being delivered from this danger, caused Richard to be murthe∣red (as is said) left in his name the like Treason might be attempted: Charles  the sixt of France, Father in Law to King Richard, hearing of his sufferings and wrongs, but not as yet of his death, raiseth an Army to relieve him, and to be revenged on King Henry. He was marched as far as Piccardy, where he understood that King Richard was dead, whereupon he changeth his resoluti∣on, knowing he could do the dead no good,
and disbandeth his Army: Yet  shortly after, purposing to be revenged on King Henry, by taking his towns in Aquitan, raiseth another Army; but before he was ready, King Henry was landed in France with an English Army, conducted by Piency Earl of Worcester; which caused King Charles alter his minde, and disband his forces. Yet Henry distrusting the weakness of his Title, desires that Isabel King Charls his daughter, and wife sometime to King Richard, should be maried to his el∣dest son Prince of Wales; which Charles refused to do, wherefore she is con∣veied into France, and maried to her cousin Charles, her uncles eldest son, the Duke of Orleans. The noise of the late Treason, of the French preparation, of the murther of King Richard, animated the Scots and Welch against him. Owen Glendor spoils the Marches near him: The Lord Grey of Ruthen, and Edmund Mortimer, rightful heir to the Crown, are sent against him; but they lost the battel, and are taken prisoners: Edmund is kept in a dark Dungeon, on 1402 hope the King would ransom him, which was least of his thoughts, knowing it was more safe for him, to have Edmund a prisoner, then at liberty. The Scots invade the Northern parts, but are repulsed by King Henry, who pursues them with fire and sword into their own Country. But he was no sooner gone, when they return with twenty thousand spoiling Northumberland; Sir Henry Hotspur son and heir to Henry Piercy, fell upon them, killed ten thousand, and took five hundred prisoners; among which were four Earls. The next year  following, one thousand two hundred Gentlemen are sent to Glendor, from France, to be Leaders of his disordered Rout: But twelve of their best ships were drowned in a storm, the rest returned home with much difficulty. After this, twelv thousand French are sent into Wales, who safely landing, joyned with the Welch forces, consisting of ten thousand. King Henry in his own person marcheth with a strong army into Wales: Upon the report of which, the French doubting more of the Welch inconstancy, then of their own power or valour; return to their ships without striking stroak. Hereupon the Welch fled and vanished, so that the King finding no enemy to fight with, re∣turns in peace. King Henry to strengthen himself with friends abroad, against his troubles 1403 at home, maried with Iane, Widow of Iohn, Duke of Britany, and gave his eldest daughter Blanch in mariage to William Duke of Bavarr, son and heir apparent of Lodowick Emperor; then he matched Philip his youngest daughter to the King of Denmark. After this, Piercy of Northumberland, Pier∣cy of Worcester, and Henry Hotspur, are required by the King to deliver up to him their Scots prisoners. This they refuse to do, as being against the Law of Arms, which caused some distaste▪ so that discontent daily rising, the Piercies desire the King to ransom Edmund Mortimer, Earl of March, their imprisoned Cousin, hoping thereby to restore him to his Crown; this is de∣nyed by the King as dangerous to his own safety, giving out that he volunta∣rily become Owens prisoner, to countenance the Welch rebellion, and treache∣ries against his Crown. Upon this, the Piercies in anger paid his ransom, and set him free on their own cost, and withal made a League with Owen Glendor, to depose King Henry, with whom also joyned the Scots, the Earl of Stafford, and Scroop, Arch-Bishop of York, the beheaded Earl of Salisburies brother, with many others; then they published and sent him these ensuing Articles: 1. That against his Oath he took after his banishment, never to meddle with the King nor Crown, hath wickedly seized on the Crown, and made himself King. 2. That he had imprisoned King Richard, and caused him to be mur∣thered. 3. That he hath ever since unjustly kept the Crown from Edmund  Mortimer, the true heir, as being of Clarence the elder brother to Iohn of Gant, father to the usurping King. 4. That he had imposed on the people divers needless and heavy Taxes. 5. That against his Coronation Oath, he had procured Burgyships for the Parliament, of such as would serve his turn.
6. That he hath hitherto denyed to ransom his Cousin, giving out falsly he was become a voluntary prisoner, to colour the Welch Treason and Rebelli∣on. And so upon these Articles, they defie the King, vow his destruction, and the Earl Mortimers restitution. Hereupon Armies are raised on both sides; and near Shrewsbury a battel is fought, in which a great part of the Scots who bravely assaulted the King, are cut off; Hotspur, with some other prime Leaders, and many thousands more are slain, Worcester is taken prisoner, the rest fled: On the Kings part were lost one thousand six hundred; of the e∣nemies six thousand, of which, thirty six the King slew with his own hand. 1404 Earl Duglas for his valour in a duel with the King, is set free without ransom. The next day thanks are given to God: Worcester is beheaded, and many of  the Ring-leaders are hanged, drawn, and quartered. The King to prosecute his Victory, sends his Army under the Prince of Wales, against the Rebels, but they were fled: Glendor forsaken, and at last famished in the Woods, many of whose consorts were taken, and executed. Piercy of Northumberland voluntarily submits to the Kings mercy, protesting his ignorance in that Treason; the King for that time gave him good words, with liberty to come and go, because he had the Castle of Barwick, and some other strong holds in his possession. After this, Lewis Duke of Orleans, sends a challenge to King Henry; to whom he returns this answer, that his former actions could acquit him from the name of a coward; that Kings ought not to expose themselves to danger, but when necessity required; that the Duke was not his equal, & that notwithstanding he would at all times be ready to re∣press the Dukes insolencies, or rash attempts on him or his people. The Duke hereupon in a rash passion, besiegeth the Town of Vergien in Guien, where ha∣ving lost many of his men after three months siege, was forced to rise and de∣part with dishonour. The Duke of Burgoin also, by the French Kings leave, raiseth six thousand men at Armos, one thousand five hundred Cross-bows, and twelve thousand foot men, for regaining of Callice. But the French King hearing what preparations are making in England, and considering the diffi∣cultie of this attempt, requires the Duke to desist from his intended enter∣prise.  This he conceived to proceed from the Duke of Orleans, who was jealous of Bourgoins valour. King Henry having escaped two dangers by re∣bellions, is now like to fall into the third, plotted by Piercy of Northumber∣land, Scroop Arch-Bishop of York, Mowbray Earl Marshal, and by the Lords Hastings, Faulconbridge, Bardolph, and others. But the plot in the infancy of it, was discovered; therefore the King comes unexpectedly into the North, with an Army, surprised the Lords, and struck off their heads, but Piercy and Bardolph fled. Piercy afterwards returns from France into Scotland, where he is promised aid against the King; to prevent which, the Prince of Wales is sent 1408 with an Army thither, where he rageth with fire and sword, recovers the Castles  of Barwick, and Anwick, and makes the Scots imbrace a peace. After this the K. crossing the Thames from Kent, to Essex, under the conduct of the Lord of Camois, was like to be taken by French Pirats. The Lord was suspected and at∣tached of Treason, but was cleared by his Peers; the Scots enter Northumberland with Piercy, and Bardolph, doing much mischief. King Henry upon this, levi∣ed a strong Army, but Sir Ralph Rokesby then Sheriff of that County, had defeated the Scots already, and had smote off the two Lords heads, which he sent to the King for presents. In the eleventh year of his Reign, a Parlia∣ment is called, some good Laws are enacted; the Kings three younger sons are made Thomas Duke of Clarence, Iohn Duke of Bedford, and Humphry Duke  of Gloucester. The rest of this Kings life was peaceable; he intended warres against the Turk, and was for that purpose providing ships, men, mony, and other requisits; but was hindred by an Apoplexy, which at last killed him, the 1411 forty six year of his life, and 14
of his reign. On his death-bed he caused the  Crown to be placed by him on his pillow, fearing some other might take it that had better right. The Prince thinking he had been dead, takes away the Crown; whereat the King started up, asking who had taken away the Crown: The Prince answered, that it was he; then falling back into his bed, sighed and said, My Son, My Son, God knows what right I had to this Crown, and how I have enjoyed it: to whom the Prince replyed, good Father comfort your 1412 self; the Crown you have, and if you die, I will take it, and keep it with my sword, as you have done; and then the King died: In this Kings time Guild-Hall in London was built. King Henry 5. succeeded, who of a wild and loose young Prince, became  a wise and solid King, after he had put away his lewd consorts. He begins his Reign with the honourable Translation of king Richards body from Langlie, which with pomp he interred at Westminster by Queen Anne his first wife. The next year he calls a Parliament at Leicester, where he is Petitioned to suppress the Religious houses of the kingdom, because they were abused; the Reve∣nues 1413 of which houses were proportioned to yeild to the king the annual rent of twenty thousand pounds, and would also maintain fifteen Earls, fifteen hundred knights, and above six thousand men at arms, besides alms-houses for the poor. But to divert this violent stream, Chichly Arch-Bishop of Canterbury being solicited by the Abbots, discovers to the king his right and title to the Crown of France, shewing the Clergies willingness in furthering his regain∣ing of it, by offering to him a vast sum of mony: This speech dashed the Petition; and now all mens desires are bent on France: For this cause the Duke of Exeter, the Kings Uncle, the Arch-Bishop of Dublin, the Lord Grey, High Admirall of England, and the Bishop of Norwich, attended with five hundred Horse, were sent to Charles sixt of France, to demand that Crown, with the Dutchies of Aquitan, Normandy, and Anjou, with the Coun∣ties of Poytou and Main; which if they may be delivered up peaceably, then King Henry will mary Katherin the French Kings daughter, and endow her with all the said Dutchesse and Provinces; otherwise he would gain them by  the sword. The French King amazed at this message, desired some time to deliberate, promising to send Ambassadors of his own to King Henry, whose youth the Dolphin so slighted, that he sent him a Tun of Tennis Balls as a pre∣sent, fitter for him to play with, then the Conquest of France. King Henry was so incensed at this scoff, that he swore he would ere long toss so many Iron Balls in France, that the strongest Rackets there should not be able to return them. The Dolphin hearing of the great preparations in England, sends to King Henry, that if he would live peaceably with France, and take to wife his sister Katherin, then he should have with her a large sum of mony, with some small Territories in that kingdom; the French Ambassadors were honoura∣bly  used and entertained at the Kings Table, who at last depart with no other answer, but that King Henry will have his Provinces and Seigniories which he demands. With this he prepares for his march, having first fortified the borders from Scottish invasions, and made his mother Queen Regent of Eng∣land, in his absence. Then he sends Letters of defiance to the French King; but in the mean while Richard Earl of Cambridge, brother to the Duke of York, Henry Lord Scroop, and Sir Thomas Gray, upon great rewards promised them by the Dolphin, conspired either to kill king Henry in his Tent, or to de∣liver him unto the French King; but the Treason is discovered, the Traitors apprehended, arraigned, and executed the next day. The King being landed in Normandy, neer Harslew upon the Sein, besieged  it thirty seven days; which the Dolphin not being able to relieve, was surren∣dred to Henrie, who sacked it, and ransomed the inhabitants, which mony, and goods, he bestowed on his soldiers. Then having left his uncle Thomas Duke of Exeter, as Governour there, with thirty five
Knights, and one thou∣sand  five hundred soldiers, resolves to go to Calice by Land, for the Winter coming sooner then usually, caused fluxes, feavers, and great mortality in his Army; for there died above one thousand five hundred men, besides the Earl of Stafford, Bishop of Norwich, and some other Lords; the Kings strength then consisted only in two thousand horse, and thirteen thousand Archers: yet the French durst not adventure upon them, though the Dolphin who ma∣naged this war, by reason of his fathers infirmity, had assembled above thir∣ty thousand men: So that the English burned and spoiled all in their way, with∣out resistance. The French (then at Rohan) being unwilling the English should pass through France unfought with, adviseth with his Councel what he should do; after some debate, he was advised to fight, who presently sends a defi∣ance 1414 to king Henry, whose answer was, that his men were now sick, and in want, yet strong enough to repel all violence, if he were interrupted in his march. A great Army of French being assembled, they intend to fight the English, who therefore place themselves in good array near Agencourt; the Constable of France accompanied with ten thousand horse-men, besides foot∣men, pages, and other attendants, draw near to the English Army; that night was spent by the French in jollity, presuming an absolute victory the next day, because of their multitudes, and the English paucity: so that before hand, they cast lots for their prisoners. The French Army is divided into three battali∣aes,  the first consisting of about 16000, was led by the Constable, the second or middle being bigger then the other, is commanded by the Dukes of Barre, and of Alanson: the third was Marshalled by the Earl of Mark, Damp, and others, King Henris Vaunt-guard consisting of Archers only, is conducted by the Duke of York. The main Battel is commanded by the King himself, in which were his strongest Bill men; with him were the Duke of Gloucester, Earl Mashal Oxford and Suffolk: the rear-ward is directed by Thomas Duke of Exeter, the Kings Uncle. And to keep off the French horse from the Eng∣lish foot, they are all invironed with stakes headed with sharp irons at both ends, for the easier pitching of them in the ground. An Ambush also of 1415 English Archers is placed within a new-cast hedge, which galled the French horse; so that their first battail is overthrown, not only of the horse, but of the foot also, who were wounded and troden to death by the disordered horse; many of them also were knockt down by the English Axes and Bils. Then the French main battail is assaulted by the English, who being couragiously charged by the French horse, retreated orderly, and quickly slipped behind their stakes, to train the French horse upon them; who ignorantly rushing for∣ward, goared their horses so, that the main battail was put out of order, and vanquished. In this encounter the King fought hand to hand with the Duke of Alanson, whom he felled to the ground, whose life he would have saved,  but the Guard unadvisedly slew him. The third battail consisting of greatest numbers, but worst men, cowardly ran away, casting down their arms, and many on their knees craving mercy; the King gave order they should be re∣ceived as prisoners; but whilst he was pursuing the chase, 600 French horse entred the Kings Camp, weakly guarded, riffling all that they could, and slew many of the Guarders, which caused a great out-cry: the King hearing it, supposed a fresh Army had been come to fight him again; whereupon Procla∣mation is made that all ordinary prisoners should be slain, lest they should in∣danger the Army in the new conflict. A pitifull slaughter is made among them, which cost the K. many sighs and tears, when he understood that no fresh Army was come. Though the K. and his men were tired with that days service, yet fearing the worst, he puts his whole Army in Battalia, when presently the Earls of Marle and Faulconbridge, assailed him with six hundred men, but they were quickly overthrown and slain. Towards the
Evening of this day, the King  with his Army gave solemn thanks to God for his Victory, and then gave leave to his soldiers to riffle those they had slain. Which being done, he mar∣cheth into Calice, where he is received with great joy. In this battail were slain the Constable and Admiral of France, the Duke of Alanson, the Duke of Brabant, the Duke of Barre, with divers Earls, twenty five Lords, eight thousand Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen, besides multitudes of common soldiers; the Duke of Orleans, the Duke of Burbon, with divers Lords, ma∣ny were taken prisoners. On the English side were slain the Duke of York, the Earl of Suffolk, with six hundred others: So after the King had refreshed him∣self and Army some time in Calice, he returns with much spoil and wealth in∣to England, and is received into London with much triumph. Not long after this battail, the Dolphin died; the Earl of Arminack is made high Constable of France, and none put in offices but stout men. At the same time Thomas Duke of Exeter, Governour of Harflew, issued out of the Town with three 1416 thousand men, spoiling all the Country, till almost he came to Rohan. The new Constable with five hundred horse, made the Duke retire, but orderly; the French were so hot in the pursuit, and came so near Harflew, that the rest of the English within issued out, and being joined with the Dukes forces, put the French to the flight for two miles, taking divers prisoners, which they dismissed, not without ransom. The Emperour Sigismund came into Eng∣land  to mediate for peace, but could not: After great entertainment, King Henry accompanies him to Calice, whether Henry of Burgoin upon hostages repaired. A Peace is concluded between them concerning Flanders and Ar∣tois only; this peace made the French jealous of the Duke, as of a secret ene∣my to France. Not long after Harflew is besieged by the Constable, both on sea and land: but this Fleet of five hundred French ships, is defeated by the English Fleet of two hundred sail, under Iohn Duke of Bedford, King Henries brother: Many French were killed, and many sent prisoners to England. Up∣on this the Constable raiseth his siege, and the Duke of Bedford new victual∣led, manned, and fortified the Town, and so returned to England. King Henry understanding that the French Peers were fallen out into divers  factions, upon private grudges, he calls a Parliament, shewing his right to France, his opportunity now to regain it, his good success hitherto, the ma∣ny wrongs done by the French upon the English, and withall his want of mo∣ny. These motives were so inducing, that mony is presently granted, and with chearfulness levied. Hereupon Iohn Earl of Huntington son to that D. of Exeter, beheaded under King Henry the 4. being sent out to scowre the seas, fell upon nine Carricks of Genua, hired for the French Kings service; six of which he sunk, the other three he took with great store of mony and mony worth. King Henry shortly after landeth with his Army in Normandy, before the Castle of Tonque, which he took; the report of this made the Normans flye all to their strong Towns, so that the English without resistance, march, and pitch before Cane, which after long and stout resistance by the Normans, and many furious assaults by the English is taken, the Towns-men having flung down their arms, and submitted to mercy. The A being heaped together in the Market place, and kept with a guard of English, the King enters the Town, and in the great Church gives solemn thanks for his victory. Then he assembles the inhabitants at their Senate, where he censu∣red the chief of those who refused his mercy, some to death, some to ransoms, 1417 which he divideth amongst his soldiers. The Dolphin and Constable, finding  want of mony, hindred their actions; they take from the Queen Mother a great mass of mony, which she had scraped together, which so exasperated her, that she got Iohn Duke of Burgoin, their mortal enemy, to be protectour of the King during his infirmity, and Regent of France. Hereupon grudges and quarrels arise, the two factions of the Dolphin and Regent
labouring to  undoe each other; so the publick good is neglected, and the English anima∣ted in the Conquests, especially in Normandy, where the people for want of aid from France, are willing to submit to the English; therefore the King pro∣claims that all who would yeild and become his subjects, should enjoy their own, and receive his protection: Whence most of the greatest Towns there yeild themselves into the hands of King Henry, and his two brothers, Clarence and Gloucester. All which the King strongly fortifieth; English officers are placed also in Cane. Whilst the King is thus imployed, he understands that Rohan is manned, and strongly fortified, and that the whole wealth of the Country is conveyed thither; therefore he layeth siege to that City, and chains the River, having  made a Bridge also over it, to keep off all relief by water. The Earl of War∣wick with an hundred good ships enters the mouth of the River, and caus∣eth the Town of Caodeback give them a quiet passage towards Rohan, pro∣mising to yeild it to King Henry, if he took Rohan, otherwise to let him return peaceably: so he goeth for Rohan. At this siege one thousand six hundred I∣rish under the Lord of Kilmay repair to the King, and are entertained by him. The King at first assaulted the City, but to spare his men, resolves to starve it; for there were at that time in it, above two hundred and ten thousand souls: therefore he keeps in the Townsmen by his Archers, and a deep Ditch.  This siege continued above 5 months; in which time, many were forced to eat Dogs, Cats, and such vermin; multitudes of the poorer sort were thrust out of the gates, and so perished with famin. At last some Commissioners are sent to desire a conference, which was granted; so the next morning four Knights, four learned men, and four Burgesses, all cloathed in black, repaired to the King, and told him, that it stood not with the honour of a brave Com∣mander to subdue people by famin, but by valour; that therefore if he would permit the sick, with the women and children, to pass through his Army, and then assault their walls, he should find men to buckle with. The King being offended at this boldnesse, replyed, that he was not to be taught, neither when  to assault their City, nor with what weapon, fire, sword, and famin, being e∣qual instruments of destruction, and in differently made use of by the best Commanders of all ages; therefore he tells them, that neither will he suffer their weak people to pass through his Army, nor will he relieve them, as he hath done some already, being uncharitably thrust out, and exposed to all mi∣sery. Lastly, he tells them, that he who hath ventured through all their Coun∣tries, and taken their strongest holds, dares assault the Town, and take it, when he thinks good. Thus having spoken, he commanded they should dine with his Chief Officers of State. After dinner, they repair to the King a∣gain, humbly desiring a Truce for eight days, to resolve upon the best course;  which was assented to by the King. During the eight days Cessation from Arms, many consultations were had, but nothing done. One day more is desired, and granted; mean while the commons do mutiny in the Town, accusing and threatning their Magistrates, and Commanders; who fearing the worst, made them all meet in the Market place, and demanded what they would have; they answer, a rendition of the City to King Henry. So after four days Truce more, the City is surrendred. Burgundy fearing insuing dangers, strives to reconcile the two Kings, hoping thereby to avenge himself upon the Dolphin, and the Constable. Many par∣lies were had, but to no end. The King at last told the Duke, that either he  would have Katherin the Kings daughter, with all the Seignories demanded, or else he would drive both his Master, and himself out of that kingdom. The Duke replyed, that the thing was not so soon done as spoken: Hereupon the Duke reconciles himself to the Dolphin, at least in outward shew; which was 1418 a great hinderance to King Henries resolutions, who to shew he was not dis∣maid,
created some Earls, and suddenly takes Ponthoys, with one thousand five hundred men; thence he marched to Paris, and sate down before it two days, but left it again, by reason of his paucity: Mean time, all the Towns of Normandy yeild to King Henry, except Mount S. Michael, which was never besieged. But whilst Burgundy sought to reconcile himself more fully to the Dolphin, is treacheously murthered by the same Dolphins procurement. At which, Philip Earl of Carolois is so grieved for his fathers death, that he meant to put away his wife, the Dolphins sister, but that he was disswaded by 1419 his friends. At length he strives to make peace between the two Crowns, which after much adoe, was concluded, and King Henry maried to the Lady Katherin, in whose right he is proclaimed Regent and heir apparent of France.  The Articles of Peace were these: 1. King Charles and Queen Isabel his wife, should be styled the Father and Mother of King Henry. 2. King Charles, and Queen Isabel, during their lives, should enjoy their Regall Dignities and Revenues. 3. That Queen Katherin should have in England a Dowry of twenty thousand Marks. 4. That King Henry should not be styled King of France, during the life of King Charles. 5. That after the death of King Charles, the Crown of France should come to King Henry, and to his heirs. 6. That King Henry should be Regent of France, because of the Kings infir∣mities. 7. That the Court of Parliament in France, should enjoy their ac∣customed Priviledges. 8. That King Henry should assist, defend, and protect the Peers, Clergy, and people of France. 9. That he shall suppress intestin broils, and administer justice. 10. That he shall place none in offices of Ju∣stice and Government, but such as are every way able. 11. That he shall strive to reduce the Dolphin and Constable to the obedience of King Charles. 12. That he shall cause all to swear obedience to king Charles, during his life, and after him to king Henry and to his heirs. 13. That all possessions won from rebellious subjects (excepting Normandy) should be converted solely to the benefit of the French King, except the offendors submit. 14. That Nor∣mandy after king Charles his death, shall submit to the Scepter of France.  15. That the people of France, be not burthened with Taxes, nor undue le∣vying thereof. 16. That after king Charles his death, France and England should be governed by one man only, without subordination, each kingdome retaining their priviledges. 17. That the subjects of both kingdomes live quietly and lovingly together. 18 That neither the French, nor English king, shall make peace with the pretended Dolphin, except they two concur in the same with the Duke of Burgundy. 19. That none but French attend the per∣son of king Charles. 20. That both the kings, with their people, shall ratifie by their hands and seals, and swear to these Articles. These Articles were proclaimed in England and France, and ratified by oaths;  then both kings accompanied with young king Iames of Scotland, the Duke of Burgundy, the Prince of Orange, twenty one Earls, forty five Barons, be∣sides multitudes of knights and others, make war in Burgoin, taking in all pla∣ces that had sided with the Dolphin. The murtherers of Iohn Duke of Bur∣gundy, are apprehended, sent into Paris, where shortly after they were senten∣ced and executed. King Henry is proclaimed Regent and heir apparent to the Crown of France, first at Paris, then at London. At Paris the two kings kept their Christmass: Such was king Henries entertainment and bounty, that he wins the love of the French. The late murthered Duke of Burgoins wi∣dow, before both the kings at Paris, complains of the Dolphin, and seven o∣thers,  as murtherers of her Husband. All these are cited to appear, who failing, are proscribed, that is, banished, degraded, and divested of all their Estates. The Dolphin hearing this, goeth to Languedoc, where he is aided with men and mony, by Arminac, the Constable that was. After this king Henry and his wife, go to Rohan, where they receive homage of the Nobles
of Normandy; for that Dutchy then having left his brother Thomas Duke of Clarence, General of France and Normandy, and Salisbury the said Dukes De∣puty; he with his wife go to Calice, and so to London, where they are recei∣ved with much joy: and shortly after, the Queen is Crowned at Westminster. Mean while Alanson the Dolphins Lieutenant General, levied a great Army, a∣gainst whom Clarence marcheth with his Normandy Garisons, and pitched near Angiers in Anjou. One Forgusa a Lumbard, to whom Duke Clarence trusted too much, betrayed him, by making him believe that the French Ar∣my was small, disordered, and inconsiderable; wherefore he marcheth with his horse only, leaving his Archers behind, and falling into the Ambushments of his enemies unawares, was forced to fight upon great disadvantages, ha∣ving  four for one against him; and at last after he had stoutly a long time de∣fended himself, was totally overthrown. In this battel were slain of the French, above 1000 two hundred, of the English the Duke of Clarence, the Earls of Tankervile, and Kent, the Lord Ross, and about two thousand more. The Earls of Somerset, Suffolk, and Perch, the Lord Fitzwater, and many others are taken prisoners; Sir Thomas Beauford, Commander of the Archers, understanding that Clarence was be∣trayed, hastned to succour him, but came too late, the battel was fought: the French upon the news of Beaufords coming, were fled, with their prisoners and booty. So finding the dead bodies, he buries them, and sends the corps of Duke Clarence into England, where it was buried at Canterbury, near his  Father King Henry 4. The news of this defeat being come into England, the King grieved much for the loss, chiefly of his brother. Then he sends into Normandy, as successor to Clarence, the Earl of Mortaign, brother to Somer∣set, lately taken; and withall calls a Parliament, shewing how needful it was to send an Army against the Dolphin: For undertaking of which business, he wanted not men, but mony. Whereupon the Temporalty gave him one fif∣teen, and the Clergy two; and for avoiding expence of time, the Bishop of Winchester, the Kings Uncle, disbursed twenty thousand pounds, which were repaid him out of the fifteens. An Army of four thousand men at Arms, with twenty four thousand Archers, is raised and sent to Calice, under Iohn Duke of Bedford, the Kings brother, whom the King in his own person fol∣lowed. Who understanding that the Dolphin with seven thousand men had besieged Chartiers, he marcheth directly thither; in the way he was met by the Duke of Burgundy, who brought four thousand men to him. But the Dolphin distrusting his own strength, raiseth his siege. Hereupon the King sends Burgundy into Piccardie, to suppress S. Iacques Harcourt; King Iames of Scotland in the mean time, besiegeth the Town of Direx, and by storm takes it. King Henrie pursues the Dolphin from Tours to Burgys in Berrie, but being unwilling to tire out his men in long pursuits, he returns over the ri∣ver of Loire, taking in Towns and Castles by the way. Mean while news is  brought that Queen Katherin was delivered of a young Henry at Windsor, of whom the King spake thus▪ [I Henry, born at Monmouth, shall remain but a short time, and gain much; but Henrie born at Windsor, shall reign long, and lose all.] After this, the King takes by force the Town of Meux, in Brie; hereupon the other Towns yeilded. In the interim, the Dolphin falls with fire and sword upon Burgoins Country, and besiegeth Cosney, the Duke sends to the king for aid, who himself in person marcheth thither with great Forces; but by the way he fell sick, and so was fain to send his brother Iohn Duke of Bedford: whereupon the Dolphin raised his siege, and retired into Ber∣rie;  the King is caried unto Bois in Vincennis, where he died; before his death, he called to him Iohn Duke of Bedford, and Humphrie Duke of Gloncester, his brothers: he makes Iohn Regent of France, and Lieutenant General of Normandie; and Humphrie Protector of England, and of his sons person.
Then exhorting them with his Nobles that were present, to keep friend∣ship with Burgundy, unity among themselves, loyalty to his young son; to take care of his afflicted Queen, to maintain what he had conquered, to prosecute the war against the Dolphin and Alanson; he thanked God for all his conquests, and so departed the 38 year of his age, and the 10 of 1422 his reigne, his body is conveyed into England, and honorably interred at Westminster. The Queen afterward married to Owen Teudor, by whom she had three sons, Edmund Earl of Richmond, Father to Henry 7. King of England. 2d. Jasper Earl of Pembrok. And 3d. Owen. In this Kings time, Sir Iohn Oldcastle, who in the right of his wife, was called Lord Cobham,  caused great troubles in the Kingdome, by maintaining Wickliffs opini∣ons, which could not be suppressed till Sir Robert Acton, and divers others were condemned by the Clergy for Heresie, by the laitie for Treason, and so were hanged, and then burned gallows and all. King Henry the 6. at his Fathers death, was but 9 months old, the French King being dead, the people there began to shake off the En∣glish yoke, and to adhere onely to their new King Charles. The Lord Grandvyle is sent to Pont-Melance, which he surprised; but not long after, Montacute Earl of Salisbury regained it to the English. The Parisians send to England for protection, which is promised. The league is renewed  between the Regent, and the Dukes of Burgundy and Britany: The Re∣gent 1423 marrieth Anne Burgundys brother, but the wavering Parisians, diffi∣ding in the English protection, desire King Charls to receive their City in∣to his hands; which the Regent understanding, comes upon them sud∣denly with his Army, seiseth on the Citie, puts to death many of the chief plotters of this revolt, and Masters the Citizens with English Ga∣risons. In the mean time the Lord William Stewart Constable of Scotland, with a strong Army besieges the Town of Cravant in Burgundy, which siege is raised by the Earl of Salisbury, with the loss of 21 hundred of his men, and 8000 of his enemies. After this the Earl is made Vicegerent of  France, Bry, and Champaigne, and Sir Iohn Fastolfe Deputy of Normandy: The King of Scots is released and ransomed, who marrieth with Iane the Kings Cousin German, and daughter to the deceased Earl of Somerset. The Protector sends 10000 men with money to the Regent in France: Divers Towns are taken and retaken; the Duke of Britany revolts to the French, and so did his brother Arthur Earl of Richmond, whom Henry 5 had made Earl of Yury in Normandy, and Governor there; whereupon the Regent besiegeth the Town, which promised to yeild, if help came not from the French King at a certain day: Messengers are permitted to goe and acquaint the enemy of all things. Alanson shortly after with 16000 French made shew to raise the siege, but did nothing, then he sits down before Vernoyle, giving out that he had defeated the Regents Ar∣my, which was false, yet by this falshood he got the Town; and by his retreat suffered the Regent to be Lord of Yurie: Then the Regent gave battell to the French and Scots at Vernoyle: the fight lasts three hours; in the end the English got the day, who lost of their own men 21 hundred, 1425 of the French were slain 7000, of the Scots 2700, besides 5 Earls, 2 Vi∣counts, and 21 Barons: Alanson with divers prime men taken prisoners, Vernoyle is surrendred too, and fortified by the Regent, who thence go∣eth to Rohan, where he is joyfully received; then he sends 10000 men to Myne under Salisbury, who won Maunts, and divers other Towns in  that Province. Richmond now Constable of France with 40000 Scots, French, and Britans, besiegeth Saint Iames in Benyon defended onely by 600 English; but this handfull sallying out furiously on the enemy, and crying hidiously Saint George, Salisbury, presently
defeated this great Ar∣my,  supposing Salisbury with his Forces had been got into the Town; many of the enemie were drowned, more slain, some taken prisoners, but most ran away, leaving behinde them 14 piece of Ordnance, 40 bar∣rels of powder, with match, wine, and other provisions; The new Constable to redeem his lost honor, burneth a few Villages in Anjou, ha∣ving recollected his dispersed Forces. But at home fell out a dangerous difference between the Protector and his Uncle Henry Bishop of Winchester, and Chancellor of England: For appeasing of which, the Regent makes a journey into England, where by order of Parliament, the differences are composed and en∣ded;  in honor whereof the King kept a solemn feast. In the interim the Earl of Warwick the Regents Lieutenant in France, takes many pla∣ces in Mayne, and is threatned by the French Bravadoes, to no purpose, for having made shew to fight, they run away: Things being quieted at home, the Regent with his Uncle, the Bishop of Winchester returns in∣to France; and upon Burgundies intreaty he sets Alanson at liberty for the ransome of 200 thousand crowns; which money he might have had again if he would have sworne allegiance to King Henry of England, which he would upon no terms consent to. About this time the Bishop of Winchester was made a Cardinall at Callice, more for his wealth then for  his learning, for he was a rich Prelat, but a poor Schollar. Auranches an English Garison in Normandy is besieged by Rustian Marshall of Brita∣ny; but the English sallied and defeated the Army, and took the Mar∣shall prisoner. Pontorson is besieged by the English under Warwick and the Lord Scales, who forraged the enemies Countrie there about; and being encountred by some French Lords, and 6000 other Soldiers, he defeats them, and takes some of these Lords, with one thousand more priso∣ners: The Garison of Saint Susan surpriseth the Castle of Ramfort; which twenty thousand French appointed to raise the siege of Pontorson, regains from the English, when in the mean while Pontorson is taken by Warwick,  the City of Mouns is betrayed by some of the Clergy and Magistrates within, who in the night murthered the English Guard that maintained the first watch, opened the Gates, and let in five hundred French men, who committed great slaughter there, the Earl of Suffolk, Governor of the Town, with most of the English Soldiers enter the Castle, and held out a siege, till the Lord Talbot in the night with seaven hundred men, by the assistance of Suffolk and the others in the Castle, regained it; the English crying S. George Talbot so amazed the sleepie French in the dark, that many broke their necks over the walls, thirty Citizens, twenty Priests, and fifteen Friers who had betrayed the Citie, were tortured 1427  to death as Traitors. About this time died the Duke of Exeter, the Kings Tutor, which charge was conferred on Warwick, and in his room was set up Thomas Montacute Earl of Salisbury, who is sent into France with five thousand men, to which number as many more were added; with these he march∣eth against Orleans, seated on the River of Loyre, it was strongly fortifi∣ed by the Bastard and Bishop of that place, a Bulwark was erected on the Bridge, out of which issued the Bastard of Orleans, but was beaten back into the Town with the loss of his men, and of the Fort: About two months after the Town was besieged, the Earl of Salisbury looking into  the Town out at a window of the Tower within the Bulwark, was unhap∣pily killed with a great shot, whose death was fatall to the English, who began now to decline in their victories. Suffolk is made Generall in that siege, whom the Regent furnisheth with new supplies by Sir Iohn Fal∣stolph; who in his return
towards the siege, is set upon by 9000 French,  under Delabreth, and Steward, now Constable of France, who with five thousand five hundred of their men are slain, and eleven thousand taken prisoners. This was called by the French the battel of herrings, because the English chief provision then was such Lenten Stuffe. Orleans being wearie of so long a siege, and finding the French aid failed them, sent to the Duke of Burgoin, to take them into his protection, to which he assented if the Regent would so agree thereunto; but he refused, thinking it a dishonour for King Henry to beat the Bush, and another to catch the Hare: Wherefore the Duke's affection to the English  began to grow colde. At last Alanson in the night time (the English Watches being care∣lesse) conveyed many Regiments of men, and Provisions are con∣veyed into the Towne, so that shortly after they Sallied out, slew six hundred of our men, and tooke two Bulwarks. They assaulted also Talboat, in the Bastile, who beat them back into the Towne with losse of their men. The next day Suffolke quitted the Siege; and was himselfe within few dayes after Besieged, and ta∣ken Prisoner, with his Brother, and many more, in the Towne of Iargzaux, by Alanson, who kills all his Prisoners, except the former two. 1428 Alansons Army consisting of twenty three thousand men, was in∣creased by the comming of Arthur of Brittan, Count Vaudeme, and many more, who fall upon Talbot, Scales, and Hungerford, as they were conducting five thousand men to Fortifie the Towne of Meum, these three are taken Prisoners after some Bloudie blowes, and twelve hundred of their Company slaine. The Report of the French good Successe, made many Townes and Forts revolt to them: Hereupon the French King with a great Army enters Champaigne, takes Troys, the Chiefe City of that Province; Challons and Rhemes revolt to King Charles; upon this he is presently Crowned there; the report of whose Coronation, caused many places to rebell, and submit to the French King. The Regent finding the French so fortunate in recovering their Townes, meanes to trie them in a Pitch'd Battell, therefore Sum∣mons King Charles to a Fight, who accepts of the Challenge; but when it came to the upshot, he raised his Camp in the night, and run away; the next morning the Regent pursues him, but could not in∣duce him to fight; wherefore he returnes with his Army to Paris, where hearing of dayly revolts, marcheth out againe with his Ar∣my of ten thousand men, hoping to make the French (whose num∣ber was more then double) to ingage, but could not; about this time King Henry was Crowned. The Regent perceiving that the Townes of France generally revolted, resolves to make Normandy sure; therefore  he repaires thither, calls a Parliament, and lets them know, the right 1429 King Henry had to that Dutchie, the miseries they endured under the French, and their happiness under the English Government, and withall promiseth them a further addition of immunities. Mean while King Charles labours to win the Duke of Burguoin by great promises, and shewes of grief, for the murthering of the Dukes father, with which pas∣sages the Duke acquaints the Regent; the King perceiving he could not win the Duke, sets down before Paris with his whole Army, scales the walls, and thinks to take it by storm, but is beat back by the English Gar∣risons  there. King Henry understanding of the daily revolts in France, from him, comes to Callice with a great Army, and by the way of Rohan mar∣cheth to Paris, where he is anointed and crownedKing of France, receiving homage and fealtie from the nobility and Citizens. At length a peace be∣ing urged by Pope Eugenius 4. both Kings condescend to a truce for
6 years,  which lasted but a while, for shortly after King Henrys return into England, Ann the Regents wife, and sister to the Burgundian died, whereby the Dukes affections to the Regent grew cold daily; the truce lately concluded, is broken by the French, who by secret underminings possest themselves dai∣ly of towns and castles; they secretly convey 200 soldiers into the castle of Rohan, hoping to surprize it, but the treason is detected, and the conspi∣rators 1432 driven into the dungeon, whence some are hanged, some tortured, some imprisoned, and a few ransomed. Iohn Lord Talbot is now redeemed out of prison, who brings from England 800 men, and joynes with the Re∣gent, 1433 he challengeth the French to fight, but they refused▪ About this time  the Pesants of Normandy rebel, who marching towards Cane, used much cru∣eltie, but they are quickly suppressed by the Earl of Arundel, and the L. Willoughby, who slew above 1000 of them, and put their ringleaders to death by tortures. The E. of Arundel as he was besieging Gerbory Castle, is shot with a Culvering, and being taken prisoner, shortly after dieth. The D. of Burbon after 18 years imprisonment is ransomed for 18000 pound; but died in London the same day he intended for France: The Regent and D. of Burgoin being exasperated against each other by some tale-tellers, were again reconciled by their friends, and so far as to meet at S. Omers for a conference, but whilst they both stood upon punctilios of honor, the  Regent claiming superioritie as the son, brother and Uncle to Kings, the Burgundian as Lord of that town, they departed discontented; and forth∣with Burguoin makes a league with the French King, the murtherer of his father; about this time S. Dennis was betraied to the French by the bastard of Orleans, and shortly after recovered again by the English, who beat 1434 down the walles and towres thereof. Ponthois also rebels, and thrusts the English garison out of the town; mean while the Regent dieth, and is so∣lemnly buried in S. Marles Church at Rohan in a rich monument, at which the Norman Nobility stormed, who not long after intreated K. Lewis 11. to pluck it down, and cast the Regents carcass into the open fields, which he  refused to do, holding it baseness in them to insult over his dead body, whom they durst not look on whilst he was alive. After him the Duke of York is made Regent, which place was aimed at by Somerset the Kings cou∣sin. Paris revolts with divers other places, using the English cruelly and scornfully: The Normans also rebel and insult over the English, till they were subdued again by Talbot and Scales, who slew 5000 of these rebels. The new Regent with 8000 soldiers lands at Harflew, and from thence comes to Rohan, but his proceedings were much hindred by the D. of Som∣mersets privat grudgings; the D. of Burgundy pretending a title to Callis, be∣siegeth it with 40000 men, by 3 assaults he attempted to win it, but is still  beat off with loss; then he thought to subdue it by famin, but could not because the English Navy was master at sea; at last he tries to shut up the harbour, by sinking 4 great hulks filled with massie stones cemented with iron and lead, that they might not be beaten asunder by the sea; but being they were not sunk in the channel, at low water the ships lay dry, so that the Callisians tore them asunder for their own use; the Duke had built a strong Bastyle, and placed 400 men it, which annoyed the town much; but it was assaulted and won by some troops of horse out of the town, the Protector being landed with his forces, so affrighted the D. who lay now between the town and English army, that he removes in the night, lea∣ving  his ordnance, tents, armor, and provision to the Protector, who ha∣ving 25000 men in his army, falls upon Flanders and Artois with fire and sword, and then returns with rich booties to Callice, and from thence into England, being in much trouble about the Scots invasion with 30000 men under K. Iames 1. who besieged the Castle of Rosburg; which the
Scots left  and retreated into their own country, upon the coming of the Earl of Northumberland with his army. About this time Q. Catherin the Kings mo∣ther died. The D. of York is discharged of his Regency in France, and the 1436 1437 E of Warwick is put in his room, who after 7 times imbarking arrived in Normandy, and sends Talbot, Faulconbridg, and sir Thomas Kyriel with 5000 men to raise the siege from Crotoy, afore which Burgundy lay with 1000 men. The D. upon this flies into Albevyl, and from thence into Amiens; the English finding that he would not fight, enter Piccardy and Artois, spoiling all before them, and carrying away much bootie; Kyriel surprized the Dukes carriages and ordnance. The E. of Mortayn, Somersets son, took the 1438 castle of S. Auyan in Mayn, where he slew 300 Scots, and hanged al the French  men there, for their revolting. The English begin to have some hopes in regaining of Paris upon the rebellion of the Dolphin against his father, therfore a great army is prepared, but the Dolphin was reconciled again to the French K. and so the English hopes were strangled in their birth. Iohn L. Clifford in a frostie and snowie night clothes himself and followers all in white, and so having passed over the ditches of Ponthois, they scale 1439 the walls, and take the town, in which they killed the most part of the men found there, some ransomed themsevles; upon this the French King in person besiegeth Ponthois, giving it many furious assaults, but to no pur∣pose:  mean while Richard Beauchamp E. of VVarwick and Regent of France died; so Richard D. of York is made Regent the 2d time, who with a great ar∣my repairs to the siege, daring the French K▪ into the field, which he refu∣sed; so leaving his Ordnance in the Bastyl of S. Martin which he had ere∣cted, raised his siege in the night, and went to Poysy; the English next mor∣ning seise themselves of the tents and provisions left behinde, so having fortified the town, the Regent with his army goeth towards Poysy and dares the French King; who finding it good sleeping in a whole skin, refu∣sed to fight; whereupon the Regent forsakes him, and marcheth to Rohan; when the French K. heard that the English were so far off, he besiegeth Ponthoys the 2d time, assaulting it almost every hour, he lost before it almost 3000 men, and in the end he won the town, where he slew 400 English. At last both Kings being weary of war, desire a parley, for which Callis was appointed, because Charls of Orleans who had bin a prisoner in England ever since the battel of Agencourt, was to be conveyed thither; the Ambassadors could not agree, because K. Henrys demands were thought unreasonable. 1440 1. In demanding 300000 crowns for his ransom, too great a sum. 2. For re∣quiring the possession of Aquitan and Normandy, without acknowledement of homage to the crown of France. 3. For desiring al Townes and Forts in France to be delivered up to K. Henry, which the English had enjoyed with∣in the last 30 years, so the parley is dissolved; yet shortly after Philip of Bur∣gundy paid the D. of Orleans his ransom. In the interim the Regent divides his forces into 4 troops, which in several places invade France and Norman∣dy; the French on the other side being 60000. fall upon Aquitan and Guian, taking in many towns and forts, which shortly after were retaken by the English: about this time dissention arose between the protector & his uncle the Cardinal of VVinchester, and the Archbishop of York, whom he accuseth for doing publick things for their privat gain, the matter is referred to the counsell, but no redress was had, because most of them were Clergy 1442 men; and to vex the Protector the more, they accused and convicted his wife of witchcraft, and that she had conspired against the Kings life, wher∣fore  she is forced 3 times to do publick penance in London, and then com∣mitted to perpetual imprisonment; divers of her associates were executed. King Henry made the L. Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, and sent him into Nor∣mandy with 3000 choice men. The E. of Arminac to strengthen his title of in∣heritance to the Countess of Comings lands, offers his daughter in mariage
to King Henry, with much money, and a surrender of all the lands in Aquitan belonging to him; this offer was willingly hearkned unto; but the French King prevented the matoh, by making himself owner of the said Earls dominions; So King Henry will think no more on that match. After much effusion of blood, a peace is made between the two King∣domes 1443 for eighteen months; in which time the Earl of Suffolk without any Commission or acquainting his associates, sollicits a match between King Henry and Margaret, Cousin to the French King, and daughter to Rey∣ner Duke of Anjou, and titulary King of Sicily, Naples and Ierusalem. He demands no money, because the Duke was poor, he also consents that  King Henry shall freely release to her Father, all his right to the Dutchie of Anjou, and Countrey of Mayne: This motion was well liked by the French Lords; and King Henry; but opposed by the Protector, because the Duke was poor, his honor but . ar. 2. That the King was inga∣ged to Mary, Arminacs daughter. 3. his loss would be great to part with his interest in Anjou and Mayne; but these reasons were rejected, the King resolves to have her, and therefore bestowes new honors on them who were inclined to this match; among others this Earl of Suffolk is made Marquis, whom the King sends richly attended into France, to receive the young Queen from the French King, and Reyner her Father;  within few days after her arrivall she was married, and Crowned. The time of the truce is almost expired, great preparations in France for re∣newing the War, King Henry to incounter those preparations, calls a 1445 Parliament, in which the Marquiss of Suffolk makes a speech highly tending to his own commendations, in commemorating his former ser∣vices, which he desires may be recorded; this was consented to with great applause, and he is made Duke of Suffolk. Such was the condition of France at this time, that within few years the whole Kingdome with Aquitan and Normandy is lost to the English; partly by the wise Counsels of the Duke of Orleans, who had he been  kept a prisoner still, it had been better for England, and partly by means of this unfortunate match between the King and Queen, whereby he lost Arminac, and other friends, nor did this Lady bring either money or new friends to strengthen his cause: Besides, the giving up of his right of Anjou and Mayne, lost him both Normandy and Aquitan. The murther also of Glocester his wise Counseller, and the Kings own milde and peace∣able disposition, were main causes of the loss of France; now the Queen being of a haughty and revengefull spirit, scorned that the King should be altogether ruled by Glocester the Protector, therefore she being incou∣raged by Buckingham, Suffolk, the Cardinall of Winchester, and the Arch-Bishop of York, all enemies to the Protector, calls him in question,  for the treasure spent in the French Wars; then in Parliament they con∣demn him to imprisonment, for high Treason; and the next day he was found dead; thus was that good Duke of Glocester rewarded for his faithfull service. Upon his death the Duke of York begins secretly to set on foot his Title to the Crown, the Duke of Suffolk fills his Coffers with the peoples money. The Souldiers are neglected, the Kings Coun∣sellers disabled, and the people discontented. The Truce with France is violated on the English side, by taking the Town of Tongyers on the Frontiers of Normandy, belonging to the Duke of Britany, without satis∣faction given to the Duke, and on the French side, by taking Pont-Larch 12 miles from Rohan, where the English were cruelly slain, and their goods rifled; so within a few years after, the most Towns in Normandy and Guyan are delivered up to the French among the rest, Harflew, and 1448 Rohan, by Sommerset and Shrewsbury: These disasters went not alone, but
were accompanied with a rebellion in Ireland, which drew thither the Duke of York with an Army, who both suppressed the Rebellion, and by his wisdome, courtesie and valour, obtained the love of the Nation. The Irish expedition hindred the affairs of Normandy; yet Sir Thomas Kyriel is sent thither with 1400 men, who regained some lost places, and 1449 then joyned himself to Matthew Gough and others, so that now their ar∣my consists of 5000 who encountring with 7000 of the enemies march∣ing to the siege of Cane were overthrown, 4000 of them being slain: Cane is closely besieged, and assaulted by the French, but so stoutly de∣fended  by the English, that many French men lost their lives there; at last the English being tired out, and Sommerset importuned by his wife, and clamours of the meaner people, resolves to surrender it, though he was much opposed in this by Sir David Hall, Captain of Cane, who af∣firmed that this Town belonged not to the King, but to the Duke of York, and that therefore Sommerset though the Kings Lieutenant there, could not surrender it; but at last it is yeilded upon Articles: And so now all Normandy is lost. Sir David Hall in anger sailes into Ireland, and incenseth York against Sommerset, whom he persecuted so, that at last this Sommerset lost his head. The Queen is blamed for the loss of Norman∣dy; 1450 so was Suffelk, who is accused of high Treason. 1. In causing the Duke of Glocester to lose his Protectorship and life. 2. For placing ill Counsellers about the King. 3. For misguiding the Queen, and mis∣ruling the Kingdome. 4. For losing Aquitn and Normandy. 5. For re∣porting that his daughter in Law, heir to Iohn Duke of Somerset, was next heir to the Crown, if the Kings issue failed. 6. For perswading the French to transport an Army into England, that his son Iohn by his wife might succeed to the Crown. 7. For causing the Duke of Orleans to be set at liberty. 8 For perswading the French King by the same Duke to make sharper war in Normandy. 9. For having secret correspon∣dence with King Charls. 10. For discovering to the French King, the weakness of King Henrys provisions. 11. For bragging he had power to work the French King to any thing. 12. For stopping supplys from the Kings Army in Normandy and France. 13. For his ill gotten wealth, and monopolies of the chief Offices. The Queen to prevent the Dukes further perill, who could not clear himself of these Articles, caused him to be sent to the Tower, and then concluding the Parliament, restored him to high favour with the King; the people repine at this, and then openly rebell, under Blew∣beard their Commander, but this rebellion was nipped in the bud, and the Ring leaders executed. Upon this a Parliament is called ar Leice∣ster, where in the lower House Justice is required to be done of Suffolk, whom the King to please the people exiled for 5 years, but as he was sai∣ling to France, he is taken, landed on Dover sands, and his head chopt off on a boats side: Thus was the blood of Humphry Duke of Glocester re∣venged. Mean while the Dvke of York in Ireland, sets on foot here in England his claim to the Crown, as being descended lineally from Philip heir of George Duke of Clarence, the elder brother of Iohn of Gaunt, great Grand-father to King Henry 6. It was also whispered about that God blessed not King Henrys usurped succession, as might be seen by the loss  of France: The weakness of the King, the ambition of the Queen, and wickedness of the Counsellers; hereupon a Kentisb Rebel, Iack Cads, who falsly called himself Mortimer, made an insurrection there, and with his armed crew marched towards Greanwich, where the King then was, to whom he sent messengers, to inform him, that he meant not to hurt
his person, but to remove his evil Councellors, who had oppressed the peo∣ple. The King upon this is counselled to encounter these Rebels, not with words, but swords; therefore an Army is suddenly raised, the Rebels re∣treat, whom the Kins Forces under Sir Humphry Stafford, and his brother, pursued: the Rebels taking advantage of place and time, confronted and o∣vercame many of the Kings Forces. After this victory, Iack with his graceless rout, came to black Heath, thence to London, where they did much mischief; but at length the Kings pardon is proclaimed to all, except to the Ring-leaders; so the fearful multitude left their Captains. Iack is proscribed, and a thousand Marks promised to him that shall bring him dead or alive. In the end he was found, and slain; as he fought desperately for his life, his head is presented to the King, who paid the reward. The Duke of York being advertised by his friends, and such as disliked the 1451 present Government, that a Parliament was at hand, left his Deputation in Ireland, and returns home, where he adviseth with Iohn Duke of Norfolk, and his other friends, how he might without usurpation, or treason, set forth his Title to the Crown. After long debate, it was concluded, that the Duke of York should raise an Army, under pretence of removing the Duke of So∣merset from Court, for mis-ruling the King and Queen, for oppressing the people, for occasioning the loss of France, and for other treasons. The King upon this raiseth also an Army, who understanding from the Duke of  York, that he intended nothing against his person and state, but only the re∣moval of Somerset; the King sent Somerset (for a shew) to the Tower. Here∣upon York dissolves his Army, and privately repairs to the King, where un∣expectedly he meets with Somerset, and is accused by him of treason, for rai∣sing an Army to destroy the King; wherefore he is detained prisoner: but be∣cause the Kings Councel thought it unlikely that he aimed at the Crown, see∣ing he had dismissed his Army upon Somersets commitment, he is shortly af∣ter released. In the midst of these troubles, the Lords of Acquitain offers secretly to surrender that Dutehy again into the hands of King Henrie. Here∣upon 1452 Talbot Earl of Shrewsbruy, is sent over with three thousand choice men, who received the Dutchy to the Kings use. But the French King with two and twenty thousand came suddenly and fought the English; here the Earl, and almost all his Army, was slain, and Aquitain regained. Shortly after 1453 Prince Edward is born, Edward Tuthar King Henries brother by the mother side, and father to King Henry the seventh, is made Earl of Richmond. The Duke of York complains to divers of the Nobility, of the Treasons and Treacheries of Somerset, and strengthens himself by the assistance of the Earls of Salisbury, and Warwick; then he causeth Somerset to be arrested of High Treason in the Queens great Chamber, whence he was conveyed to the 1454 Tower, and shortly after accused in the Parliament of Treason. The Parliament is adjourned by reason of the Kings either reall or feigned sickness: Shortly after, Somerset is inlarged, and made Governor of Calice, to the great discontent both of Lords and Commons; the Duke of York, and his associats, raise another Army within the Marches of Wales, both to be re∣venged on Somerset, and to set the Crown upon Yorks head; so they march towards London. The King to prevent his coming thither, meets him with another Army at Saint Albons; a bloudy battail is fought, on the Kings part were slain Somerset, Stafford, Buckingham, Clifford, and more then eight thousand Lords, Knights, and others. The King is taken prisoner, and brought to the Duke of York, who having power to kill him, yet used him with all respect, and brought him with honour to London; where upon the Dukes re∣quest, a Parliament is called, and York made Protector of the Kings person, and kingdom. Salisbury is made Lord Chancelour, and his son Warwick, Captain of Calice; and so
the kingdom was governed, to the content of all  good men; but Humphrie Duke of Buckingham, who lost his eldest son in the battail of S. Albons, and Beauford, the new Duke of Somerset, who then lost his Father, inform the Queen, that for all this fair shew, these Trium∣viri 1455 would bring misery on her, and on the King, whose Crown they meant to set on the head of York, if their plots be not prevented. Hereupon the Queen and they in a reat Councel held at Greenwich, re∣move York and Salisbury from their government: Hence divers broils are bred; the Merchant-strangers in London, for growing richer then others, because of their parcimony, and vigilancy, are robbed, but the chief offen∣dors in this were put to death. The French burn and rob some Frontier Towns in this kingdom. The Scots also did much hurt in York shire, till the Duke came against them with a great Army, then they retreated into thei own Country. 1456 The Queen made great shew of love to York, but meant his ruine; therefore she got the King to make his Progress to the North, Hunting and Hawking by the way: Mean while by her letters she requires the three Lords to come to a speedy Conference with the King: whereupon they came, suspecting no hurt, and were kindly used. But being advertised of their danger, the Duke of York fled to Wales, Salisbury to his own Country, and his son Warwick into Calice. The King fearing that these jars among his Nobles, would occasion  his enemies abroad to attempt mischief against him and his kingdom, caused all his Lords to meet at London. The Lancastrian Faction lodged in the Sub∣urbs, 1457 the Yorkish within the walls, the Citizens fearing blows, remained Neuters; and to keep the Kings Peace, guarded the streets night and day with armed men. But at length the Arch-Bishop of Canterbury, with other Clergy men, prevailed so with their Rhetorick, that the King, Queen, and Lords, met, and friendly (at least in shew) intertained each other. This union is honoured with a Religious procession through the City; in which the King wore the Crown, the Queen was led by the Duke of York, the Lords of each Faction, went hand in hand, at which the people much re∣joiced.  But shortly after, upon a falling out between a servant of the Kings, and a Gentleman of Warwicks, in which the Kings servant was wounded, the Kings guard assaulted the Earl and his followers, as he was taking horse; much bloud was shed, but no man killed. The Queen who hated the Earl, commanded he should be apprehended, and sent to the Tower; which he 1458 hearing of, posted away into York shire, where he complains to the Duke of York, and to his Father, of the wrongs done him by the Kings servant, and the Queen notwithstanding the late friendship; but fearing he might be outed of his government in Calice, he posts thither, his father the Earl of Salisbury, marcheth to the Court with ve thousand men, complaining to the King of  the wrongs done by his servants to his son, and of the Queens dissimulation. The Queen upon this, causeth the Lord Audley to incounter him on his way with ten thousand men, and to bring him dead or alive; she also came af∣ter with another Army. The two Lords fight desperately on both sides: at last, the Lord Audly with two thousand four hundred of his men are slain, and Salisbury remained Master of the Field. The Duke of York perceiving that his life was secretly aimed at, raiseth an Army, and claims his Title to the Crown in the open Field. Therefore he 1459 with Salisbury, march into Wales, where Warwick repairs to them, with Trallop and Blunt, two expert Commanders in the French wars. Their  Armies meet the Kings Forces neer the Town of Ludlow: the two Captains, which pretended they were for the Lords, and had intended to invade the Kings Army, betimes the next morning, (being checkt in conscience to fight against their Soveraign) secretly fled, came to the King, and acquainted him with the Enemies project; for which service they are pardoned, and rewar∣ded.
The Lords understanding their two chief Captains were revolted, and dif∣fiding in their cause, fled from their Army in the dark; the Duke into Wales, and thence into Ireland, the other two into Devonshire, and from thence to Calice. The King glad at their flight, pursues them, but too late; he par∣doneth the ordinary soldiers of the Yorkish Faction, but their Captains were executed. The Lords are proclaimed Traitors, their goods and lands con∣fiscated, the government of the North is committed to the Earl of Northum∣berland, and to the Lord Clifford. Henry the young Duke of Somerset, is made Commander of Calice, who going to take possession, not thinking his Enemies were there, was beat off by the great Guns from the Castle. The  Queen hearing of this, prepares to send a new Fleet, which lay ready at Sandwich; but the Mariners, who favoured the Yorkish Faction, boarded these Ships, as they lay at anchor, and conveyed them with the Lord Rivers, ap∣pointed Admiral of them, to Calice; Warwick sails in them to Ireland, to confer with the Duke of York. In his return, the Duke of Exeter, Admiral of the Seas, intended to take him, but his Mariners, Favorers of the Yor∣kish Faction, were cold in the pursuit: so Warwick returned safe to Calice. The King upon advice of his Parliament, attainteth all the Lords of the Yor∣kish Faction, of high treason, and fills all the Sea Ports with Garisons, for fear of Invasion: But the Earls at Calice had secret notice of every thing done  in the Kings Chamber; they manned divers of the Kings ships, which Dyn∣ham had brought thither, in which they arrived within the haven of Sand∣wich, and took Sir Simon Mountfort prisoner, Warden of the Cinque Ports, vanquished the Town, and caried away such of the Kings Ships, as they found there. They arrive at Sandwich the second time, and are assisted by the Lord Cobham, with twenty five thousand men, who march towards Lon∣don, whither the Lord Scales is sent to secure it for the King: but the Lord Major would not suffer him to enter, shewing he had power sufficient to keep the City for the King; so Scales in anger, possesseth the Tower, and annoics the Londoners. The King marcheth with Buckingham and Somerset, and with many other Lords, and a strong Army, against the Enemy: the two Armies met near Northampton; the King is for Peace, the Queen for a Battail, who therefore incourageth the soldiers. The fight began, and lasted two houres very furi∣ously: At last the King is overthrown, two thousand of his men slain, among which were Buckingham, Shrewsbury, and many others. The Queen with Somerset and the Prince, fled to Durham, hoping to raise a new Army, or else to shelter themselves in Scotland. The King is taken prisoner, and caried honourably to London. The Tower is delivered to the Lords by the soldiers, against the will of the Lord Scales, who striving to escape disguised in a wher∣ry,  is taken and beheaded. The Duke of York hearing of his Victory, repairs to London, calls a Parliament in the Kings name, and sate down in the Kings seat in the upper House, where in an eloquent speech, he discovered his title to the Crown, being heir to Anne daughter of Roger Mortimer, son and heir to Philip, the only daughter of Lionel Duke of Clarence, the third son of Ed∣ward the third, and elder brother to Iohn of Gant, who was Father to the U∣surper, King Henry the fourth. He related also the several calamities that fell upon this kingdom, under that unlawful government. Lastly, he requires no favour, but what justice will afford him, nor other possession, then what his descent and title will allow him. The Lords and Commons after long de∣liberation,  enacted, that King Henry should continue King for his life; that the Duke of York should be proclaimed heir apparent of the Crown; that he should be Protector both of King, and kingdom; and that the present posses∣sion of the Crown, should be delivered to him, if at any time King Henry, or his friends, should attempt to infringe these Acts, now confirmed by Oaths.
The Duke of York, being now Protector, sends to Scotland in the Kings name, to the Queen, Somerset, Exeter, Devonshire, Clifford, and Ross, and the rest of the Lords fled thither, to repair to the Kings presence; but they instead of obeying this command, come to the Court with an Army of eigh∣teen thousand English and Scots. Hereupon the Duke of York, with his youn∣ger son, the Earl of Rutland, and the Earl of Salisbury, leaving the King with the Duke of Norfolk, and Earl of Warwick, march with five thousand men, and met the Queen at Wakefield. The Duke in expectation of his el∣dest son Edward, Earl of March, with a great Army, would needs fight, which unfortunately he did, for there he was slain, and almost three thousand of his men. Rutland being but twelve years old, kneeling, desired mercy, but was cruelly stabbed by the Lord Clifford. Salisburies head, with divers others, are struck off, and set upon the walls of York, in spight of the Yorkish Facti∣on. The young Duke of York after this, with three thousand men, fights Pembroke, the Kings half brother, and some other Lords, with their compa∣nies. In the first incounter, Pembroke, and the Earl of Ormond fled, four 1460 thousand of their friends are slain, Owen Tuthar Father in law to King Henry, is taken prisoner, with many others, and put to death. Mean while the Q. Army beats the Duke of Norfolk, and rescues King Henry from his power. But when she heard of young Yorks victory, she retreats Northward, and rai∣seth  sixty thousand men, and near Towton, is met by York, Warwick, and al∣most forty nine thousand men; a cruel battail is fought, in which above thirty six thousand English are slain; among which, were divers Earls, and Lords, the two Dukes, Somerset and Exeter fled, Devonshire, with many others, ta∣ken prisoners; the King, Queen, Prince Edward, and others, are fled into Scotland, where they are friendly intertained by the young King; in recom∣pence of which favour, Barwick is delivered to the king of Scots. The Duke of York being Victor, rode triumphantly into York, took down the heads of his Father and Friends, and in the same place causes the heads of Devon∣shire, and some others, to be set up. King Henry sends his Queen, with Prince Edward, to her Father Reyner, desiring him to procure aid from the French king: In the mean while he resolves to stay in Scotland, in expectation of better fortunes. These troubles were presaged by a blazing star, divers pro∣digious births, and a monstrous cock out of the sea. A Porcland crowed three times, turning his head to the South, North, and West. In king Hen∣ries time Pauls steeple was fired with Lightning, and Leaden Hall in London built. Upon a League with Spain, our Sheep are transported thither. The white and red Roses began to be the badges of York and Lancaster. Whit∣tington Colledge, and Newgate are built. The Bishop of Salisbury is pulled  from the high Altar, as he was saying Mass, and on the top of a Hill near Edington, is barbarously murthered by the Wiltshire men. Each one of his te∣nants carying away in triumph, a piece of his bloudy shirt. In this kings time also, France, Normandy, and Aquitain, are lost, five main battails fought between the two great Factions: 1. At Saint Albons, in which the Yorkish prevailed. 2. On loar Heath, wherein the confederate Lords are Victors. 3. At Northampton, in which king Henry is overthrown. 4. At VVakefield, wherein the king was victorious. 5. At Towton, in which the new Duke of York prevailed.
CHAP. XXV. A Prosecution of the Scottish History under Robert Duke of Albany, and Mar∣do Earl of Fife Governours; also under James the first, and James the second, Kings, from the year 1400, till the year 1460. WEE shewed before, that the peace being broken by Piercies 1400 invasion of Scotland, open war is denounced by the Scots against England. Archibald Duglas, with ten thousand  men, rageth with fire and sword as far as New Castle. Henry Piercy, and George Dumbar, meets him with a strong Army; a battail is fought, the Scots are defeated, and Duglas having lost one eye, is taken prisoner, with some other Lords. This battail was fought at Hamildon in Northumberland; 1401 About this time died Annabella the Queen, and Trale Arch-Bishop of S. An∣drews, who kept Prince David, a lascivious and unruly youth, in some awe; but when they were dead, he flew into all kind of disorders, complaints came daily of him to the king his father, who desires his brother the Duke of Al∣bania, Lord Protector, to keep a strict hand over the young Prince: he wil∣ling to extinguish his brothers race, makes David a close prisoner, purposing  to starve him; but he was relieved a while by a maid, the keepers daughter of the prison, who through the window conveyed unto him thin Oaten Cakes, which she hid in a Linnen Cloth cast over her head, to keep her from the heat of the Sun. A Country Nurse also sometimes gave him suck out of her breasts, which he received by a cane; so his life was prolonged a while: but the kee∣per upon suspition, watched the prison so narrowly, that he caught both these women, who were punished; the cruel keeper execrating his own daughter, suffered the young Prince at last to eat his own flesh, for want of other food, and so he died miserably. No man durst acquaint his Father with this sad and bar∣barous usage, nor with his death a long time, for fear of the Protector. But at last by secret whisperings, the king hears of it, sends for his brother, and ac∣cuseth him, he layeth the fault upon others, and is ready to clear both himself and servants. Mean while he corrupts his accusers, produceth some malefa∣ctors out of prison, but free from this crime, whom he cruelly puts to death. Yet the king could not but intertain the suspition still of his brothers treachery, but durst not punish him, because of his greatness: Mean while being much grieved for his son David, takes care for his younger son Iames, now under the tuition of the Arch-Bishop of Saint Andrews, who with others of the kings friends, advise him to send the Prince to Charles the sixth King of France,  so he should be educated by him, and out of harms way. Upon this, he is sent with Sinclar Earl of Orkney, his Governour, towards France; but stops at Flamburg, by reason of the wind, or his own sickness, where he is detained by the English, and sent up to the King, who retains him as a prisoner, against the Law of Nations, and Articles of Peace, made lately for eight years. The king of England having received Letters from the Scots King, shew∣ing the causes of his sons going to France, and withall desiring he may not be detained in England, desires to be advised by his Councel, what he should do in this case; some were of opinion, that seeing this Prince was sent away to secure him from danger, and that there was now a peace with Scotland, the  Scots Prince should be set free, and hospitably used; and that there was no policy at that time to exasperate the Scots: but others affirmed, that his deten∣sion was just, because the Scots had aided Piercy against the king, and that old Piercy being a traitour, is maintained
and sheltred by the Scots king. This o∣pinion prevailed; Prince Iames is retained, and care taken for his education. But when news came of his captivity to king Robert his father, being then at Supper, he fell suddenly so ill, that they could scarce keep life in him; so grie∣ved he was, that within three days he died, the 16 year of his Reign. The Government of the kingdom is committed to his brother Robert. In the five 1406 following years, divers incursions of English and Scots upon each other were made, and divers places taken and re-taken. The battail of Harlaw among the Scots themselves, was memorable. Donald Lord of the Isles, laid claim to the Country of Ross, as being next heir, and which the Governor wrongfully detained from him; therefore having raised ten thousand men in the Isles, en∣ters Ross, where none made resistance, all acknowledging him for their  Lord. Having had such good success here, he attempts Morray land, which also submitted to him; then having plundred Bogie, he threatens Aberden; the Governour against this sudden and unlooked for enemy, prepares an Army, but before he could be ready, the Earl of Marre, with most of the Gentry of those parts, encounters him near the Village Harlaw; a bloudy battail is fought, which continued till the night parted them: so great was the losse on both 1411 sides, that neither party brag of the Victory. More Gentry were lost in this intestin quarrel, then before at any time against a Forain Enemy. About this time the University of Saint Andrews was erected. For ten years after this, no memorable action is recorded between the two kingdoms; either because of the Truce, and the English imployments in France, under Henry the fifth, or else because the Governour of Scotland durst not stir, fearing lest the king of England should send home the right heir to the kingdom Some inroads the Borderers made now and then upon each o∣ther, but not by publick Authority: The Dolphin of France being disinheri∣ted by his crazy-headed father, sends to Scotland for aid, according to the old League. A Parliament is summoned, and seven thousand Voluntaries un∣der Iohn Earl of Buchan are sent, who got the French a memorable victory against the English, for which, he is made High Constable of France, the  highest office next to the King. Mean while, Robert Protector of Scotland dieth, fifteen years after the death of king Robert the third. In his place is set up his son Mordacus, a man unfit for Government; which called the Earl of Buchan home from France, who shortly after was invited again by the Dol∣phin 1420 into France, whither he hasteneth, with five thousand Scots, and lands at Rotchel. King Henry of England carieth over with him into France, young King Iames of Scotland, purposely by his means to alienate the Scots from the French, which he could not do; for when the Scots King did press them to forsake the French, and joyn with their King; they answered, that their King being now under another jurisdiction, had no power over them: where∣fore King Henry having found in Meldin which he took, twenty Scots, he cau∣sed them to be hanged, pretending they fought against their King. Two years after, the English having got a victory at Vernol, Earl Buchan, with o∣ther Lords, and two thousand Scots besides, were there slain. And three years after this, the Scots had another overthrow, as they were conveying provisions to Orleans. Scotland in the interim, is untowardly governed by Mordacus, and his three unruly sons, who sleighted their old father. Wal∣ter the eldest, being in love with one of his fathers Falcons, begged him, but having received a denial, in anger wrung off his neck; to whom the old man thus spake Son, (saith he) because thou wilt not obey me, I will send for  one whom both thou and I shall obey. Wherefore he resolves to send for his Cousin German King Iames. A Parliament is called at Perth, where it is unanimously concluded, that the King must be sent for, all men being weary of the present Government. Ambassadors are dispatched into England, the
Duke of Gloucester being then  tector of the young King, calls a Parliament; in which it was resolved the Scots King should be sent home, and to indear him the more to England, the Duke of Somersets daughter is given to him in mariage; her portion should be retained for half of the Kings Ransom, for paiment of the other half, some Hostages should be left: So Iames returns home the eighteenth year of his Captivity, to the great joy of the people, who complained of their grie∣vances 1423 suffered by Mordaos three sons, and others, who to satisfie the people, were sent to prison till the next Parliament The King and Queen are Crowned about the twentieth of April, Mor∣dac set the King in his Throne, a ceremony belonging to the Earls of Fife. A  Parliament is held, and some good laws enacted for suppressing of high-way men, who were become very bold and numerous, according to the looseness of the former times. Subsidies are also granted, for paiment of the moity of the Kings Ransom, which because it was unpleasing to the people, some part thereof was remitted by the King. In this Parliament, Mordacus Duke of Albany, with his two sons, Walter and Alexander, and divers others, are apprehended, and sent to several prisons; the Dukes Castles are seized on for the King. Iames the Dukes youngest son, seeing the ruine of his Fathers Family, in revenge, raiseth some Forces, and burns Dun-Britton; then having murthered the Kings Uncle, with thirty more, flies into Ireland, where short∣ly  after he died. Divers prime persons also fled with him. Shortly after, a Parliament is held at Sterling, where. Mordac with his two sons, and his wives father, are arraigned of High Treason, and beheaded. Not long af∣ter this, Ambassadors come from France, to renue the old League, and to make a match between Charles the sevenths son, and King Iames his daugh∣ter, being as yet children. The next year after, the King makes a Progresse into the Northern parts, 1426 for suppressing some turbulent spirits there. Divers of the factions Ring-lea∣ders are apprehended, and put to death. Alexander Lord of the Isles, upon intreaty of friends, is pardoned, and conditionally that he will be quiet, and subject to the Laws, is sent home: But he was so far from acknowledging the Kings favour, that he thought himself highly wronged for being imprisoned so long. Therefore he raiseth some Forces, and suddenly falls upon Inner∣nesse, which he first plunders, then sets on fire. He besieged the Castle, but could not take it; therefore riseth, upon the report of an Army sent by the King against him. He was now ten thousand strong, but two of the Clans, to wit, Chatan and Chameron, upon the news of the Kings Forces coming, for∣sook him. Hereupon, mistrusting the fidelity of the rest, disbands his Forces and flies into the Islands, and thence intends for Ireland; but finding no se∣curity, except in the Kings wonted clemency, procures some potent friends  to make his peace with him, to which the King would not hearken, till he come himself; therefore he comes privately to Edinburgh, and in a white sheet upon Easter day, casts himself at the Kings feet, and submits to his mercy; the Queen and Lords then present intercede for him: he is commanded to stay till Divine Service was ended. Mean while the King thinking it fit to yeild somewhat to the Queens request, and yet not safe to send home so potent and factious a man, without some punishment, he sends him to Tentallon Ca∣stle, and his pragmatical mother to the Isle Aemona: the Clan-Catans, and Clan-Chamerons, destroyed each other by their fewds. In the Isles, Donald Baloc, to revenge his Cousin Alexanders wrongs, makes new stirs. Against  him the Earls of Mar and Cathnesse, raise some Forces, whom Donald suddenly overthrew. Alan Earl of Cathness, was killed: Alexander of Mar, fled with a few. Donald upon this good success, goeth with fire and sword, through all Abria, or Lochabor, but hearing the Kings Army was coming, hastneth to the Isles, with rich booty; the chief of these Clans
repair to the King, to  clear their innocency, but he will admit of no purgation, till they bring to punishment, the Ring-leaders of these Rebels. Upon this, they go home, where they apprehend many of them, whom they put to death, and three hundred they sent in chains to the King, whom he commanded to be hanged; Donald himself could not be found. There were some other of these Clans left, who by their private quarrels, destroyed each other. Mack Donald, a nota∣ble Rebel, for shooing a widow, whom he had robbed, with horse shoos, was so shooed himself, and caried about the streets in that manner, with twelve of his companions, and then hanged upon Gallows near the high-way. Mach Donald the Islander, hid himself in Ireland; where his head was cut. off, and  sent to the King for a present: and so the kingdom was pretty well quie∣ted. After this, the King sends divers wise and sincere men about the kingdome, 1 40 to hear complaints, and to look to weights and measures. At this time he had two Twins born to him, which occasioned much joy, and the inlargement of Duglas and Kennedy out of prison, who had been sent thither for speaking too lavishly against the present Government. He advanceth learning, and sends for some skilful in all sorts of Manufacture out of Flanders. He had a mind also to reform the abuses of the Clergy, but durst not adventure, be∣cause of their power and exempt jurisdiction: Yet he was blamed for the lux∣ury and excess of his Courtiers, in diet, and apparel, though he himself was very moderate, both in the one and the other. He was disliked also for penu∣riousness, having a greater Revenue then his brother, by the addition of the Earls of Marr and Buchans patrimonies, who were dead. Whereas his Un∣cle Robert, and this Roberts son, his Cousin German Mordacus, the last Go∣vernours of Scotland, had been very bountiful to the people, whose inheritance also fell to the King, against whom the Gentry grumbled; also for keeping all the Wardships in his own hand, which ought to be given as Rewards to well deserving men. The King excused his parcimony, by shewing how poor his Revenues were by the profuseness of the former Governours and Kings;  and that he was forced to raise Taxes for defraying of publick charges. Mean while an Ambassador comes from France to bring away Margaret, who had been betrothed to Lewis, Charles the sevenths son. This Ambassie is crossed by another out of England, desiring an union of the two kingdoms, which is more natural, then with France, that neither speaks the same language, nor is consned within the same Island. This union was then earnestly desired, because Burgundy was fallen off from England, and France was beginning to grow too strong. Barwick, Rossburg, and the other places, now controverted, are promised to the Scots, if they will assent to an offensive and defensive League with England. The matter is referred to a Parliament, wherein it  was conceived, that Englands aim was to make the Scots forsake their old friends, to the end they should be wholly subject to the English. Therefore they resolve to be constant to their old League. This being denyed, the Ambassador threatneth war against Scotland, shewing there was already a Fleet prepared to intercept the Lady and her company. Notwithstanding these threats, the King sends away his daughter, who escaped the English Fleet, because that was ingaged in pursuit of some Holland Vessels, laden with wine from Rotchel, which they took for Prize, (England and Burgundy be∣ing now enemies) but this Prize was re-taken by the Spaniard. The Scots ships arrive safely at Rotchel, from whence the young Lady is conveyed by the French Nobility, to Turon, where she is maried, to the content of both Nations. The King of England had now twice provoked the Scots to make war; once by labouring to intercept the Scottish Lady; and then by sending Piercy with four thousand men to plunder the borders of Scotland, who was met by
Dug∣las  Earl of Angus, between whom was a hot Skirmish, and many killed on both sides, some say about 20, of the English were taken 1500. K. Iames raiseth a great Army, and besiegeth Roxburg; but when he was in hope of a surrender, the Q. comes post to him, & in a great fright assures him, that a plot was intended against him, suddenly to take away his life: Upon this, he ri∣seth from the siege, and disbands the Army, for which he was much blamed, in that he would be so uxorious, as at his wives report to dismisse an Army raised with so much trouble and charge. The King in his return, retires him∣self into the Dominicans Covent at Perth, to try what he could learn there of this plot. Mean while the Traitors (the chief of which was VValter of Athol, the Kings uncle) hasten to bring the Treason to maturity. One of  the Kings own servants makes way for the Traitors entrance into the Kings Chamber in the night, who presently assault him; the Queen by interposing her self to keep off the swords, received two wounds; but being forcibly ca∣ried away, and the King left to himself, he is murthered, having received 1437 twenty eight wounds. The sad news of the Kings death being spread a∣broad, inquiry is made every where for the Traitors, who were all found out, and in lesse then forty days justly executed. Walter Earl of Athol, had his limbs disjointed the first day, by the Strapado; then he was set upon a Pil∣lar, and there Crowned with a burning Crown of Iron, to accomplish what the Witches had told him, to wit, that he should be crowned in a great Assem∣bly  of people: the next day he is dragged by a horse through the streets of E∣dinburgh upon an Hurdle. The third day his bowels are taken out, and burned, he being yet alive; his heart is pulled out, and his head cut off, and advan∣ced upon a Pole. At last his body is quartred, and set up in four several pla∣ces: Some others of the same wicked crew, are tortured to death, with hot pincers; and others with other punishments. This King reigned thirteen years, and lived forty four: he was buried in the Charter House of Perth, which he founded. To Iames the 1. succeeded Iames the 2d, and youngest of the Twins, for Alexander the other died. This King is Crowned at Holy Roods in Edinburgh.  During his minority, Alexander Leviston is made Protector or Regent. Arch∣bald Earl of Duglas, being angry that this honour was not conferred on him, suffers, or rather encourageth the Ananders under his jurisdiction, to spoil and plunder the Country. Complaints are made against him, which he sleighted, commanding his people not to obey the Kings Edicts, alledging he had Re∣gal power himself. Besides there were private quarrels between the Regent and Chancelor, crossing each others power, to the great disturbance of the peo∣ple; which at last broke out into publick hatred, to pillaging, and burning of Houses and Villages. The Q. being much troubled at this distemper, and wil∣ling to get her young son out of the Chancelors custody, who kept him with  himself in Edinburgh Castle, cunningly insinuates her self so much into his good opinion, as that she got leave to lie in the same Castle with her son, whom at length she conveyed away in her Trunk, where she kept her Linen, to Lieth, and from thence in a ship to Sterlin, where the Regent resides. Thither the chief of his party came to see the King, and to consult, how the Kingdom should be freed from the Chancelors tyranny, who had abused his trust, wronged the King, oppressed the people, and filled his own Coffers with the wealth of the kingdom. There the Queens wisdom and care is highly commended; and its agreed, that an Army be raised, and Edinburgh Castle besieged, before the Chancelour know any thing. Presently the Regents Faction arm themselves and beleaguer the Castle. The Chancelor knowing his own danger, sends to Duglas for aid, assuring him that the Regent aimed at the ruine of them both. Duglas who hated them both equally, answers him that both the Chancelour and Regent were perfidious, and aimed at nothing
but their own private good,  and that therefore the Kingdom should be happy if they were both dead. Up∣on this answer, the Regent and Chancelour make Truce for two days, and came to a parly, in which they made known to each other, how dangerous it would be for them to jar, seeing Duglas desired the ruine of them both, aim∣ing at the sole rule of the kingdom, which he would easily obtain, if either he could ruine one or both of them. Thus they two agreed: The Chancelour delivers the keys of the Castle to the King, where he supped that night, and the next day confirms the one in his Chancelorship, the other in his Regency. But not long after, Duglas their mortal enemy died, whose son being fourteen years of age, by reason of his great wealth and power, and pufft up also  with flatterers, took more state on him, then became a subject. His Court outvied the Kings; his Guard consisted of two thousand horse, he made Knights; and Councellors, and Officers of his State; then he sends Ambassa∣dors to the French King, mentioning the merits of his Progenitors to the Crown of France, and so he obtains the Title of Duke of Turon, or Tours. Which honour his Grand-father received from Charls 7. and his father till that time enjoyed it. So formidable was the power of Duglas, that the Re∣gent and Chancelour committed the Queen and her husband Iames Stuart of Lorn to prison, upon suspition that they complyed with him. Nor were they set free, till they had cleared themselves, and promised not to meddle with  publick business, without the Regents knowledge. Whilst the kingdom was thus distracted, the Islanders land with great For∣ces upon the main land, and with fire and sword, spoil all before them, sparing neither sex nor age. To these miseries were added a great famin and pestilence; the cause of all these calamities is ascribed to the Regents tyrannical govern∣ment, who sleighting the Chancelor, ruled all by himself. But the Chancelour seeing how discontent the people were with the Viceroy, seizeth himself of E∣dinburgh Castle, and then watched an opportunity, to get the King out of the Regents custody. One day the King was hunting in the Woods near Sterlin, with a smal company, the Regent also then was out of the way; the Chan∣celor  with some Troops of horse lighting on the King, desires him not to fear, they were come to take him away from his Imperious Tutor, and to set him at liberty; therefore (saith the Chancelour) play the King, and strive now to rule both your self, and your people, whose disease is such as cannot be cured but by your own immediat hand. With this, he leads the Kings Horse by the bridle, to a place not far off, where four thousand horse were ready to convey him to Edinburgh, where he is received with great acclamation. The Viceroy being much perplexed, that he was thus overreached by the Chan∣celor, and not knowing whom to trust, resolves to cast himself upon the Chancelour: therefore with some of his retinue rides to Edinburgh, and  by the intercession of the Bishops of Aberden and Murrey, procured the Chancelour to give him a meeting in the church of Saint Aegidius; where having met, the Viceroy desires there might be no difference between them, seeing they both aimed at the same thing, which vvas the good of the King, and Kingdom, though in the manner there might be some diversi∣ties. He wisheth him to consider how many enemies they had, how glad they would be (saith he) of our jars, how happy might both we and the Kingdom be, if we accord, which if we doe, we shall secure our selves, disappoint our enemies, advance the Kings, and Kingdoms good; therefore if by either of us, any thing hath been done amiss, let it be forgot and forgiven, for the publick goods sake; he having said and confessed his error in carying away the yong K. (whose tuition was by his father committed to the Chancelor alone, & wch he had found to be no honor but a burthen to him) & the Chancelor being glad of this friendly overture, lays hold on it,
& so they are recōciled, & resolve  to concur equally in government of the kingdom. Then a Parliament is cal∣led, in which many grievances and complaints are exhibited, by those who had suffered in the late distractions. The Regent told them that Duglas might quickly remedy these evils, if he would comply with the Parliament, which can do but little good in settling of affairs, so long as so potent a man stood out against them. Upon this, an Order is made to invite him to the Parlia∣ment, that he with the rest might act for the publick good; that he would not degenerate from his noble Progenitors, who had been alway faithful Pa∣triots; that if he please to come, he shall have what share in the Government he will desire. Upon this invitation, and perswasion of friends, and desire also of more power, he comes. The Chancelour met him divers miles from the City, and entertains him for two days together at his house, called Crichton Castle, where he desires him to acknowledge the Kings power and government, and to submit thereto; that he would put away from him all lewd persons, and not protect high-way men, nor oppress the Kings subjects. What hath been by him hitherto acted, shall be imputed to his ill Councellors, and his own inex∣perience and youth. By these fair words, he was allured to go; who also had brought with him his brother David: But some of his wisest friends suspected treachery, and therefore wished him to return, or at least to send back his  brother, that the whole Family might not perish together. But these men were quickly silenced by the Chancelor; and the two young Gentlemen went in chearfully, suspecting no hurt. As soon as Duglas was entred Edinburgh Castle, the Vice-Roy meets him, and makes much of him, causing him to sit down at the Kings own Table. About the midst of Dinner, some of the Kings Guard in Arms, brings into the room a Bulls head in a Dish, which they set down before him. In those times, this was a sign of death to those that were to lose their heads. The young Gallant being affrighted at this sight; began to withdraw from the Table; but he was presently laid hold on and caried out into the Castle Court, where he for his intemperate youthful∣ness,  is beheaded, with his brother. When the King heard of this executi∣on, he wept, but was checkt for it by the Regent, shewing, that in the death of Duglas, consisted the Kings security and happiness. Duglas dying with∣out issue, the Earldom being intailed, fell to Iames, nick-named Crassus, or Grosse; and his other Patrimonies, which were very great, to his sister Beatrix. Grosse died within two years after; and his eldest son William succeeded, who 1443 maried with his Uncles daughter, heir of many Countries; which brought much envy on him, both because of the great power and wealth was fallen to him, and likewise the propinquity of bloud between him and his wife; of  these things he being conscious, resolved to procure the Kings favour upon a∣ny tearms, who now was of years, and had undertaken the Government of the kingdom; therefore he bestowes large gifts on some Courtiers, to speak for him; and withall comes in person to the King, acknowledgeth his for∣mer errors, and promiseth for the future to be loyal to his Majesty. Upon this the King receives him into favour, and imparts his councels to him; but the Vice-Roy and Chancelour fearing lest this insinuating of Duglas into the Kings favour, aimed at both their ruines; resigned up their places, and took leave of the Court. The one retired himself to his own Country Mansion; the other to Edinburgh Castle: and as they feared, so it fell out; for Duglas  so insinuated himself into the Kings affection, that he intending to be revenged on them for the death of his two Cousin Germans, perswades the King to call the Regent and Chancelour to an account of their Government; hoping by these means to oppress them if they came, or to have their estates confis∣cate, if they came not. Upon this they are summoned, but came not, ex∣cusing
their absence, not for any crime they were guilty of, but because they had too many enemies at Court, to whose censure they should be loth to sub∣mit; therefore they would reserve themselves for better times. Upon this answer, Duglas got a Parliament to be called at Sterling, in which the Regent and Chancelour are proclaimed publick enemies to the State, and their estates confiscate. To this purpose, Forces are sent to demo∣lish the Castles, or to new Garison them; which was done accordingly: the Chancelor in requital, raiseth some Troops, and commits great spoil in the enemies Country, being aided by Kennedy, Arch-Bishop of S. Andrews, George Earl of Angale, and Iohn Earl of Morton. Upon these Duglas wracks his anger, one quarrel begets another; so divers Forces are raised by these parties, and divers Skirmishes there were, not without much sheddin of bloud. Mean while the Chancelour Crichton, is beleaguered in Edinburgh Castle by Duglas. At length, after nine months siege, Crichton is pardoned for all offences of his against the King, and is permitted to march away with his Forces; so the Castle is surrendred. Not long after, Crichton is again made Chancelour, but he left the Court, and all publick imploiments: every one knew that Duglas was the cause of all these civil broils; yet so great was his power with the King, that no man durst accuse him: some great ones he caused to be put to death, some to be banished. Having done what he  could against Crichton, he tries what he can do against Leviston the Regent, whom he causeth with his son Iames, and divers others, to be summoned to the Parliament at Edinburgh, where they are accused of high crimes. The Regent, and the two Dundasses, are sent to prison in Dunbarton Castle, the rest are beheaded. Iames the Regents son, on the Scaffold, complained much against the inconstancy of Fortune, and vanity of worldly Honours; shew∣ing, that notwithstanding his Father had been Vice-Roy of Scotland, and had done so much good service for the King and kingdome, yet all is forgot, the Kings pardon sleighted, the intreaties of the Nobility for his life rejected; therefore wisheth all men to beware of publick imployments, and honours, be∣ing  the deceitful smiles of flattering fortune: and having so said, laid down his neck on the block, to the great grief of the Spectators. In the midst of these Civil broils, Crichton the Chancelour is sent Ambas∣sador into France, to renue the old League, and to get a wife for the King. About this time Cameron, Arch. Bishop of Glasgow, for his cruelties and op∣pression of his tenants, was called upon by a strange voice to appear before Christs Tribunal; being then asleep, he awaketh in fear, and calls up his servants, who sate down by him: He calls for a Book, and as he was begin∣ning to read, the voice summons him again, to the amazement of his ser∣vants; but when the voice called the third time, he gave a hideous groan,  thrust out his tongue and died. And now the Truce with England is expired: whereupon incursions are made into each others Territories, fire, and sword, raging on both sides; so that the Country for many miles is laid waste: therefore a new Truce for seven years is concluded; before the expiration of which, the Borderers begin to spoil and rob each other. Complaints being made on both sides, Armies are raised; a battail is fought, in which the Scots had the better; three thousand of the English being slain, and of the Scots six hundred only; many were taken prisoners, and much booty is caried into Edinburgh. This battail was fought at a place called Sarc. Upon the news of this overthrow at London, a new Army is appointed to be sent a∣gainst  the Scots, for re-gaining of what was lost: but this Expedition was hindred by the intestin commotions in England; therefore Ambassadors are sent to Scotland, with Propositions of Peace: upon which, when they could not agree, a Truce is made for three years; and presently after a Messenger is 1448 sent from the Chancelour out of
Flanders, about the mariage of the Duke  of Gelders daughter, sister to the Duke of Burgundy, with King Iames. She the next year is conveyed into Scotland, with a great company of Lords and Earls, and is Crowned at Holy Roods. After this, Earl Duglas undertakes a journy for Rome, being the year of Jubilee, accompanied with many Lords and Gentlemen; who in his absence is complained of by his enemies to the King, who durst not in his presence, whisper against him. He is accused of divers oppressions. The King was not willing to hear any complaints against him, being absent; yet to stop the clamours of the people, he sends to the Earls Proctor, to appear, and to take notice of the crimes objected against his Lord. He refuseth to come, wherefore he is imprisoned for contempt; but at last he submits, and comes  into the Court, who Petitioned, that the Trial be put off, till the Earl come himself. But a sentence past for satisfaction of his debts. To this purpose, Commissioners are appointed to take up his Revenues, who were sleighted by the Earls Tenants and Vassals; therefore the King sends an Army into Galloway to force them. The Earl hearing of these passages at Rome, was much perplexed; he was also forsaken by divers of his followers: so that he returns home with thin Attendants. Before he came to the King, he premises his brother Iames to sound out how he was affected towards him; and finding he stood right in the Kings opi∣nion, returns home; and upon promise that he would suppresse the Annanders,  who were notable Robbers, he is so highly advanced in the Kings favour, that he confers on him the Title of Vice-Roy of Scotland; which afterward he forfeited, by having secret correspondency with the King of England. Crichton the Chancelor was again advanced, which so angerd Duglas, that he set some of his followers in the high-way one night, as he was going home from Edin∣burgh, to murther him but being a stout man, he escaped, by killing one, and wounding another, but he was wounded also himself. Shortly after, being re∣covered, he returns unexpectedly to Edinburgh, with a great Train of his friends and servants, and had almost surprised Duglas, who having escaped the dan∣ger,  to make his party the stronger, enters into league with the two richest Earls of that time; to wit, of Rosse, and Craford. So that now he began to sleight the King; for one Sir Iohn Harris of Galloway complaining to Duglas of the wrongs he had suffered by the Ananders, his Vassals, and finding no redresse, falls himself upon them with some Forces, which he had raised, ho∣ping to recover his losses. But he with his Train was surprised by the Earls Forces, and hanged, notwithstanding the King by his Letters intreated his pardon. This made people give out, that Duglas aimed to be King him∣self; for when the King had interceded again for a chief man of the Maclel∣lans, whom Duglas kept in prison for killing one of his name, he sleighted the Kings request, & executed the Gentleman. The King being stirred up by the clamors of the people against Duglas, sends for him, who because of his guilty mind, refuseth to come, knowing that he had many enemies at Court. Yet at last, upon the publick faith, confirmed by hand and seal; he adventures to come to Sterlin with a great Train, where he is kindly used by the King, who after Supper, calls him aside, and reproves him for his ingratitude, and insolencies; yet promiseth to pardon all by-past offences, if he will break off the league with Rosse and Craford, which could not consist with the Kings safety or honour. At this the Earl began to boggle, and use tergiversation, saying, he would advise with his friends, and that the King needed not to be so hasty or pressing. At this he was so incensed, that he told the Earl plainly, if you will not (saith he) break off this confederacy, I will, and with that stabs him in the breast with his dagger. The Courtiers hearing a noise, pre∣sently brake into the room, each one giving the Earl a wound. Upon the re∣port of this slaughter, a great tumult in the Town is raised by the Earls four
1451  brothers, and his faction; but the tumult was at last appeased. The Earl∣dom falls to Iames the next brother, who speaking bitterly against the per∣fidiousnesse of the King and his Court, desires his brothers, friends, and followers, to besiege the Castle; but they wanted strength enough for that enterprise, therefore they take the Kings Patent containing the Publick Faith, and ties it to a horse tail, dragging it up and down the streets, and using all opprobrious speeches against the King and his Court. Then in the Market place the King and his adherents are denounced Perjurers, Truce-breakers, and enemies to all good men, by the sound of five hundred horns: at last they plunder the Town, and fire it. Within few days this inraged multitude falls to spoiling of all the Kings lands and tenants; they besiege also Dalketh Castle, but could not take it. In the interim the King raiseth an Army, but because the Duglassians were too strong for him, he resolves to forbear action, till Alexander Gordon come with his Northern Forces; the Earl of Craford to keep these from joining with the Kings Southern Forces, encounters with Gurdon at Brechin in Anguse. A fierce Battail is fought, in which the Crafordians are defeated, many prime men on both sides were killed, Gordon here lost both his brothers, and was for∣ced to return home with his victorious Army, to suppress the Earl of Murry, who was raging with fire and sword in Huntlies Country of Bogy; but the Gordons beat him not only thence, but also out of his own Country of Murry. Mean while a Parliament is called at Edinburgh, to which Earl Duglas and the Lords that followed him, are summoned to appear, who refuse to come. The Earl also caused a paper to be fastned the next night on the Church door, wherein he renounceth all Allegiance to the King, saying, that he will never trust him, who murthered his Cousins at Edinburgh, and his brother at Ster∣lin, being allured thither upon the publick faith; for this contumacy, this Earl Iames, with his brothers, and Beatrix, his deceased brothers wife, with the Earl of Crawford, are proclaimed Rebels. An Army is raised to pursue them; their houses are plundred, fields wasted, barns fired, and their cattel driven away. Earl Iames in the mean time to keep the wealth once gotten, still in his Family, marieth with Beatrix, his defunct brothers wife, and deals with the Pope for a dispensation, which the King by his Letters hindred. The three ensuing years are spent in destroying each other with fire and sword; wher∣upon followed the famine and pestilence. Some of the Earls wisest friends, advise him to submit to the King, rather then stand out to the ruine of himself, family, and friends: but he is resolved never to trust those that had murthered against their faith, his Cousins, and brother: Earl Craford being weary of the wars, and of the injustice of the cause, resolves in time to submit to the Kings mercy; therefore one day bare-footed, and bare-headed, he comes  and casts himself at the Kings feet, desiring pardon for what was past, and promiseth his fidelity and loyalty for the future. The King upon this sub∣mission, and perswasion withall of Arch-Bishop Kennedy, his wise Counce∣lour, considering also that Crafords falling off from Duglas, would weaken that party, receives him into his favor, which Craford ever after retained till his dying day. Duglas perceiving his Forces to grow weaker daily, had little hope left him now, but in the King of England, from whom he expected help; therefore sends Hammilton to London, who receives this answer from the King, that he would not make war upon Scotland, except the Earl will be∣come a subject of England, and trust the King with his person and estate: This hope failing him, and being weakned every day by the Kings Forces,  who plundred his Countries, and beat down his Castles; he is resolved up∣on the advice of Hammilton, to venture his Fortunes upon a battail. Abrec Castle was now besieged by the Kings Army. The Earl raiseth all the strength he could to relieve the Castle;
but when he came within view of the Kings  Army, he made a halt, and kept off his soldiers so long from fighting, that they grew weary with delays. And Hammilton one night revolted to the King, who after he had imprisoned him a while, receives him to his fa∣vour. Others also following the example of Hamilton, forsook Duglas, so the Castle at last is taken by the King, and demolished. The Earl be∣ing forsaken by most of his men, flyeth to England, vvith a few of his friends: but shortly after, he got some new Forces, and vvith them en∣ters Annandel, but is beaten by the Kings party; he escapes again with his brother Iohn; Archbald Earl of Murrey is slain, and George is wound∣ed, and afterward beheaded. Then a Parliament is held at Edinburgh,  in which the Duglasses, Iames and Iohn, with Beatrix, are proscribed. Earl Iames having lost his brothers, forsaken by his Soldiers, slighted 1455 by the English; betakes himself at last to Donald Lord of the Isles, and Earl of Ross, with whom he enters into a league; they fall first upon the Kings lands next to them, then upon Argile, Arran, Lechaber and Murray, which they waste with fire and sword, they took the Castle of Innerness and fired the Town. Mean while the English invade the Scots borders, and carrie away great booties. Beatrix who had married two brothers, being checkt in conscience, submits her self to the Kings mercy, who par∣doned her: The like did the wife of Donald; and the like favour she ob∣tains. Piercy and the banished Douglass invade Marcia again, but are beat back vvith loss by George Douglass E. of Anguse; Donald being weary of his wick∣ed courses, sends an humble Petition to the King by his friends, acknow∣ledging his faults, and promising all fidelitie and allegeance for the fu∣ture, presuming his Majestie would be no less gracious to him, then he had been to Crawford and others: The King upon the importunity of his friends, and the necessity also that lay on him then, to settle his distra∣cted Kingdome, sends him a pardon; and so all being quieted at home, he prepares now to make war upon England. In the interim the confe∣derate Lords, namely the Duke of York, the Earls of Salisbury and Warwick, with the rest, send Ambassadors to desire the Scots aid against King Henry their enemy, who had lost France, oppressed his Kingdome, and injured the Scots, withall they promise restitution of what had been lately taken from the Scots; this proffer is accepted by King Iames, who having rai∣sed an Army, and being now on his march, is met by an English Imposter who had lived long in Italy; he feignes himself to be the Popes Legat, sent from his holiness, to forbid him to make war upon England, for the Pope was resolved to make a general peace in Christendom; this being believed, the King disbands his Army, not knowing that this Imposter was sent by King Henry, till afterward; when he saw he was deluded, he assembleth again his Forces, and marcheth straight to Roxburg Town, which he took and demolished; then he sits down before the Castle, where an Ambassie from the English Confederates assures him, that their King was defeated, and the war ended; therefore having thanked him for his good will towards them, desires him to raise his siege from Rox∣burg; otherwise an Army will be sent against him: To these the King answers, that as hitherto he hath not made use of the Confederates fa∣vour, so for the future he will not fear their power: He set down before a Castle built on his own ground, from which he is not to be removed by words, but by arms: Mean while Donald of the Isles with fresh Forces  repaires to the King, proferring his service and fidelitie, which the King accepted; the Earl of Huntley also brings some more supplies; the King growing wearie of this long siege, falls to storming of the Castle with great Ordnance, but whilst he was giving fire to one of the pieces himself; standing too near was
suddenly struck dead; his death was a  while concealed, least the Soldiers should be disheartned, the Queen cal∣ling the Lords apart, desires them not to give off, nor be dejected for the Kings death, she would bring another King shortly in his room, so they fall furiously on the Castle; in the interim the Kings son Iames, now 7. years old, is brought into the Camp and saluted King; shortly upon this the Castle is surrendred, the Garison is permitted to depart with their baggage: And that this Castle may breed no more quarrel, it is levelled to the ground. King Iames died the 23 year of his Reigne, and of his life the 29. 1460 CHAP. XXVI. The English History under King Edward 4. Edward 5. and Richard 3. from the year 1460, till the year 1485. VPon the overthrow of King Henry 6. Edward Duke of York is proclaimed King, and Crowned: He begins his Reign with many good Acts; Repeals the last 1461 Kings Statutes, concerning Treason, and puts the Earl of Oxford with some other of King Henries Coun∣cellours,  to death. His two brothers George and Ri∣chard are made Dukes; the one of Clarence, the other of Gloucester; divers other Lords also are created. The Duke of So∣merset, Sir Ralph Pery, submit themselves to the King, who pardons them; but afterward they revolted. When the Queen had returned with new Forces from France, and in Scotlrnd had raised an Army to invade Nor∣thumberland, King Edward sends a Fleet into the Northern seas, and an 1462 Army by land under the Lord Montacute; he follows after himself with another. Montacute is incountred by the Lords Ross, and Hungerford, and Piercy. The Lords fled, and Piercy was killed. These being defeated, Montacute marcheth against the King and Queens Army, who before K. Edward came up with his Forces, disordered and routed the Queens  Army. Somerset with divers other great prisoners are taken, and execu∣ted. King Henry with many more fled into Scotland; an Army is sent in∣to Northumberland, where divers Castles were taken; in one of which, was Sir Ralph Grey, who was degraded by leaving off his spurs, renting his Coat of Arms, and breaking his sword over his head, and then beheaded. Montacute for his good service, is made Earl of Northumber∣land; the Earldom of Pembroke is given from Tuthar to the Lord Herbert. But shortly after, Northumberland upon submission, is restored to his pos∣sessions and honours; and Montacute was contented with the title of Mar∣quesse. Then the King rewards his Captains and Soldiers with the ene∣mies  lands; he new stamps the Coin, passeth a general pardon, and builds 1463 many Castles on the Sea Coast, to keep off Pirats, and on the main land, to suppress Theeves and Rebels. Mean while King Henry disguised, and coming for London, is taken and imprisoned in the Tower. King Edward being desired by his Councel to mary, sends the Earl of Warwick Am∣bassador into France, to procure the Lady Bona, daughter to Lewis Duke of Savoy, for his wife. In the interim, this young King being almost out the age of twenty four years, and impatient of long delays, falls in love with the Lady Elizabeth, the Widow of S. Iohn Grey, who vvas slain in  the battel of S. Albons, as he vvas fighting for King Henry, and at last marieth her; then he makes her Father the Lord Rivers, an Earl, and High Constable of England. Her son, Sir Thomas Grey, is made Marquess Dorset; this match vvas the occasion of much mischief, as will appear. 1464
The news of this hasty mariage highly displeased the Earl of Warwick, who took this as an affront; yet dissembles his anger, resolving to depose the king, when time served. The King fearing the power of this Earl, indeavoured se∣cretly to abridge him of his Authority. Warwick gets leave to go to his Castle for his recreations sake, where he hatcheth some plots against the K. About which time was born the Lady Elizabeth, afterward the wife of K. Henry 7. 1465 and mother to K. Henry 8. K. Edward to make himself the stronger against Lewis the French K. who was offended with his mariage, taking it as a frump on him and his Q. sister, makes peace with Scotland for 15 years; and to in∣gage the Kings of Arragon and Castile, he sent them as some think, many sheep  to the prejudice of this kingdom. This K. also marieth his sister to Charles D. of Burgundy, as he had formerly maried two of his sisters to the D. of Exe∣ter, 1466 and Suffolk. Warwick aiming to restore K. Henry, got his two brothers, the Arch-B. of York and Marq. of Montacute, to join with him; yet the Marq. was still a secret friend to K. Edward. The D. of Clarence also being offended with his brother the K. joins with the Earl of Warwick, upon the Earls perswasions, who complained of the K. for sleighting his own kindred, and preferring the kindred of his wife: the D. also marieth with the Earls daughter, being then at Calice; and a rebellion is made in Yorkshire by the Arch-bishop of York and Montacute, causing the country people to believe that the yearly alms of Corn which they gave to the poor of S. Leonards Hospital, was converted by the Go∣vernor  and Priests thereof, to their own private benefit: Hence the Collectors of these alms were beaten by the Rusticks, with whom divers good people si∣ded: at length they fly to arms, more then 15000, who came and faced York; but in the night Montacute sallied out upon these Rebels, killed many, and struck off their Capt. head. The Rebels weary of the siege, march to London, condu∣cted by S. Iohn Conyers. Herbert Earl of Pembroke, and Humphry Lord Staf∣ford, with 9000 Welch men and others, march against these Northern Rebels, 2000 Archers are utterly defeated by the Yorkshire men. A division also fell out between Pembroke and Stafford, so that Stafford departs with his Archers from Pembroke, who being hereat troubled, but not dismaid, set upon the Rebels  the next day, and was like to prevail; but one Clapham carying the Earl of Warwicks banner, and accompanied with 500 Northamptonians, crying a farre off, a Warwick, a Warwick, so affrighted the Welch, supposing Warwick had bin coming with another Army, that they ran away, and were utterly routed, to the loss of 5000 of their company. Sir Richard Herbert, and 8 more, are behea∣ded at Banbury, by the rebels; so was Earl Rivers, the Q. father, and Sr Iohn his son, being apprehended at Grafton, without any legal proceeding. The Lo. Stafford is executed by the K. command, for deserting the Earl of Pembroke. At last, the K. marcheth on with his Army against the rebels, with whom were joined the D. of Clarence and Earl of Warwick. A Parly is proposed for peace, and many messengers for that purpose sent to and fro; this made the K. secure, who in his bed was seized on by the Earl of Warwick, rushing with a good Guard into the Kings Camp, slew his watch∣es, and took him, whom secretly he conveyed as a prisoner to the Arch-Bishop of York his brother, who gave the K. so much liberty to hunt, that he made shift to escape to London: at which Warwick was much troubled, with Clarence and the confederates, who had upon the K. Captivity dismissed their Army, but they presently raised another, and so did the King; all things now were in a combustion, injustice and violence raged every where. At length by the medi∣ation of some great and peaceable Lords, a parly was granted between the K.  and the confederates in VVestminster Hall, but to no purpose, such bitterness there was on both sides. The K. also brought much envy on himself, by cut∣ting off the heads of the Lord VVels, and his brother in law Sir Tho. Dymock, because they could not perswade Sir Tho. VVells, the Lords son, and General of the rebels, to forsake them, and serve under him, Sir Robert to revenge
his  fathers and uncles death, ventured too rashly upon the K. great army, with his handful of men, the confederates not being come yet with their army, so that the K. got the honor of that day. In this battel of loose coats (so called, because the rebels slung off their coats, that they might run the more nimbly) were slain 10000 men; Sir Rob. VVells, with some other prime men lost their heads. Upon the report of this overthrow, Warwick and Clarence, fled to Exeter, from thence to Dartmouth, & so to Calice, the K. was much grieved that they escaped. But to prevent their landing in England, with forain forces, the K. intreats his brother in Law the D. of Burgoin, to hinder all aid from the said Earl, and to surprise him with a Navy; to which the D. was willing enough, being angry with the Earl for hindring his mariage with Margaret the K. sister; for siding with K. Lewis of France, the D. mortal enemy, and because the Earl was more belo∣ved of the people, then the K. himself. But when the Duke and Earl came with their wives and friends before Calice, the Earls Deputy Vawcler beat them with his Ordnance from the Castle, not permitting any help or succour to be affor∣ded from the Town to the Dutchess, who was brought to bed on shipboard. The King was so glad of this, that he made the said Deputy chief Captain, and Burgoin gave him an annual pension of 1000 Crowns; yet the Deputy incou∣raged 1469 the Earl to ask aid if Franceo, and Calice should be his, when time served. Upon this the Earl puts to sea, takes some of Burgundies ships richly laden, then  lands at Deep. Upon invitation, he repairs to the K. who used him and his com∣pany graciously and bountifully, for the hatred he bare to K. Edward, and the D. of Burgundy. Upon the report of this intertainment, Q. Margaret, and Pri. Edward her son, with some others, repair to the confederates, and consult about restoring of K. Henry; they gave their solemn oaths to each other, to stand firm, and for the more strength, the Earl of Warwick maried his 2d daughter to Pri. Edward, which made Clarence a secret enemy to Warwick, fearing that this match would be the undoing of the family of York; therefore he gave private intelligence to his brother K. Edward of all Warwicks proceedings. The English Lords being furnished with all necessaries from the French K.  make ready for their voyage, but are met with by a Burgundian Fleet in the mouth of the river Sene, which the next evening a sudden storm drove into the sea, drowned many, and dispersed most of them. Warwick glad at this mishap of the Burgundian, and understanding by Letters that he was howrely expected in England, where he should be sufficiently backt, makes haste, leaving the Q. and Prince behind, and so with great celerity lands at Dartmouth. The K. mean while trusting to the Burgundian Fleet, which he did not know was spoiled, ne∣glected his own Fleet, and gave himself to dalliance with Ladies. Warwick sends out Proclamations, commanding all in K. Henries name, to aid him, and to oppose Edward the Usurper; and so in a short time, his army mightily in∣creased,  and marched towards London. K. Edward also levied a strong army, but understanding that the people every where affected K. Henry and Warwick, his heart failed him, so that he mistrusted his own army, wherefore he left his army in the night, and with 800 of his best friends, posts to Lincolnshire, thence to Holland, resolving to stay with the D. of Burgundy till times were better; the Kentish men hearing that K. Edward was fled, assembled tumultuously in great numbers, and would by force have entred London Gates, but being resisted, they fire and riffle the suburbs, and murther much people, but were at last suppressed and punished by the Earl of Warwick, who presently goeth to the Tower, sets K. Henry at liberty, and conducts him triumphantly thence to Pauls, where having performed his devotions, he keeps his Court in the Bishops Palace; then he calls a Parliament, in which his chief adherents are attainted of high trea∣son, and their estates confiscated. The Dutchy of York is settled on the D. of Clarence, though the second son; the Crown is intailed to K. Henry, his heirs male, and for default of such issue, to Clarence and his heirs. The Q and her son Pr. Edward, offer divers times to come over by sea, but are hindred by
cross winds and storms, which the people construed as a judgement on her, for her cruelties in causing so much bloud shed. Burgundy was loth at first to furnish K. Edward with ships and mony, fearing lest Warwick would make a new war on him; yet understanding that K. Edward was invited by his friends into England, and that there were great hopes, he furnisheth him with 50000 Florence of gold, and 18 tall ships, with 2000 land soldiers: He lands in York∣shire, where he found cold welcome, the people being more addicted to King 1470 Henry. Yet he marcheth to York, where he publisheth; that he made no claim to the Crown, but to his Dutchy, of which he was unjustly deprived, and shews that in this, they were in equity to aid him. Upon this, he took his oath, that he would be a true subject to K. Henry, therefore he was let in, intertained, and monyed; but before two days were at an end, he plants a Garison there, and forceth the inhabitants to furnish him with all things needful for an army; then he hires soldiers every where, and many Gentlemen came in to him. His old friend Montacute, who had a strong army, gave him free passage to march. War∣wick comes to the City of Warwick, with his forces, and writes to Clarence, to hasten thither with his Army, for he meant to give the K. battel; but Clarence made no haste, which bred suspition in Warwick, that he meant to fail him in his need; therefore he goeth to Coventry with his army. K. Edward dares War∣wick into the field, who kept close within the walls, to try what Clarence would doe. K. Edward went thence towards his brother Clarence, who likewise refused to fight: Hereupon the D. of Gloucester, brother to them both, reconciled them and their armies: then the 3 brothers strive to win VVarwick to their side, but he cursing the D. perfidiousness, would not unite with them. Wherefore King Edward to increase his strength, repairs to London, which excluded him a while. But when they considered his just title, his abilities for government, and his great army, whereas K. Henry was weaker every way, chiefly in the gifts of the mind, they open their gates, lets him in, and salutes him K. then was K. Henry seized upon again, and committed to the Tower. VVarwick thought to have surprised the K. in his march towards London, but was prevented; therefore he marcheth to Barnet 10 miles from London, purposing to venture all upon one battel. K. Edw. army being furnished with all things needful, by the Londo∣ners, marcheth also to Barnet. The right Wing of Warwicks army was com∣manded by his brother Montacute, and Oxford. The left Wing by himself, and the D. of Exeter; the main battail by the D. of Somerset. K. Edw. Vant∣guard was led by the D. of Gloucester, the main battail by himself, & Clarence, in which was K. Henry; the Rereward was conducted by the Lord Hastings. A cruel battail of 5 or 6 howres is fought, and it was not known a great while, who had the better; at last Warwick perceiving that his men and friends could not hold out long against the Kings fresh Forces and Supplies, pressed so far among his enemies, killing multitudes of them, that at last he was killed himself, and so was Montacute. The death of these two was the overthrow of the whole army, who ran away, and left the Victory for K. Edward, who that afternoon enters the city triumphantly with his prisoner K. Henry. In Pauls he offered up his standard, with thanks to God for his Victory; in this battail were slain almost ten thousand men. The K. grieved much for the death of Montacute, his true friend; both he and his brother VVarwick are brought to London, where in Pauls Church they lay open faced for 3 days, that the people might see they were truly dead; then  they were both buried with their Ancestors in one grave. Q. Margaret landed at VVaymouth, with some Forces, before she heard of K. Edwards Victory; there∣fore with her son the Prince, she takes sanctuary in the Abby of Beaulieu, whi∣ther the D. of Somerset Earl of Pembroke, Earl of Devonshire, with divers o∣thers resorted, resolving to raise a new Army: the Q. and Somerset levy for∣ces about Bristoll and Gloucester,
intending to joyn themselves with Pembrokes Welch men; but the K. prevented those designs, who sent his brother the D. of Gloucester with an army, who overthrew the D. of Somersets forces in one hour, of whom above 3000 were slain, among which, was the Earl of Devonshire, with some other prime men. The Q. and Pr. are taken prisoners, with divers o∣thers, who the next day are beheaded, except the Q. the Pr. is murthered by Clarence, Gloucester, Dorset, and Hastings. Not long after, Reyner sold Naples & Sicily, and with the mony of that sale ransomed his daughter Q. Margaret. K. Henry in the mean while was found dead in his Chamber in the Tower, being murthered by K. Edw. brother, the D. of Gloucester. To assure the people he was dead, his body is exposed to the public view one whole day in S. Pauls Church; his two brothers Clarence & Gloucester for their perjuries & murthers, afterward  imbrewed their hands in their own bloud. Two or 3 years after K. Edw. was set∣tled his brother in law the D. of Burgundy, perswades him to renue his wars 1473 with France, wch he did, because of his title to that kingd. and for that the Fr. K. had assisted Q. Margaret and Warwick, against K. Edw. and for that the Fr. K. made war upon the D. of Burgundy. Now because mony was wanting, a benevolence is demanded, and paid, but grudgingly. One old widow, though a niggard, gave the K. 20 l. for which he kissed her, she being proud of this kisse, gave the K. 20 l. more, shewing that 40 l. was little enough for a kings kiss. The K. having at Dover 500 ships and boats, 1500 Horse men, and 15000  Archers landed at Calice; but the D. of Burgundy failed him, who promised to meet the K. with 2000 Horse, who after he had triffled away much time in the siege of Nuyce, sent his forces to Berroys in Lorrain, to be revenged on Reyner, Q. Margarets father, for some ill language he gave him. Yet K. Edw. marcheth by Bollen to Perone, where he had no provision of the D. for his Army; thence he goeth to S. Quintins, but is beat back from thence, contrary to promise. At last a peace is concluded with the French K. for 9 years, on these conditions: 1. That the Fr. K. pay to Edw. 75000 Crowns, and 50000 more for an annuall pension. 2. That the Fr. K. within one year mary the K. of Englands daugh∣ter to the Dolphin, allowing them for their maintenance yearly 50000 crowns  and then shall deliver the quiet possession of Guyan to them. 3. That the Lo. Howard and S. Iohn Cheny, should stay with the Fr. K. as Hostages til the Engl. army be landed in England: The D. of Burgundy storms at this peace, shewing it was a dishonourable act in K. Edw. who replyed that it was more dishonoura∣ble in the D. to call him in, and then to fail him. So the D. went away in a chafe. The Fr. K. to confirm his amity with England, sends to the English Army 100 Wagons of wine, and gave them leave for 3 or 4 days to solace themselves in Amiens, where they found good chear provided for them. And because they ca∣ried themselves civilly to the Townsmen, the Fr. K. sends to the chief Com∣manders, plate and mony. Shortly after, K. Edw. by gifts, intreaties, and pro∣testations, that he would mary one of his daughters to the yong Earl of Rich∣mond, 1475 got him to be delivered to his Ambass. by the D. of Britany, whom pre∣sently they conveyed to S. Malos; but the D. being informed that a mariage was pretended, but his death was intended, and fearing this delivery would be a per∣petual stain to his Honor, sends one Peter Landoys to S. Malos, where the young Earl was, expecting a fair wind. This Peter by his cunning, got the Earl into a Sanctuary, so was the sheep delivered, and the woolf deluded of his mony. But the D. promised faithfully to retain the Earl by him as his prisoner, wch in some sort contented K. Edw. After this the D. of Clarence, K. Edw. brother, was condemned of Treason, against the K. life, and is imprisoned in the Tower. 1477 But not long after, he was drowned in a But of Malmsie, not without the kings knowledge. This K. the 5 last years of his life, grew extream wretched and covetous, so that with his exactions, he lost his peoples affections. In the 20 year of his 1488 reign, he sends into France to have the mariage accomplished between the Dol∣phin and his daughter. But K. Lewis deluded him with frivolous excuses, and
marieth him to Maximilians daughter, which Maximilian was the son of Frederick the Emperor, against his oath and articles. Iames 3d K. of Scots desires a match between his son and K. Edw. daughter, which was willingly assented to, and good sums of mony disbursed aforehand, conditionally it should be repaid if the match broke off. But the Scots K. after things were concluded, sends an Army to invade England, which spoiled all before them with fire and sword; against whom Gloucester is sent with 21000 men, who took the town of Barwic, and besieged the Castle, but could not take it; thence he marcheth into Scotland, wasting all in his way, and forced K. Iames into Edinburgh Castle; the Nobility desire peace, and obtain it, on these conditions, that a full amends be made for the hurt done; 2. That K. Iames would restore his brother the D. of Albany, to his honors and possessions. 3. That the Castle of Barwick be delivered up; and 4. That repaiment be made of K. Edw. mony lent to K. Iames. The 3 last con∣ditions were assented to; K. Edw. being deluded by the Fr. K. about the mari∣age 1483 of the Dolphin, and likewise the tribute of 50000 Crowns, which was to be paid him yearly during his life, was denied; resolved to invade France with a Royal Army. But in the midst of his preparations, he fell sick, as some think of a surfet, or as others of melancholy, and shortly after died the 23 year of his reign. To K. Edw. 4. succeeded his son Edw. 5. at 13 years of age. His uncle the D. of Gloucester (a man as deformed in body, as crooked in conditions, who had  murthered both K. Henry, and his son Pr. Edw. and his brother also the D. of Clarence) resolves with the D. of Buckingham, and Lord Hastings, to remove from the yong K. all his mothers kindred, being mean people, and to undertake the charge of government themselves. Therefore when he understood that the Q. with her brother the Earl Rivers, and her son the Lo. Grey, intended to con∣duct with an army the yong K. out of VVales, towards London, there to be crow∣ned. He wrote to the Q. advising her not to come up to London, in that po∣sture, for fear the people would grow jealous, and raise Civil wars; therefore wisheth her to put aside that Train, and to disband her Army: he swears with∣all, that this his advice proceeded from his good will and love to her and hers. The Q. being too credulous, and thinking he had spoke as he meant, follows his advice; which he also by his letters gave to the Earl Rivers, and the Lord Grey. So the army is dismissed, and the K. is accompanied by Rivers, Grey, and some other friends to Northampton, and thence to Stony Stratford, which little town not being capable of the whole train, the Earl with his followers remained that night in Northampton. But Gloucester, and Buckingham, with some resolved at∣tendants, bore Rivers company that same night; but withal in the night time, the two D. seized upon all the keys of the Inn, and caused all the ways between these two towns, to be guarded, and none to pass that way; then they fell upon the Earl, who was confident of them till now, and commits him to safe custody. The 2 D. rode to Stony Stratford, and presented their service to the K. which he accepted, having no suspition of what was done; then they seize on the Lo. Grey, the K. half brother, and some others, whom they sent to Pomfret Castle, where without any judicial proceedings, they lost their heads; they remove also the K. menial servants & officers, giving out that the Earl with the rest of his con∣federates, meant to destroy all the Lords of K. Edwards bloud, and to rule all themselves. The Q. being then at Westminster, hearing of these tragical pas∣sages, took sanctuary there, and repented she had advised upon Gloucesters cun∣ning letters, to dismiss the army. The K. also grieved much, but the 2 D. pro∣tested, they acted nothing but for his weal; and that they would be faithful to  him till their lives end. Then they brought him to London, where he is met by the Major and his brethren, in whose presence Gloucester demeaned himself so submissively to the king, that they all, and most of the Nobility and Councel∣lors of State, were perswaded of the Dukes real intentions for the kings good; so that he was made protector of king and kingdom.
Gloucester having obtained his chiefest desire, labours next to get the young D. of York into his hands; for that end, he complains to the K. Councel of the wrong the Q. did both to the K. in that she would not permit him to en∣joy the company of his only brother, and to the kingd. in detaining the said D. in sanctuary, as a malefactor in prison; by which all Councellors & Officers of State, are scandalled. This motion so well pleased the Lords, that presently they employ the Cardinal Arch-B. of York, who was gracious with her to de∣sire she would send the yong D. to his brother the K. to solace him, for these reasons: 1. Because it was dishonourable to the whole kingd. that a childe so near to the K. should be kept in prison; for what else is a sanctuary. 2. Because that place was only for such as by their conscience were accused of some crime,  which an innocent child could not be guilty of. 3. Because he wants discretion to demand such a priviledge. Lastly, they tell her that any person may be taken out of sanctuary, for his good and welfare; and therefore if she refused to let him go, that he must be taken thence without her leave, and the rather because it is suspected she meant to send him beyond seas. The queen alledged, that none was so fit to tutor so yong, tender, and sickly a child, as the mother, & that both their safeties consisted in being separated; but perceiving they meant to have him by force, after she had wept, kissed, and embraced the child, praying for his safety, she delivers him to the Arch-B. from whom the Protector in the Starre-Chamber attending then the queens answer, took the child, kissed and hugged him, protesting that from his soul, nothing in the world was so dear to him, ex∣cept the king; whereas indeed he meant the destruction of them both; then he brought him to the K. who was exceedingly joyed with his company: but shortly after, he conveyed them both through London in great pomp to the Tower, pretending he did this out of his care to them during the troubles of the kingdom; whereas indeed there were no troubles but by his procurement, and the other Lords who adhered to him. The Protector having secured the two young Princes, next bethinks himself how he shal obtain the kingd. which he knew would be difficult without the D.  of Buckingham, who was a powerful man; therefore he acquaints him with his intention, desiring his assistance, promising to mary his son to the said D. daugh∣ter, to give him the Earldom of Hartford, to which the D. pretended a right, but never could obtain it, from Edw. 4. and lastly, to share with him in the K: trea∣sury. Upon these tearms Buckingham assented to, and assisted him in the plot: but the Lo. Hastings, whom the Protector had made Chamberlain, could not be won to this wicked design; for one Catesby a Lawyer, and a Favorite of Hastings, was employed by the Protector to sound his inclination, which when he had craftily done, he informs the tyrant there was no possibility to win him. Hereupon the Protector calls a Councel of the Lords at the Tower, under pre∣tence  of fitting all things for the K. Coronation, which he least meaned. When the Lords were sit, the Protector at last came, and chearfully saluted them all: Chiefly Dr Morton, B. of Ely, whom he hated, yet imploys him to procure som Strawberries out of his garden, which were very good. The Bish. glad to plea∣sure him, hastneth home; the Protector also presently went out, and returns within an hour, but with a discontented countenance, and troubled minde. All wondred at the sudden change; at last after some silence, he asketh what punishment he deserved, that intended to murther the K. uncle and Protector. At length Hastings answered, that he deserved the greatest punishment imagina∣ble. Then saith the Protector; that sorceress the Q. and that strumpet Shores wife, have conspired against my life; of which that you may be sure, you shall see my arm, which is already consumed, and with that he shewed his naked arm, as if they had not all known, that his arm had been ever so from his Nativity. Besides, no man could believe, that the Q. so vertuous a Lady, would intend such a mischief, or that she would have consorted with her deceased husbands con∣cubine, Shores wife. Hastings who after
K. Edw: death, conversed with Shores wife, was beginning to excuse her; but presently the Protector interrupted him, calling him traitor for doubting of that which he spoke, and with that clapping his hand rudely on the table, the chamber suddenly was filled with ar∣med men, one of which, knockt down the Lord Stanley under table with his Holbard, but killed him not. Hastings is arrested by the Protector, accused of Treason, and without any other proceeding, caried out into the Green, where his head is chopped off. This execution was done that very day, and hour, that the Earl Rivers, Lord Grey, and Sir Thomas Vaughan, were executed in Pomfret Ca∣stle, without legal proceeding. After the execution, the Cardinal of York, the Bish. of Ely, and the Lo. Stan∣ley,  are committed there to several prisons. The Protector and Buckingham, put themseves presently into arms, and sends for the chief Citizens; to whom the Protector complains, that his death was conspired that morning by Ha∣stings and his complices; therefore they are required to certifie the City of the true cause of this broil and execution in the Tower. Two hours after the exe∣cution, a long Proclamation is read by an Herald of Arms, which was thought to have been written and sealed some days before. Then was Dr Shaa imploid to Preach the next Sunday after at Pauls Cross, a Sermon in commendation of the pedigree, vertues and valour of the Protector, and in detestation of the last K. Edw. lascivious acts, and familiarity with Shores wife, and others; also to  shew his children were bastards, and born in adultery, because he was contract∣ed to the Lady Lucy, before he maried the Lady Grey, and was also affied to the Lady Bona, sister in law to the Fr. K. he also accuseth the Protectors own mo∣ther of incontinency, in the generation of K. Edw. and the D. of Clarence. At last, he hoped the people would receive the Protector, as their Lo. and K. But the Doctors eloquence could not prevail with the people, to accept Richard for their K. yet the next day in Guild-Hall, Buckingham labours by arguments to make the Protector right heir and inheritor of the Crown, and with much re∣luctancy, got divers of the townsmen to go with him to the Protector at Bey∣nards Castle, where they prayed him to undergo the office of a K. which he refu∣sed to do at first; but upon their importunity, he assented to that, which most of all things in the world he desired. K. Richard being Crowned, to insinuate himself into the good opinion of his 1483 enemies, makes Stanley whom he imprisoned, Steward of his house, and inlar∣ged the Arch-B. of York: but Morton of Ely, he sent prisoner to the Duke of Buckingham. Then he creates his only child Edw. Prince of Wales, Iohn How∣ard is made D. of Norfolk, his eldest son Sir Tho. Howard, is created Earl of Sur∣ry, the Lo. Barkley is advanced to the Earldom of Nottingham, and the Lord Lovel is made Viscount Lovel. He sends also Ambassadors to King Lewis of France, to conclude a peace; but Lewis would not admit any of them into his presence. Upon this he began to think, that so long as the two young Princes lived, his glory would be eclipsed; therefore he makes a progress to Gloucester, appointing that the children should be murthered in his absence, thinking this would take off all suspition from him. He first writes to Brakenbury Lieutenant of the Tower, to execute his bloudy sentence, which he refused to do. Where∣upon cursing the Lieutenant, he writes to one Terril, promising him great re∣wards to execute this murther, to vvhich he assented, and by the K. command takes the keys of the Tower from the Lieutenant, and then the next night he sends two wicked executioners into the childrens chamber, where they smothe∣red them in their beds, and buried them at the stairs foot. The news of the two  young Princes found dead in their bed, much perplexed the Nobility and peo∣ple, but most of all the dying Queen; great sorrow vvas expressed every where, except amongst the Tyrants confederates. But this vvicked Tyrant is crossed and tortured, not only vvith continual fears and jealousies; and torments of con∣science, attending on his bloudy soul, but also the next year, by the loss of his only child the Prince of Wales. D Morton, a witty and learned man, being
1484 Buckinghams prisoner, observing the D. ambitious humour, insinuates so into his favour, that they began to be inwardly familiar, and to impart their secret thoughts to each other: vvithal, the Dr shews, how ungratefully the Usurper had used the D. by vvhose means he had obtained the Crown, in not rewarding him, nor restoring to him the Earldom of Hartford, but rather labouring to suppress him, being jealous of his greatness. He complains also of the kings in∣gratitude to his mother, in making her unchaste in the conception of his two elder brothers, K. Edw. and the D. of Clarence. Lastly, of his murthers com∣mitted on the Lo. Rivers, and the rest; chiefly of Pr. Edw. son to Henry 6. and of the murther of the same K. and of Clarence his own brother, and of the mur∣thering  of his innocent Nephews, vvhom he bastardized. Therefore he advi∣seth the D. for his own safety, and his Countries, to make use of his own great∣ness, and goodness, and of the peoples affections, that so he may either make himself K. or else further the uniting of the two Houses of York and Lancaster, by bestowing K. Edw. eldest daughter on the Earl of Richmond, descended from Iohn of Gant the 4th son of K. Edw. the third; by vvhich means the kingdom should be quieted, both from Civil wars, and this monster of men. The D. though ambitious enough, yet he knew there vvas much envy, but little security in usurpation; he therefore thought it best to make the Earl K. The Bishop vvas desirous to go into the Isle of Ely, promising to furnish the D. with men and mony; but the D. fearing lest the Bishops escape should be re∣quired  at his hands; was loth to let him go, nor was he willing to part vvith such a friend and Councellor; but the Bish. knowing his head was in danger of the Tyrant, whilst he was a prisoner made an escape in a disguised habit to Ely, where having furnished himself with mony, sails presently into Flanders, ani∣mates the Earl of Richmond then in Britany, to mary K. Edw. daughter, to de∣pose the Tyrant, and to make himself K. He also by letters stirs up the Gen∣try and Lords to assist the Earl, who so prevailed with the D. that he inlargeth him, and meant to give him aid, notwithstanding K. Richard had importuned the D. to deliver up the person of Richmond to him, for jewels, mony, and large promises. This plot was not so closely caried, but K. Richard knew of it; there∣fore he means either to win Buckingham, or to dispatch him: for this cause he kindly invites him to the Court; but the D. knowing Richards bloudy disposi∣tion, 1485 excuseth his not coming by the indisposition of his body; the K. writes a sharp letter, commanding him to come; the D. returns a peremptory answer, that he would not come to such a monster and tyrant, who was no K. but an U∣surper. With this the D. hastneth into Wales, where he raiseth an Army; for∣ces also are levied in Devonshire by the Courtneys, some in Kent, by the Gentry there, and some in Yorkshire, by Grey Marq. Dorset. K. Richard to support his bad cause, raiseth another Army, by which he meant to suppress the D. forces,  before they were joined with their friends. The D. striving to dare the K. de∣termines to lead his whole Army through the River Severn, at a low Foord; but God for his assenting to the murther of the two young Princes, crossed him so with continual rains for ten days, that both his passage was hindred, and the Country thereabout almost drowned, to the great loss of the inhabitants; the Welch men run away, and left him alone. The D is inforced to harbour himself near Shrewsbury, at one Banasters, who vvas his servant. The D. friends hearing of his bad success, disperse their companies, every one shifting for him∣self; divers of them took shipping for Britany; as the Courtneys, Dorset, and ma∣ny knights. The K. proscribes Buckingham, promising 1000 pound to him that should take him. Upon this, his faithless servant Banaster betrays him to the Sheriff of Shropshire, vvho vvith a strong guard, conveys him to the King then at Shrewsbury. The D. upon examination confessed all, & without farther proceeding lost his head. In the mean while the Earl of Richmond with 500 enters the sea, not hearing of his friends arrival out of England, nor of their o∣verthrow; but by a
sudden storm, his ships were scattered, and driven back, some upon Normandy, some on Britany; the ship in which the Earl was, kept the sea, with one more. The next day the Earl came before Pool, but finding the Coasts all along filled with armed men, doubting they vvere his enemies, though they laboured to train him in, returns, and lands safely in Normandy; whence he sends to Charles 8. for a free passage into Britany, which the K. gran∣ted, and withal sent him store of mony: so having come into Britany, he meets his exiled friends, vvho acknowledge him for their K. conditionally, that he mary with K. Edwards daughter, which he promised by solemn oath to do. So they make ready a Fleet by the D. of Britanies help, and levied what soldiers they could et. Mean while K. Richard tyrannizeth over Richmonds friends, he makes him a Traitor by act of Parliament; many Lords he puts to death, and seized upon their whole estates as Traitors. He executed one for this distich. The Rat, the Cat, and Lovel the Dog, Rule all in England under the Hog. That is, Ratcliff, Catesby, and Lovel, the Tyrants 3 Favorites, ruled all under K. Richard, who gave a Hog for his supporter, to make himself the strong∣er. He concludes a peace with K. Iames of Scotland, and matcheth his Niece the Lady Anne with the Prince of Rothsay, the said K eldest son. He also  labours again with large bribes and promises, to get the Earl of Richmond into his hands, but could not; for the D. of Britany vvas then sick, and Peter Lan∣dois▪ vvho at S. Malos had freed the Earl heretofore, now disposed of all business in that Country. He being greedy of so great a prey as vvas promised, to wit, great store of mony, and all the Revenues of the Earl and his confederates, promiseth to betray the Earl; but D. Morton hearing of the danger, presently acquaints the Earl therewith, who hasteneth out of Britany into France, where he was welcomed with his friends by the French King, and help promised him. Landois had appointed some companies of armed men to attend the Earl into England; but indeed to surprise him. Now when it was given out, that the French K. would assist the Earl, divers Commanders from Calice secretly re∣pair to the Earl, who courteously received them. But K. Richard understanding of preparations in France to aid Richmond, he deviseth a new plot to keep him off from marying vvith the Lady Elizabeth, as he intended; therefore he gets the Q. Mother upon large promises made to her, to deliver into his custody, her five daughters, hoping hereby to hinder the uniting of the two Houses. So out of covetousness, she delivers her daughters to him, vvho had killed her first husband, executed unjustly her brother, and her son, and had bastardized and murthered her two other sons. Having got them into his custody, he intends to mary the said Elizabeth his brothers daughter, but that was hindred by Q.  Anne his wife, who within a few days after is found dead in her bed; some think she was poisoned; others, that it was grief killed her, because she per∣ceived the designs and plots of her wicked husband. The Queen was scarce cold, vvhen King Richard makes love to the Lady Elizabeth; but she kept him off with fair words, desiring him first to subdue the Earl of Richmond, and to settle himself and kingdom. Mean while false news comes to him, that Richmond and his friends vvere out of hope to re∣ceive any aid from the French King. Upon this, King Richard began to be se∣cure, and to discharge his Garisons on the Sea Coast. When news was brought to Richmond, that his Lady, and her sisters were by their mother delivered into  K. Rich. hands, that the wife of this Richard was found dead, and he now made love to the Lady Eliz. his chief hopes. This news hastned Richmond to come for England; therefore having obtained of the French King mony, ships, ar∣mor, artillery, and 2000 men, he arrives at Milford Haven in Wales. The Welch understanding that he was the son of Owen Tuthar, their Country man, and that his mariage with the Lady Elizabeth, would
settle and unite the king∣dom,  they flock to him from all parts. Besides these, Thomas Lord Stanley, Father in Law to Richmond, came to him with 5000 men; Sir George Talbot also, came with the power of the young Earl of Shrewsbury, (then in Ward) which consisted of 2000 men. All these had been levied for King Richards service, but were now revolted to a more lawful power. King Richard grie∣ved much at this revolt, yet raiseth an Army of 20000 men, purposing to venture all upon a battel. The D. of Norfolk could not be drawn away from K. Richard, but remained loyal till his death. The 22 of August, and third year of this Tyrants Reign, at Bosworth in Leicestershire, the two armies met, and fought for two howres space. King Richard perceiving his men to fight coldly, and that many revolted, and many stood by as Neuters, he rusheth furiously amongst his enemies, and was stoutly encountred by Sir William Brandon, the Earls Standerd bearer, whom Richard slew. He also knockt down Sir Iohn Cheney, a stout man, and gets to the Earl, whom he fights, but is at last killed by him, and so by the death of this Tyrant, the long quarrel en∣ded. Richard lost the Duke of Norfolk, and 1000 more. The Earl lost not above 100. King Richards carkass was found naked in the field, filthy with dirt, and gory bloud, which was cast on an Horses back, and caried to Leicester like a Calf, his head and hands hanging down on the one side, and his legs on the other, and so was basely interred, as he had buried his two Nephews. The Crown was found among the spoils, and brought to Richmond, by the Lord Stanley his Father in Law. There in the field Henry is Crowned, with the acclamations of the people. And then he gives solemn thanks to God; and 1485 so ended this Tyrant Richard, who in his life was monstrous, in his death cou∣ragious: He had a deformed body, but a cunning brain, an eloquent tongue, and a ready hand.
CHAP. XXVII. The English History under the Reigns of King Henry the 7. and King Henry the 8. from the year 1485. till the year 1548. KIng Henry the 7. being crowned, according to his promise marrieth the Lady Elizabeth, uniting thereby the two Roses. After the manner of France, he chooseth a guard to attend upon him, and makes his Uncle Iasper Earl of Pembrook, Duke of Bedford; The Lord Stanly his father-in-law is made Earl of Derby, and divers other honors he conferred; Stafford the Duke of Buckinghams eldest son is restored to his fathers honors and possessi∣ons. Then he calls a Parliament, wherein all former Acts prejudicial to him, or his, are cancelled; the Crown is entailed on him and his heirs. He makes also good Laws, and pardons his enemies upon their submission. He bounti∣fully recompenced the Duke of Britany for his former favours, and so he did the French King, thereby redeeming his Hostages, the Marquess Dorset and Sir Iohn Bourchier. But King Henry was not suffered to enjoy long quietness, by reason of unruly spirits, such as the L. Lovel, Humfrey Stafford, and his bro∣ther 1486. Thomas, who leaving their Sanctuary at Colchester, made many people in the North take Arms against the King, who upon this news suddenly sends  against them his Uncle the Duke of Bedford with three thousand men, whose breast-plates were made of tanned leather, for want of better Armour. But Lovel perceiving that the King would force him to fight before he was ready, and that a better strength was comming with the King himself, his fear made him flie to Sir Thomas Broughton in the North; the two Staffords took san∣ctuary in Culnham Abbey near Oxford, and the Rebels Army left to the Kings mercy, who upon their submission pardoned them. The Staffords are taken out of the sanctuary, which must not protect Treason; Humfrey was put to death, the younger brother spared, because he was instigated by his restless brother Humfrey. Shortly after the quenching of this fire, breaks forth a new flame blown by Simond a Priest, who knowing that Edw. Plantaginet Earl of Warwick, son and 1487. heir to George Duke of Clarence, brother to King Edward the fourth, had been kept by the two last Kings a prisoner in York-shire ever from his infancie, and that King Hen. had secretly removed him to the Tower; this Priest (I say) got the tuition of a witty boy, one Lambert, but of mean parents; him the Priest in∣structed in all manner of literature and court-ship, making him believe that he was the onely son and heir of the Duke of Clarence; the boy being now seventeen years old, (the true Plantaginets age) and made fit to act his part, is transported by the Priest into Ireland, who quickly works upon the fickle wilde-Irish, to accept him for their King. Shortly after, the Nobility and Commons, and Gerardin the Chancellor are all drawn into this net. Gerardin concludes from his person, feature, gesture, speech, and other Princely qualities in him, that he was the Duke of Clarence his heir, and therefore furnisheth him with money and other necessaries, so did the other Lords of Ireland: he informs also the Lady Margaret King Edward the fourths sister, daughter to Charles Duke of Burgundy, and supposed Aunt to this counterfeit, of his being there, which she knew to be false, yet entertained the conceit out of malice to Henry of the house of Lancaster, (she being of the house of York) therefore she gives out that the true Plantaginet was in Ireland, that the Irish had re∣ceived him for their King, and that she would furnish him with arms, men and money; this report carries over into Flanders to the Dutchess Dowager, her nephew the Earl of Lincoln, Francis Lord Lovel, with some other prime men, at whose comming the Dutchess caused to be levied two thousand men in her Country under Martin Sward; these sail for Ireland, and joyn with Sir Tho. Grardin the Chancellor who had raisied two thousand
Irish ready to passe  for England. Wise and vigilant King Henry caused the true Plantaginet to be brought from the Tower through the streets, into Pauls Church there to be seen by the people. Then he prepares an Army to encounter Lamberts forces who were arrived near to Lincolne; the two Armies couragiously joyn battel, but in lesse space then an hour, the naked Irish are slain with their Comman∣ders, Lovel, Gerardine, Sward and Broughton, the rest submitted, and are pardo∣ned, the Priest is sent to perpetual imprisoment; his personated Pupil is first made a skullian, and afterward the Kings chief Falkoner. Then the Queen is crowned; Archbishop Bourchier dieth; Morton Bishop of Ely succeeded in that See, and was also made Lord Chancellor, who shortly after received from  Pope Alexander 6. the Cardinals Hat. The troubles between the French king, and the Duke of Britany did per∣plex 1488. King Henry, for they both had been his friends, therefore was unwilling to side with either, but rather to mediate a peace; the Duke being ruled by his French guests, the Duke of Orleans and his complices refused to hearken to those conditions of peace which the French king proposed. About this time the Lord Woodvile, Captain of the Isle of Wight, and the Queens Uncle, without the Kings knowledge sailed into Britany with four hundred expert souldiers to aid the Duke, who was then ready to fight the French king near to Tongiers. Fifteen hundred Britains were clad in coats with red crosses, as if  they had been Englishmen; but in the end the poor Britains are slain, with the Lord Woodvile, so that the French got the day. Upon this King Henry is advised by his Parliament, rather to adhere to the Britains, then to the French, because he had been more beholding to that Duke, then to King Charles; be∣sides if the French should get Britany from the Duke, they would prove bad neighbours to England. Hereupon an Army of eight thousand men is sent under the Lord Brooks; but as soon as they arrived, the Duke died, and the war ended by the affiancing of the Lady Anne the heir of Britany to King Charles. The Northern Rusticks of York and Durham, refusing to pay the tax gran∣ted  to the King for maintenance of the British war, rushed furiously upon, 1489. and murthered Henry Earl of Northumberland, for distraining the goods of such as would not pay, and not resting here, they grow to a great body, and force the Gentry of those places to take their parts: Hereupon the King sends an Army under Thomas Earle of Surrey, who was taken prisoner at Bosworth field, but is now set free by King Henry, and received into his favour. The king had another Army comming after, which so affrighted the Rebels, that they all fled every man to his own home; but the king made strict enquiry after the Ring-leaders, who being apprehended were executed, the meaner sort were pardoned. King Charles having corrupted the British Nobility, obtained the Lady 1490. Anne for his wife, and returned the Lady Margaret to her father Maximilian king of the Romans, who scorning thus to be slighted, resolves to be revenged, therefore he desires aid from king Henry, who by advice of his Parliament concluded to assist him, because France by the addition of Brittain would be∣come too great. A benevolence is demanded and granted by the Gentry, but grudgingly. A fleet of ships is prepared to transport the Army under the kings Uncle Iasper Duke of Bedford, and Iohn Earle of Oxford, but when the Army was ready to be imbarked, the king is informed that Maximilian had no military preparations at all, which vexed king Henry, fearing lest the people  might account him a coward if he should dismisse the Army, or brand him with oppression or covetousness, for pretending a war to pick their pockets, therefore he adviseth with his Parliament what were best to be done in this case; they all resolve, that he alone with his own Army should war upon France in revenge of the wrongs lately offered to king Henry. Shortly after, the king sailed over to Calice, and there having marshalled
1491.  his Army into four battels, he layeth siege to Bulloign; the French king fearing lest the Brittains (whom he had lately offended by altering some of their customes) might fall off to the English, sends Articles of peace to king Henry, who accepted of them, and shortly after a peace is concluded, and the sum of 186000. and 200 pounds is paid towards king Henries charges, besides a yearly pension of five and twenty thousand crowns was duely paid whilst king Henry lived: and so the king returns by Calice into England. Mean while the Dutchess of Burgundy, a mortal enemy to the house of Lancaster, deviseth a new trick to vexe king Henry: she had got a Dutch boy, comely, learned and witty, his true name was Peter Warbeck, but nicknamed Perkin, which in Dutch signifieth weakness; he waseducated by this Lady in all Princely qualities, so that he was thought by most to be of a Noble extraction; he was so expert in the pedigrees of the houses of York & Lancaster, that no man could exceed him; for she made him believe that under the name of Richard D. of York second son to King Edward the 4. her brother, she meant to make him King; then she sends him over into Ireland, where he was received as their Lord and King: the French king also willing to divert the English Army intended against him, and to remove King Henry, sends for this Perkin Warbeck, resolving to make him King; as soon as he was come to the French Court, he was re∣ceived and entertained as if he had been born to a Kingdome, but on a sudden his honours vanished into smoak, for a peace was concluded between the two  Crowns, and Perkin ran away secretly to the Dutchess of Burgundy, and fearing lest the French would have betraied him to King Henry, the Dutchess receives him with great joy, giving him all the accommodation beseeming a Prince, with a guard of thirty Gentlemen; then she caused it to be published in England, that her nephew Richard Duke of York lived in her Court, there∣fore wisheth all true hearted English to stick by him, as rightful heir to the Crown. The report is suddenly believed by those who were willing to fish in troubled waters, who delight in the change, who were discontented with th  house of Lancaster, and complained they were not rewarded by King Henry as they deserved. Upon this Sir Robert Clifford is sent into Flanders to enquire the truth of things, who having conferred with the Dutchess, and seen the behaviour of this Mock-prince, certifies his friends in England, that this is the true son of King Edward the 4. The perswasion of which grew so gene∣ral, that King Henry prepares for future storms, and Perkins invasion; he guards all the Sea-coast, and by his letters informs the Burgundians and Flemings of the vanity and foolery of this device; he sends also privately some politick 1493. heads to finde out of the Dutchess and Perkin, who of quality in England sided with him, upon whose information some were put to death. King Henry finding that Maximilian King of the Romans, and his son Philip Archduke of  Austria and Duke of Burgundy secretly favoured the attempts of the Lady Margaret concerning Warbeck, removed the English Mart from Flanders and Callice, prohibiting all importation of Flemish wares into England; Maximi∣lian also forbad all English commodities in his Countries: Upon this, great discontent arose among the English Merchants, who could not keep so many Apprentices and Journy-men as formerly, therefore a multitude of Journy-men and Apprentices run furiously into the Still-yard, broke open ware∣houses and shops, rifling all in their way, and abusing tht Easterlings, till the Lord Maior with his forces dispersed them; the Ring-leaders being about eighty, were with many others imprisoned, but at last they obtained the Kings pardon. Sir Robert Clifford repenting of his journey into Flanders, obtains the Kings pardon, and leave to return home, who in the Tower before the King and his Lords, discovers the whole practice and purpose of the Lady Margaret and Warbeck. The King also
enjoyns him to discover the Conspirators, that if  they were great ones, they might be presently seized on, without further trouble, being already in the Tower. Sir William Stanly onely is accused, whom the king had highly loved, and made him his Chamberlain: but now having nothing to say for himself, is imprisoned, and a few dayes after be∣headed. Yet for all this, many out of several ends were so desirous of change, that they could not keep their tongues from speaking despitefully of theking; but he curbed their tongues by strict punishments, and strengthened himself against all assaults or invasions. King Henry remembring the aide which the wilde-Irish gave to Perkin two years ago, sends an Army thither under the command of Sr. Edward Poynings, 1495. who could doe but little good upon that wild people, sheltring themselves in Bogs and Woods; nor did the Nobility there give any aide to Sir Edward, for which the Earl of Kildare was suspected, being then the greatest man in that Island, and the kings Deputy. He being falsly accused, is brought over into Eng∣land; but he so cleared himself before the King, that he is dismissed with ho∣nour, and leave to continue in his place: Mean while, Perkin with the off∣scum of divers Nations, came upon the Kentish coast, some of them landed to try what the people would do for Perkin; the country people cunningly trai∣ned them further into the land, with their fair promises to live and die with Perkin against the King, till finding opportunity, they fell upon them, and kil∣led  many; one hundred and sixty they took prisoners, whom the High-Sheriff sent bound with ropes to London, where they were tryed and executed in divers places of the kingdome. Perkin in discontent returns to Flanders, where he recruits himself with more rascals, and with them he sets saile for Ireland; where finding men, but no arms, he leaves the Irish, and comes into Scotland, imploring the help of king Iames the fourth, being then young. The Scots taking opportunity by this to invade England, raise an Army and enter Nor∣thumberland, wasting, burning, and destroying all before them with much in∣humanity and cruelty; and after they had left that Country desolate, finding no English aid comming to their new king, they return home with their booty,  and let Perkin shift for himself. Upon the great desolation of the Northern parts, king Henry raiseth a puis∣sant army to be revenged on the Scots; for the maintaining of which war, a tax is granted: No sooner was this Army on foot marching northward, but it is suddenly recalled; for the Cornish-men refused to pay the Tax, and were in arms, pretending that the king and kingdome were abused by Archbi∣shop Morton, and Sr. Reinold Bray, the kings two faithfullest Councellors; that these two polled the people, to enrich themselves. One Ioseph a Black-smith, and Flamock a lawyer, were the two main men of this faction; these being in a great body, presse forward towards London; and by the way they make the Lord Audley their cheif Commander; the king gives them leave to march on, because the farther they are from their own home, the lesse help they shall have; and the long march also will tire their souldiers. Now when they came into Kent, the help which they expected there, failed them; and not on∣ly so, but were ready also to resist and suppresse them. Wherefore the Cornish∣men being no ways daunted, retired to Black-heath, intending to try their for∣tune. The king having divided his Army into three parts; chargeth the Re∣bels in the face with his own part, the other two on either side; the Cornish re∣sist stoutly, so that the fight lasted some houres, in which the Lord D'awbeny was taken prisoner by them, but presently let go again, hoping thereby to  finde favour; at last, the king won the field: of his side were lost three hun∣dred, of the Rebels above two thousand, their chief Commanders were ta∣ken prisoners; the ring-leaders of this rebellion were executed as traitours: their heads and quarters dispersed in divers Towns and Castles, for the greater terrour of Rebels. Whilest king Henry was busie about the Cornishmen, lest
the Scots should  make an invasion, he requires Thomas Howard Earl of Surrey, with Richard Fox Bishop of Durham to withstand, till he sent more power to aide them. In the interim, the Scots invade England again, and are met with an Army of twenty thousand, which made them retreat; the English enter Scotland, and destroy divers Towns and Forts neer the borders without resistance; in the night∣time, the king of Scots dismisseth his Army, who disperse themselves into the woods and mountains: the English pursued a while, but were forced to give off by reason of the storms, and want of provision in that barren part of Scotland. About this time, an Ambassador arrives from Ferdinand king of Castile, to  mediate a peace between the two kings. A Truce for some years is concluded, conditionally that Warbeck be banished out of Scotland. The peace also be∣tween France and England is ratified; the English trade is also restored to the Flemings upon the desire of Philip Arch-Duke of Austria, and great joy was used in Antwerp upon the return of the English. And now king Henry had peace every where, except with Perkin, who being turned out of Scotland, sails with one hundred and twenty ragged souldiers and four ships into Cornwall; the discontented Cornish flock to him, and aid him with three thousand men; with these he marcheth towards Exeter; which because they within would not yeeld upon his entreaties, he besiegeth it round; and for want of Artil∣lery  to batter the wals, they caused them to be scaled in many places at once: but still he is repulsed with the losse of many of his men in the Town-ditches and Trenches. Then they try to set the City-Gates on fire, but the townsmen made greater fires within, till with Banks and Bulwarks they secured those places; then Perkin fals to his scaling again, but to no purpose, whereat he was much disheartned: Mean while, the King resolves with his Army to raise the siege; but before he came, Courtney Earle of Devonshire with a good Army forceth the Rebels to give over the siege, who march away thence to Taunton, which they besiege: The king directs his march thither, upon the report of whose comming, Perkin flies away with sixty horse to Beauly Abbey, where  they take sanctuary; the residue of them were taken prisoners, and divers of them executed: but the meaner sort falling on their knees, begged for mercy, which the king granted them. After this, king Henry goeth to Exeter, where having thanked and commen∣ded the inhabitants for their valour and loyalty, gave to them his sword from his side, commanding that hereafter it should be born before the Major publiquely, as formerly and for the like purpose king Edward the fourth had done. Then the king sends some bands of souldiers to Beauly to apprehend Perkin, who yeelded himself, and was brought to the king, by whom he is car∣ried 1498. prisoner to London; but escaped to the Abbot of Shene, who procured  him the kings pardon: Then was he brought to White-hall, where his ignoble pedegree was written in a paper, and pin'd upon his back; so being stocked there a whole day, and the next morning upon a high scaffold in Cheapside, 1499. from thence he is committed a close prisoner in the tower. But as he was pra∣ctising to escape with young Warwick, who had been a prisoner from his infancy, he is condemned of high treason, and executed at Tyburn two dayes after: and the young Earl of Warwick on the tower hill; for no other crime but for affecting his liberty; for which fact king Henry was much blamed. After these things, Arthur Prince of Wales being now fifteen years old, is 1500. betrothed by deputation to the Lady Catherine, daughter to Ferdinand king of Spaine, being of the age of eighteen years. The next year she is joyfully re∣ceived into England, and married in Pauls Church. Not long after, king Iames the fourth of Scotland is affied to the Lady Margaret, king Henrys eldest daugh∣ter, and afterward married: by this match, king Henry aimed at the union of 1501. the two Crowns; and he knew that if his two sons and their issue failed, the Scots king would be drawn into England, as to the richer and greater kingdom;
which was better then if England should wait upon a greater kingdome, and be commanded by a Deputy. Prince Arthur about five moneths after his marriage died, to the great grief of all good men, and was buried in Winchester: his brother Henry Duke of York succeeded in the Principality of Wales, and was the next year after crea∣ted Earl of Chester by the king. The Lady Margaret, king Henry's eldest daugh∣ter, with a great train of Nobility and Gentry, is sent into Scotland to king 1502. Iames, who meets her on the Borders, receives her from the Earls of Surrey and Northumberland, and is married to her in Edinburg. After this, the king to enrich himself and impoverish his people, takes advantages of forfeitures upon the penal Laws, the chief charge of which businesse is committed to Em∣pson  and Dudley, two corrupted Lawyers, who by their Catch-poles miserably 1503. polled and pull'd the people, so that no man was master of his own; this im∣poverishing of the people was held a good way to keep them from re∣belling. Philip Arch Duke of Austria going by Sea to take possession of the King∣dome 1505. of Castile, fallen to his wife Iane by the death of her mother, was driven by storms with his Queen into Waymouth; Sir Thomas Trenchard entertains them both at his house, and acquaints by posts King Henry of the Arch-Dukes arrivall: The king presently sends to invite them to his Court, being then at Windsor; The Prince of Wales with a great train meets them about five miles from VVindsor, and within half a mile, king Henry with his Nobility welcomes them, with all the joy and solemnity that could be conceived; after some stay at VVindsor, the king conducts his Royall Guests to London with all imaginable magnificence; where, after much mirth, the League is renewed; and so ha∣ving parted with much love, Philip and his Queen embark themselves for Spain, where they both died not long after. Within a while king Henry be∣gan 1506. to grow weak and sickly, and so Empson and Dudly took more liberty to oppresse the people then before. But as the kings time grew short, so he grew better; for he remitted all offences against his penal laws, he enlarged pri∣soners (except traitours and murtherers) and paid the smal debts of those that 1507. were in Wards; he gave also money to those that had been wronged by these two wicked Cormorants; He repented heartily for the wrongs he had done, and lent money gratis to divers Merchants. At last he died, having lived two and fifty years, and reigned three and twenty, and was buried in his Chappel 1508. which he had erected at VVestminster. Henry the eighth succeeded at the age of eighteen years; he married Ca∣therine daughter to Ferdinand of Arragon, Prince Arthur his brothers wife, by dispensation from Pope Iulius: In the beginning of his Reign, to please the 1509. people, he causeth the heads of Empson and Dudly to be chopt off for their oppressions, and punished inferiour offenders in that kinde with Stocks and . His Wives father Ferdinand of Arragon, got king Henry to aid him gainst the Moors, which he did; He helped also Pope Iulius against the French ing, who had invaded the Churches Patrimony, and proclaims war against him for detaining from him Guyen and Normandy, and his other lands in France; For this his assistance of the Pope, both against the French sword, and Luthers pen, he obtained the title of Defender of the Faith. Ferdinand also his father in law promiseth to help king Henry against France, if he would land his men in Bisca, from whence they might march to Guyen. King Henry accordingly sends ten thousand men under Grey Marquesse of Dorset, who being landed in Biscay did no good at all; nor had they any aid from Ferdinand, whose in∣tention  was onely to surprise Navarre for his own use, which he did; for ha∣ving raised an Army under Duke D'Alva, which he pretended to joyn with the English forces, he suddenly rusheth upon Navarre, surpriseth Pampalona, and seiseth himself a great part of that kingdome: nor did Ferdinand at all assist the English as he promised, but suffered them for foure moneths to
perish  with want and sickness, so that the Souldiers returne to England in dis∣content. Whilst things were acted thus by the Spaniard, the English Admiral Sir 1512. Edward Howard takes divers French vessels, burns and spoils Britany in divers places; the Britains dated indeed the Admiral, and he came into the field with two thousand and six hundred men against ten thousand; but when they perceived the English courage, they ran away. King Henry upon this sends more aid to his Admiral both of ships and men; with these he encounters the French fleet: the Regent of England, in which were seven hundred souldiers, and the great Carrick of Brest wherein were nine hundred, both these ships being fast grapled together, were unfortunately burnt and drowned in the sea, with all that were in them: the French king increaseth his fleet, and sent it with all necessaries into the Haven of Brest. King Henry also inlargeth his Fleet, with which the English Admiral resolves to set upon the French at Brest, but as he was entring in, the formost Ship was splitted upon a Rock, which made the rest forbear to proceed. The Frenchmen upon this fortifie the Haven, placing in the mouth thereof four and twenty old Flemish hulks, which were to be set on fire when the English Ships did draw neer them; they raised also divers Rampires and Bulwarks for their great Ordnance. The English Admiral fearing the Haven was too shallow for his great Ships, 1513. entreth into the harbour with oared Barges, and manfully assailed the three  great Gallies of Rhodes, brought thither by a knight called Prior Iohn; but when the English Barges were gone, the French in great numbers rush into the Gallies, and with continual fresh supplies overmaster the English, the greater part whereof being slain, the Admiral with a Pike is born over-boord and drowned, the rest are taken prisoners; the Lord Thomas Howard, brother to the deceased Admiral, is put in his place. Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury is sent in∣to France with eight thousand men, and Somerset Lord Harbert with six thou∣sand, these besiege Tyrwin; shortly after the king himself with eleven thou∣sand comes over and joyns himself with the two former bodies, having left the care of the South part of the kingdome to his Queen, and of the North to  Howard Earl of Surrey, because of the Scots: At Tyrwyn there were divers sal∣lies of the French upon the English, and many skirmishes, till the French king came with a great Army to raise the siege; after many bravado's and threats, the battels joyn with great eagerness, but at last the French are beat, many whereof are slain, many taken prisoners, the rest fled, Tyrwyn is surrendred, pillaged, and burnt down, onely the Bishops Palace was preserved with the Cathedral Church; In this siege Maximilian the Emperour served under king Henry. After this, king Henry besiegeth Turnay, which after many sharp assaults and  skirmishes, yielded to submit and pay ten thousand pound to king Henry. Wolsey the kings Almoner takes of them the Oath of allegiance, and Sir Edward Poynings is made Governour of the Town, and so the winter drawing on, king Henry returns home, mean while the English Admiral vexeth the French both at sea and land. The Scots, in the absence of king Henry, invade England with ight thousand men under the command of the Lord Humes king Iames his Chamberlain, these having done much mischief with fire and sword, are sud∣denly assaulted by Sir William Bulmer and one thousand Archers, who defeated them, and stript them of their booty, being too secure and confident. King Iames in revenge of this defeat, against the peace and articles of marriage, en∣ters England with one hundred thousand fighting men, and besieged the Castle of Norham, which he took, the Earl of Surrey being aided by his eldest son the Admiral, marcheth with six and twenty thousand fighting men, among which were many Lords and Knights, against the Scots; a bloody battel is fought in Floden field, where after a sharp dispute the Scots are defeated, of whose army were slain king Iames, two Bishops, twelve Earles, fourteen Lords, twelve
thousand Gentlemen and common souldiers; on the English part were killed fifteen hundred. King Henry to reward the service of those who had fought for him against the French and Scots, confers on them divers honours. Thomas Howard Earle of Surrey is made Duke of Norfolke, and his son the Admiral is made Earle of Surrey. Brandon Viscount Lysle is stiled Duke of Suffolke. Sommerset Lord Herbert is created Earle of Worcester. Stanly is made Lord Monteagle, and Thomas Wolsey is Bishop of Lincoln. About the end of this year the enclosures near Islingtown are thrown down by the Londoners, as hindring their recrea∣tions. The French under Prior-Iohn land in Sussex in the night time, and  burn a village there, but he is beaten to his gallies, with the losse of many of 1514. his men, and with a wound in his face; to requite this, Sir Iohn Wallop from the Admiral lands in Normandy with eight hundred men, where he burns and spoils one and twenty villages. After this a peace is concluded between France and England, upon a match between the French King Lewis the 12. and Mary King Henries sister. Hereupon the Duke of Longuevil, and the other French prisoners taken at the battel of Tyrwin, are released; the Lady with a great train is landed at Bulloign, where the Dolphin with the French Nobility receives and brings her to Abuyle, where she is married, and shortly after crowned at Paris; but within twelve weeks after the marriage King Lewis  dieth, and Queen Mary is brought again into England by the Duke of 1515. Suffolke, who with the kings consent married her. Francis the first successor to Lewis, renews the peace with England. About these times, Thomas Wolsey born in Ipswich of mean parents, became the most potent man in the Kingdome; First he was the Kings Almoner, then Bishop of Lincolne, then a Privy-counsellor, at last Archbishop and Cardinal of Yorke; yet not content with all this, he gets the King to take the great Seal from Canterbury, and to give it him, whereby he became also the Chancellor of England, so that now without him no matter of Church or State was man∣aged. He demands accounts of all officers in the last wars, and thereby en∣richeth  himself, either sharing with them, or receiving great bribes from them; 1516. they that had nothing were punished; He erecteth also new Courts of Judi∣cature, by which he enriched his coffers: Such was his pride, that he would not suffer Cardinal Campeius the Popes Legat here for England to land, untill he had sent back to Rome for a new Commission, in which Wolsey is made 1517. Campeius his Collegate; so at last both the Legats repair to Greenwich, where the King was; before them were carried two silver Crosses, two silver Pillars, two guilded Axes, and two embroidered Cushions; their message is delivered in an Italian speech to the King, for his aid, with the other Christian Princes against the Turks; to this the King required some time of consideration: then did Wolsey by his Legative authority without the king, erect a Court, in which he visited all Bishops and their Diocesses, inriching himself by bribes, and sequestring for his own use the probate of Wills; and such was his pride, that before and after meat when he washed, he was attended on by Dukes and Earles. The King and Queen, the twelfth year of Henries Reign, resolve to passe over into France, for which cause great and rich preparations are made by Sea 1520. and Land; they came at last with all their train to Callice, and the French King with his Queen and attendance to Arde. Cardinal Wolsey is sent before with a large Commission to treat about a further peace with king Francis; the Lords and Gentry that attended on Wolsey were cloathed with crimson velvet, and  wore chains of gold, the yeomen and grooms were apparrelled in scarlet: when he came to Arde, the French king royally entertained him, and having seen his large Commission, gave him the like under the great Seal of France: Then did both the Kings with their Queen and train meet in the valley of Andrea, where they feasted and rejoyced some dayes together, and then friendly departed to their own homes; and because
there was like to be wars between  the Emperor and French, King Henry being in league with both, mediated for peace, therefore Commissioners from these three Princes were to meet at Calice; the Cardinal is employed by king Henry, with the Earle of Worcester, 1521. and some others in this Commission; he with his Colleagues ride proudly through London, where he is met by the Maior and his brethren, and the Companies in their several Liveries; thence he passeth in Barges to Gravesend, and thence to Canterbury, where he is met by the Archbishop and his Clergy with a solemn procession; from thence he goeth to Dover, and so to Calice; where he meets the other Ambassadors, a conference there was had, but no∣thing effected: Wolsey to shew his greatness, would needs go to the Emperors  Court, carrying with him the great Seal of England, which no Chancellor be∣fore durst do; he is accompanied with four hundred and sixty horse, being in all places met and saluted by the Gentry. At Bruges he was met about a mile from the Town by the Emperor himself, who highly honoured him, both be∣cause of his large Commission, and of the broad Seal of England which was carried before him in great state; but the want of the same in England hindred the passing of writs and patents. At Bruges, the causes of the war beween Caesar and France are disputed at large: the Cardinal makes a witty speech commending the excellency of peace, which the Emperor liked well, but withall told the Cardinal, That God had not put  the sword in vain in the Magistrates hand, but that by it he was to mantain his hereditary rights against usurpers, and regain by violence what by violence was detained, and therefore he doubted not of his Uncle king Henries help, seeing all Princes were bound to support right, and suppresse wrong; he com∣plains also of the wrongs done by the French to him, in repudiating his daugh∣ter the Lady Margaret, in detaining from him his Towns and Castles in Picardy, in getting treacherously from him his wife the Lady Iane the young Dut∣chess of Brittany, in mantaining his rebellious subject the Duke of Gelders against him, and lastly his surprisal of the kingdome of Naples from the house of Castile. The Cardinal could reply but little to what was said, there∣fore  he took his leave, and returns for England, where he is welcomed and feasted by the king. The proud Cardinal, under colour of the kings aid to Caesar against France, grants forth Commissions under the great Seal of England for every man to set 1522. 1523. 1524. 1525. down the true value of his estate, and to pay four shillings in the pound; the same sum is also demanded of the Clergy: this proceeding was most distaste∣ful to all men, as consisting neither with law, nor the peoples liberty, nor with the welfare of those whose credits exceeded their estates, besides that the sums demanded were not payable; notwithstanding Wolsey would not (though ge∣nerally petitioned) mitigate this rigor; and though in Hampshire Viscount Lysle wrote to the Cardinal the danger that was likely to ensue if there were no mitigation, seeing the people were ready to rise, yet he received no other answer, but that it should cost him his head, for offering to differ from his in∣structions; but at last when he saw how heavy this burthen was to the people, new Commissions are sent out to demand the sixth part of each mans sub∣stance; but the people instead of paying the money cursed the Cardinal: so great was the distemper every where, and danger of insurrection, that the king was much grieved thereat, and caused these Commissions to be recalled, protesting they were sent abroad without his knowledge, and that he would require nothing of his people but by way of benevolence. The Cardinal perceiving how the king had laid all the blame upon him, to  ingratiate himself with the people, he calls the Maior of London with his brethren before him, to whom he protested that he had kneeled to the king to perswade him to revoke the Commission, and to relie on his peoples bene∣volence; to this purpose he directs his letters to all the Shires, but this policie could not get the peoples good opinion of him;
then Commissions are made  for the benevolence, but they also did not take with the people, some plea∣ding poverty; others, that demanding of benevolences was against their li∣berty, and the statute made in the first year of king Richard the third. About this time, the Cardinal procures a licence from the Pope to pull down some smal religious houses, for appropriating their lands and revenews to two Colledges which he had erected, the one at Oxford, the other at Ipswich: this gave a hint not long after to king Henry to demolish all such houses. Then this busie-headed Butchers dog (as the people called him) took upon him to reform the kings house; therefore he put out some of his menial servants, and puts worse in their rooms: He bestows on the king his Mannor of Hampton  Court, for which he hath leave of the king to keep his court in his Palace at Richmond. The French king, about this time, desires in marriage the Lady Mary, king Henry's onely daughter; but this motion liked not our States-men, who 1527. foresaw that if king Henry died without issue male, France being the greater kingdome, would make this but an attendant upon that. The Cardinal also made a scruple of the lawfulnesse of king Henry's marriage, and it was disputed at Paris, whether Mary were legitimate, being king Henry's daughter by Cathe∣rine his brother Arthurs wife. This doubt the Cardinal first raised in displea∣sure to Caesar, because he had not used his utmost power to make him Pope. Dr. Longland Bishop of Lincoln and the kings confessor, told him that he had  lived almost twenty years incestuously with his Queen, and that therefore he should now leave her bed, and repent for this great sin. The King presently upon this, imploys the Cardinal in an Embassie to the French king, the substance whereof was onely known to the king and him; at his departure, the king takes his leave of him, as of a familiar friend: when he rode through London he was attended on by twelve hundred Horse. At Calice and Bulloin he is received with great honour, and flattering Pageants are presented to him at Bulloin: as he rode towards Amiens, he is met by the Pro∣vost and chief Citizens, and within half a mile by the king himself, who in great state conducted him to his lodging, on the gates whereof was written in fair letters Cardinalis Pacificus: after much entertainment and divers confe∣rences, a Peace is concluded, and sealed with a seale of gold: of which after∣ward the Cardinal bragged in the Star-chamber, and that he had made an everlasting peace; but the people muttered, that France never kept peace long with England; and that a peace with Caesar and the Flemings (which the Cardinal kept off) had been better. The nullity of the kings marriage being smothered a while, is revived a∣gain; 1428. and the king upon this refrains her bed: VVolsey procures a Commis∣sion from the Pope, to be directed to him, and his brother Campeius; that be∣fore them as supream Judges the matter might be debated: the Commission  being granted, Wolsey acquaints the Queen therewith, who accuseth him as being chief cause of these troubles, because the Emperour her Nephew had not made him Pope, and because she had gently told him of his tyranny, co∣vetousnesse and leachery: The king permits the Queen to choose her own Councellours, who named four Doctoors, two of the law, to wit, Warham Archbishop of Canterbury, and West Bishop of Ely; and two of divinity, namely, Fisher Bishop of Rochester, and Standish Bishop of Assaph: a stately Court is erected in the great Hall at Black-friars, where were placed two Chairs, and 1529. two great Cushions, covered with Cloth of gold; the Legats took their places, Wolsey the right hand: The King and Queen are cited; He by his Proctor acknowledgeth the Legats power from the Pope, but the Queen appealed from them to the Court at Rome, which appeal was not allowed: the pro∣ceedings of the Court were so tedious, that the King with the Queen came in person, where he desires a quick end, and withall protests how much he lo∣ved the Queen, and what an excellent wife she had been to him; but that now he was troubled in Conscience to keep her company.
At Rome, there is a custom that all legal proceedings cease from the last of Iuly till the fourth of October; which the two Cardinals willing to observe, resolve to adjourn their Court, at which the king is troubled, and sends the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk with other Lords to the Legats for dispatch of their sentence, but could not prevaile, which made Suffolk cry out in open Court, That never any Legat or Cardinal did good in England. The king re∣solves to wait till October; but understanding that Campeius was bound for Rome, being sent for by the Pope, and that this businesse was to be determined in the Court of Rome, which would prove both tedious, chargeable, and troublesome: He began to be sensible of the jugling of these two Legats, and withall to hate Wolsey, whom of nothing he had raised to such honour and greatnesse. The kings Counsel and Nobility being glad that Wolsey was like to fall, help to further it, by framing articles against him, for his pride, tyrany, oppression, and secret correspondency with the Pope, by which the kings power was diminished; therefore they conclude he incurred a praemunire and forfeiture of all his estate, and promotions, and liberty to the king: these ar∣ticles were delivered to the king and subscribed, who concealed them for a while; then Campeius takes his leave of the king at Woodstock; Wolsey is com∣manded by the king to attend him into London, not knowing what had passed; as they were journying from thence to the sea-coast, by order, Campeius his Trunks are opened, and search made for VVolsey's letters to Rome, but they were sent away a day before by the post. The Cardinal was indicted the next Term in the kings Bench, upon the Sta∣tute of Praemunire, by Hales the kings Atturney; and the Indictment being found against him, the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk are required to take the great seal from him, which was bestowed on Sir Thomas Moore; then the Cardinals goods by command are seised on, and he is confined to Asher neer Kingston: then being required to plead to his Indictment, by his Atturney he confessed all; his places are taken from him, and conferred on others; yet the king left to him the Bishopricks of York and VVinchester, and sent him also  much of his plate and houshold-stuffe. And now the king begins to manage the affairs of the Church and State himself, the charge whereof hitherto he committed to VVolsey. In Parliament a complaint is made against the Clergy for exacting large sums as fees for the probate of Wils. 2. For demanding Mortuaries of poore house-keepers. 3. For becomming Husbandmen, and Grasiers, and Farmers. 4. For keeping Tanning-houses, for being Grocers, for ingrossing Wool, Cloth, and other commodities. 5. For enjoying great revenews and benefices, in which they neither preached nor kept hospitality. 6. Because some dunces kept above twelve benefices. This complaint is much opposed by the Bishops,  chiefly by Rochester, who told the Lords, that these proceedings of the Com∣mons were like those of the Bohemians, which proceeded not of Faith: The Commons complain to the king against the Bishop for counting them Here∣ticks and Infidels; the king sends for the Bishop and accuseth him, who clears himself that he spoke that phrase of the Bohemians, not of the house of Com∣mons. Then shortly after this debate between the Bishop and Commons, in which some uncivil words were used, Articles are preferred against VVolsey, which are these; 1. That he got himself by sinistrous means to be made the Popes Legate, to the kings prejudice in ecclesiastical things. 2. In writing still, Ego & Rex meus; as if the king were his inferiour. 3. For calling the Church of England a reprobate Church, in his letters to the Pope. 4. For carrying be∣yond seas the great seal of the kingdome, without leave. 5. For sending a com∣mission under the seal, without the king, about making a Peace betwixt his Majesty and the Duke of Ferrara. 6. For presuming to come neer the king and breath upon him, when he had the French ox. 7. For causing a Cardinals Hat to be stamped on the kings coyn. 8. For inhibiting the kings
Clark of the  Market to execute his office in St. Albans, being a parcel of his Abbey. 9. For conveying in sixteen barrels two hundred and forty thousand pounds to th Pope, besides other sums at other times, and for exacting by his commissions infinite sums of money from the people, purposely to disturbe the kingdoms peace; all these articles VVolsey confessed, and submitted himself to the kings mercy. The king understanding that the Emperour and Pope were together at Bo∣nonia, sends an Ambassadour to them, to let them know, that it was not out of any dislike he had of his Queen that he desired a divorce, but because the Pre∣sident of Paris and many grave Divines conceive this marriage unlawfull;  therefore he desires, for satisfaction of his conscience, that a speedy sentence may passe. The Emperor said, he would be satisfied by the judgment of the Law in that point. The Pope promiseth an end, when he came to Rome; but he meant no such thing: for if he should give sentence against Pope Iulius his dispensation, he would make all future dispensations of no validity; and if he should give sentence against the Queen, he would make Caesar his enemy. King Henry seeing nothing but delayes, imployes the chief Divines of England to travel into all Universities to know their opinions about this match: these returning, brought twelve Instruments sealed by so many Universities, all con∣cluding the Kings marriage unlawfull. At this time Wolsey gets leave to live  within his Diocesse of Tork; one Cromwell a servant of his, left him, and got into the Kings service and favour also. The King was content, that the Cardi∣nals Colledge at Oxford (called then Kings-Colledge, now Christ-Church) should be endowed with the Lands which were forfeited; but he destroyed his Col∣ledges at Ipswich, as being needlesse. The King understanding that Wolsey had got a Bull from Rome to curse him, if he did not restore him to all his goods and places, causeth a Proclamation to be published, That all Appeals, Provisions and Instruments procured from Rome against the Kings power, within one year next before that time, or to be procured hereafter, to be be void, and the procurers thereof to be punish∣able.  Mean while the Cardinal by his Letters animates the Pope and Clergy against the King, and they on the other side encourage him to constancie, pro∣mising his restoration: Wolsey being puffed up upon this, makes great prepa∣ration for his instalment in the Archbishoprick of York, inviting the Northern Gently thither, meaning to feast them magnificently; he erected his seat in the Cathedral-church, in height and state like a Kings throne. The King un∣derstood of all these proceedings, that they were done to affront him; there∣fore to prevent his instalment, a Commission is sent to the Earl of Northumber∣land to arrest him and commit him to Sheffield-castle; he stood upon the pri∣viledge of a Roman Cardinal, and that he was exempted from the secular  power; yet he was seised on, and his goods also, his Officers were discharged, and his Physitian sent to the Tower, whither also the Cardinal was to be brought, but that he fell suddenly sick, upon the sight of the Captain of the Tower that came to apprehend him; he took a strong Purge, which in two nights killed him. The Clergie being guilty of a Praemunire, by maintaining the Cardinals Legantine power, paid to the King an hundred thousand pounds, to prevent further mischief; and by a publike Instrument acknowledged him Supreme Head of the Church of England. So Wolsey being gone, the King causeth the Opinion of the Universities to be read openly in his Parliament, and then to  be sent to the Queen, who for all this will not relinquish her Appeale to Rome, whereupon the King gets her to be divorced, and the Archbishop to pro∣nounce the marriage null; and then he fals in love with the Lady Anne Bullen, whom he made Marchionesse of Pembrook, and afterward married her. In this Kings time, on May-day, great outrages were committed upon Mer∣chant-strangers and their goods, by multitudes of unruly
Londoners; but they  were quickly suppressed by the Lord Maior, and divers of them executed, the est were pardoned by the king who sate then in Guild-hall, Tournay is deli∣vered up to the French by king Henry for sixty thousand crowns, which was disliked by some, because it was a curb to the French, and a nurcery for train∣ing the English youth in martial discipline. Charles after the death of Maxi∣milian, comming from Spain to receive the Empire, by the way is reyally en∣tertained in England. King Henry being told by his Privy-counsel, that some Gentlemen of his privy-chamber were too familiar and bold with him, the king thanked them, and left those gallants at the Counsels disposing who re∣moved them, and put wiser men in their room: King Henry as he returned from visiting the French king, by the way gave the Emperor a visit at Grave∣ling,  and a peace is concluded between these three Princes. The Duke of Buckingham being made believe by a Monk that he should be King, because he bragged of it, and seemed to rejoyce thereat, was arraigned at Westminster be∣fore the Duke of Norfolke High-steward of England, and was beheaded on the Tower-hill. The peace concluded between England and France is broken by the French; 1. In sending Iohn Duke of Albany into Scotland to raise new wars. 2. In de∣taining from King Henry the yearly tribute due for Normandy, and Aquitain &c. 3. By seising on the English Merchants goods, and committing them to pri∣son.  4. By spoiling and taking the English ships at sea. 5. By refusing to pay to Queen Mary Dowager of France her yearly pension. 6. And by refusing to pay the money promised for Tournay. For those wrongs King Henry prepares his Navy, which he delivers to the charge of the Earle of Surrey; then he re∣strains the French Ambassador of his liberty, seiseth on the French mens goods, (except such as were Denizens) and imprisoneth them. The English Admiral lands some men in Brittany, whom he conducteth to Morley, and having beaten open with great shot the chief gate, enters the Town; rifles and burns it. Forces also are sent to Scotland to prevent the comming in of the Scots hither. The Admiral having ransacked divers Towns in France, returns with great booty into England. Iohn Duke of Albany by the French kings  procurement raiseth a great Army in Scotland to invade England; against them two Armies are sent; the one under the Earle of Shrewsbury; the other of eight and twenty thousand under the Lords Rosse and Dacres; but these Armies onely viewed each other, and so parted without blows. Charles Brandon Duke of Suffolk is sent into France with thirteen thousand men, where he makes great havock, and takes Bell Castle. From the Emperor to the Dukes service came three thousand foot and five hundred horse, with these the Town of Bray is taken by assault, then they passe over the river Some into France, and do much hurt; but the winter approaching, and the Duke of Burbon who was revolted from the French to the Emperor came not with his ten thousand men as was promised, as also because the English had not carts as the Burgundians to carry away their booty, they were resolved to disband; Suffolk sends to know the Kings pleasure, who would not assent to their return, but sends the Lord Mountjoy with six thousand men, yet notwithstanding the souldiers without the Dukes leave disband them∣selves. Mean while the Duke of Albany raiseth an Army of eighty thousand Scots, against whom the Admiral and Treasurer of England march with forty thou∣sand, but there was no blow at all given, for the Scots retreated; then the Scots  Queen, King Henries eldest sister, obtains a truce till a peace could be concluded: Albany perceiving that the Scots Nobility could not endure that he being a Frenchman born, and (next to the king) inheritor of that Crown; should have the rule of their king and kingdome; and fearing some mischief, fled secretly into France; upon whose departure a peace is concluded, and a match proposed between the Lady Mary king Henries daughter; and
young king  Iames of Scotland, the Emperor also sends to have the same Lady Mary for his wife, on whom he proffers to bestow for her dowry the Low-countries; he desired also that her portion-money might be presently disbursed for Caesars wars, and that king Henry would in person with a royal Army invade France which was an enemy to them both: the king being offended with the Em∣peror for raising the price of his gold within his Provinces, answered, That his daughter was too young to marry. Then the French king sends to have her for his son the Dolphin; but this motion was crossed by the Duke of Bur∣bons Army, and the Marquess of Piscary, who took the French king and his children prisoners as he lay at the siege of Pavia. About this time king Henry  in his hawking, fell with his head downward into a ditch, which he offered to leap over, and had been smothered in the mud, if his foot-man Moody had not plucked his head out of the mud: Not long after this, the king bestows di∣vers honours; he made his bastard-son begot on Elizabeth Blunt, Henry Fitz∣roy Earle of Nottingham; Courtney Marquess of Exeter; Brandon Suffolks eldest son by the French Queen Mary his wife, is created Earle of Lincoln; Manners Lord Rosse is made Earle of Rutland, with divers others. Ambassadors are sent from the Queen Regent of France for concluding a peace, with the proffer of twenty hundred thousand crowns for arrearages of the tribute, whereof fifty thousand pounds sterling should be paid in hand,  and security given for the rest; they promise also to pay Queen Mary her dowry: upon this a peace is made, and now the King by the means of Thomas Cromwel (whom of Wolsey's servant he had made a Baron and Counsellor of 1532. State) curb by degrees the Popes authority here, in making a law that all should incur a premunire, who appealed to the See of Rome, and procured thence any processe or judgement whatsoever; the Clergy freely submit them∣selves to him in spiritual affairs, the Pope is utterly deprived of his Anuates and first-fruits; the lawfulness of his marriage with Queen Anne is established, and the unlawfulness of his former match with Queen Katherine, the Crown is entailed on him and his issue; to this Act all swore except Sir Thomas More, who disliking the Kings proceedings against Queen Katherine and the Pope, had delivered the great Seal into the Kings hands; Dr. Fisher also Bishop of Rochester refused to swear, and both protested against the said Act of Par∣liament, for which cause they both lost their heads. The next year the Kings supremacie is confirmed by Parliament. The Lord Dacres about this time is suspected of treason, and acquitted. Elizabeth Burton the holy Maid of Kent with her complices were executed for conspiring the kings death, under the shew of devotion. The next year the kings supremacie is again confirmed, and the Popes power banished; first∣fruits also, tenths and benefices, with all Church-dignities are granted to the 1534. king. Not long after Queen Anne and the Lord Rochford are beheaded un∣justly for suspicion of carnal commerce; within twenty dayes after he mar∣rieth with Iane Sir Iohn Seymours daughter, mother to king Edward, but shortly after his birth she died. The Lord Thomas Howard is beheaded for mar∣rying 1535. without the kings consent; Margaret his sister, and wife first to king Iames the 4. and then to Archibald Douglasse, by whom she had a daughter called Magaret. Two and thirty Commissioners are named by the king who were to make Ecclesiastick laws, and by the same Parliament all religious houses not exceeding in revenue yearly two hundred pounds, were dissolved and given to the king; a book of Articles also concerning Church-government is publi∣shed  by the Clergy: these proceedings against the Popes power, occasioned the Lincolnshire men to rise in a body of twenty thousand; the king levieth a great Army, and marcheth against them; they humbly petition that the religious houses may not be dissolved, nor the old Church-government altered: but the king would hearken to nothing, except a hundred of their Ring-leaders were sent to him to be
punished; upon this every one suspecting himself, they all forsook the field and went home; but Captain Cobler (indeed Dr. Mackarel) with some others were shortly after found out and executed. This was no sooner appeased, when another Rebellion starts up in the North of forty thousand men, complaining also that the old Religion was changed and wronged: Against these the Dukes of Norfolk and Suffolk are sent with a great Army; but their intended fight was hindred by the sudden swelling of a small Brook that lay between them, upon a shower of rain; which so wrought upon the Rebels, that a general Pardon being promised, they all went peace∣ably home. In Cumberland a third Rebellion breaks out, by Tilby and Musgrave, with 1536: eight thousand men against the King; but they were defeated by the Duke  of Norfolk, seventy four of their Commanders are taken and executed. The Lord Darcy is put to death for a murther; the Lord Hussey with divers Knights and two Abbots, and many more, are executed for denying the Kings Supre∣macie, and so was Friar Forrest for heresie. Divers honours are likewise con∣ferred: Viscount Beauchamp is made Earl of Hartford, Fitz-William Earle of Southampton; and among the rest, Sir Thomas Cromwel Counsellor of Estate, Knight of the Garter, Lord Privy-Seal, Lord Cromwel, is made the Kings Vice∣gerent in all Church-matters, and had the precedencie of the Archbishop of Canterbury; and to shew how officious he was, he destroyed Images and Shrines, the Begging Friars and Nuns. About this time, the Marquis of Exeter 1537: Henry Poole, with divers Gentlemen, for conspiring with Cardinal Poole (now beyond the seas) to reestablish the Popes authority, are executed, and so are divers Abbots and others for denying the Kings supremacie. Shortly after this a Rebellion brake out in Ireland by O-Neale, but is suppressed by the Lord Grey Deputy. The Lord Cromwell is made Earle of Essex, by whose advice the king quarrels with the Religious houses, pretending their vices and idlenesse, but indeed aiming at their wealth and revenues, which amounted to more then two hundred thousand pounds yearly; all this wealth was given by the Parliament to the King, who exchanged these lands with Noblemen for other lands. Cromwell having made havock of the Church, perswades the King to marry the Lady Anne of Cleve, a good woman, but no wayes lovely, except in her flattering pictures; which made King Henry, after he had been married foure moneths, to slight her. Hereupon the Clergy, to flatter the King, pronounce this marriage to be null, because she confessed the King could not afford her that benevolence due from a husband to a wife: The like sentence is pub∣lished by the Parliament, and withall, that it was lawfull for him and her to marry when and whom they pleased; it was also enacted, that whosoever spake or wrote to the contrary, should be held as traitors. King Henry being  now free, within twenty dayes after marrieth Katherine Howard the daughter of the Lord Howard, brother to the Duke of Norfolk: And withall he began to cast off his favourite Cromwell; which his enemies perceiving, prefer a Bill of High-treason against him, wherein he is accused of divers things in generall; so then being by Parliament attainted of Treason, and of Heresie also in sup∣porting the Lutherans, he is beheaded with the Lord Hungerford on the Tower∣hill. About this time also Grey the Deputy of Ireland, for procuring the Irish Rebels to enter and make havock within the English pale, is condemned of treason and beheaded. Queen Katherine being accused for her unchaste conversation before her 1541.  marriage with one Francis Dyrham, and after with Thomas Culpeper; the two Gentlemen suffer death at Tyburn; the Queen, and the Lady Rochford who brought Culpeper into the Queens chamber, are beheaded. In this Parliament the King is proclaimed King of Ireland, which title his predecessors never assumed. Then the King married Katherine Parre the Marquis of Northamptons sister, the Lord Latimers wife sometimes, who had not escaped with her head,
had king Henry escaped death. About this time Oneal and his son reair to the Kings Court, submissively confessing their rebellions, for which the King pardons them, and made the father Earle of Tyrone, and his sonne Lord of 1542. Duncan. And now the Scots, who had been quiet a while, begin to stir again: there∣fore king Henry sends to king Iames 5. his Nephew, that he may do homage for Scotland, which was flatly refused; then king Henry demands some terri∣tories due to him on the Scots borders, for which he had old evidences to shew, these are rejected by the Scots commissioners as fained: then king Henry desires to meet and confer with king Iames in friendly manner upon the bor∣ders of either kingdome; for this cause king Henry goeth to York, where he understood king Iames would not meet him but by his Commissioners, where∣upon king Henry leaves Commissioners there, and returns home. But during this Treaty, a party of Scots invade the Western marches, spoiling and burn∣ing all before them; complaint is made, and satisfaction promised, but no∣thing performed, neither had the Scots commissioners sufficient authority from their king to conclude any thing but what was dishonorable to king Henry: wherefore he is forced to send an Army of twenty thousand into Scot∣land under the Duke of Norfolk, who was accompanied with divers other Earls, Lords, Knights and Gentlemen, who march into Scotland burning and spoiling without resistance, and so return home laden with spoiles. Upon this the Scots king raiseth fifteen thousand men, who invade the west-marches, spoiling the English ground, as the English army had done the Scotish before: but Dacres, Musgrave, and the Lord Wharton, with open forces, and a secret ambush defeated the Scots, being in mutiny among themselves; there were taken prisoners the Earls of Cassels and Glencarn, the Lords Maxwel, Fleming, and others, with two hundred Gentlemen and eight hundred common soul∣diers, with 24 peeces of ordnance, and four carts laden with spears; four and twenty of the chief prisoners are sent to the Tower, and two dayes after dis∣persed and committed to the charge of divers Lords and Gentlemen. This overthrow so much vexed king Iames, that he died with grief a few weeks  after, leaving behind him one daughter Queen Mary, newly born. Upon his death, a motion is made for a match between king Henries onely son, and this king Iames his onely daughter; the Scots prisoners promise their best assist∣ance for the furtherance thereof, for which cause king Henry set them all at liberty without ransome, and besides bestowed on them divers rich gifts. Mean while the English and French Merchants spoile each other at sea; complaints are made, but no redresse; wherefore king Henry transports an 1543. English army into France, which being landed besiege the Town of Landersey; upon this the French king comes with a strong army, raiseth the siege, relieves the town, and in the night-time (being not willing to fight) they steale away into their own countries, and the English return home. The match between Prince Edward and the Infant-Queen Mary of Scot∣land, is concluded in their Parliament, and ratified by the seals and oaths of the Nobility; for that purpose the Queen should have been sent into England. But shortly after, the French king by cunning plots alienated the Scots from that match: so that king Henry is forced to make unwonted preparations a∣gainst both kingdoms; he first then sends a mighty Army against Scotland by sea in two hundred ships under Lisle the Admiral, and by land under the Earl of Hartford: The fleet having landed all the men, they seise in the Firth  on many ships; then they besiege Lieth, and being a while resisted by sixe thousand Scotish horse, they took the Town and plundred it: thence they march towards Edinburgh, where the Provost and chief Citizens met them, who delivered to the Earl of Hartford the City-keyes, conditionally he would preserve it from fire, and suffer the souldiers to depart with their baggage out of the town: Hartford the Generall answers them, That their Nobility by
falsifying their oath had drawn these Armies on them; if the souldiers and inhabitants would come disarmed into the field, and yeeld their lives and goods to him, he would do as he thought good, otherwayes they must expect all extremity; the Citizens upon this return discontented, with a resolution to resist, which they did, till the gates and walls were battered; the English enter the Town, a part whereof they burned, and plundered the rest: mean while four thousand English horse more are sent by king Henry, great spoils and booties are carried away by sea into England; Holy-roods, Leith, Haddington, with divers other places thereabout are defaced. Then King Henry sends two strong Armies into France, the one under the Duke of Norfolke, which besieged the Town Muttrel, but after much losse of time, were fain in the end to leave  it; The other under the the Duke of Suffolke, who besieged Bulloign; to this siége King Henry himself came, who so battered the walls, that the Town was fain to yeeld, conditionally the inhabitants may depart with bag and baggage, which was granted; there came out sixty seven horse, one thousand five hundred sixty three foot, eight hundred Gunners; eighty seven hurt men, besides multitudes of others, the whole number was four thousand four hundred forty four souls. Whilst King Henry is thus employed in France, Caesar underhand makes a peace with the French, whereat King Henry was much troubled; therefore leaving order for repairing the Town and Castle, he dismisseth his Army, and  returns into England, where because of his daily wars he demands a benevo∣lence of all his subjects, which was granted, onely Alderman Read refused, therefore was forced to serve the King in person against the Scots, by whom he was taken prisoner, and at last ransomed; after King Henry was gone, the Dolphin in a dark night suddenly surprised Base-Bulloign, but was fain to quit it again, being beat out by those of the upper Town: shortly after Monsieur de Bees came with fifteen thousand men to erect a Fort before the Town, but Hartford, Lis and Gray put them to flight, and forced them to leave behinde their ordnance, tents, and other provisions: The French king to be revenged, sends in a fleet of two hundred ships, and seven and twenty gallies, with sixty 1545:  thousand men, which cast anchor before the Isle of Wight; but as the English fleet passed out of the harbour of Portsmouth, the Mary-rose one of the Kings best ships, with Sir George Carew, and above four hundred men in her, were all suddenly sunk under water, by reason the ordnance were left untrigged, and the under port-holes open, so that when the ship turned the ordnance ran back to one side, and bare the port-holes under water. The French Admiral hearing of King Henries preparation, hoised anchors, and returns into France without acting any thing. Whilst the King is absent in France, the Scots in∣vade England, making havock of all before them: the Earle of Hartford with twelve thousand men, in requital, commits the like outrages upon the Scots territories; Lisle the High-Admiral lands within the haven of Treport, the Suburbs of which he burned, with some other places thereabouts. After all this stir, at last a peace is concluded between England and France, Bulloign is restored for eight hundred thousand crowns: but the Duke of Norfolke, with 1546: his son the Earl of Surrey, after many brave services done by them, are sud∣denly apprehended and sent to the Tower, because they bare in their Escuchen certain Arms which were pretended onely to belong to the King and Prince, which Arms notwithstanding their Ancestors had born time out of minde without controlment; for this sole cause the Earle lost his head, but the Duke his father escaped this fate by the Kings death. When the King perceived that his sickness was incurable, he caused the Gray-friars Church of London to be opened again after he had suppressed it; and to be made a Parish-Church, the revenues whereof he gave to the City towards the relief of their poor, and withall gave five hundred marks yearly of lands towards the maintenance of the
Divine-service, and reparations of  the Church: he ordained his children to succeed each other, if issue failed; he ordained a thousand marks for the poor, and twelve pence a day for twelve poor Knights at Windsor, with a white-cloth Gown yearly, an embroidered Garter, with S. George his Grosse, and a mantle of red-cloth to be worn there∣on; so having reigned seven and thirty years and nine months, he died in the six and fiftieth year of his life; he had six wives, 1. Queen Katherine king Ferdinands daughter of Spain. 2. Queen Anne the daughter of Sir Thomas Bullen Earle of Wiltshire. 3. Queen Iane Sir Iohn Seymours daughter. 4. Queen Anne sister to the Duke of Cleve. 5. Katherine daughter to Edmund, and neece to Thomas Howard his brother Duke of Norfolk. 6. Katherine daughter to Sir Thomas Parre of Kendal, and sister to William Parre Marquess of Northampton; by his first wife he had two sons that died young, and Queen Mary; by his second Queen Elizabeth by his third King Edward, and by Elizabeth Blunt he had a bastard called Henry Fitz-roy, whom he made Earle of Nottingham, Duke of Richmond and Sommerset, Lord Warden of the Marches against Scot∣land, and Lieutenant-General of the North of England. He was a Prince more eminent for his vices, then vertues, for he was counted ambitious in affecting the title of Spiritual supremacie; covetous, in appropriating the revenews of religious houses to his own uses, and extraordinary exactions from the people; he was also prodigal, in wasting so great a treasure as was left him so quickly  and needlessely; He was likewise cruel in condemning two Cardinals, in put∣ting to death two Queens, twelve Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and Earls sons, 18. Barons and Knights, seventy seven Abbots, Priors, Monks and Priests, and of the common sort huge multitudes; his lust and wantonness, his wavering in Religion, his revengeful and impotent disposition, were too eminent in him. CHAP. XXVIII. The affairs of Scotland under King James the 3. and King James the 4. from  the year 1460. till the year 1513. KIng Iames the 2. being slain in the camp, his son being nine years old succeeded, by name Iames the 3. There was much contesting between 1460. the Queen-mother and her party, with Angus and the rest of the No∣bility, who should have the government of the young King and Kingdome; a Parliament is called, and arguments alleadged on both sides; the Queen pleads the right of a mother, the Lords the ancient customes of the King∣dome. At last to prevent all animosities which were like to arise, it is ordered that two able men of each faction should be named to govern the King and  Kingdome during the minority of King Iames: of the Queens side were chosen Grame and Boyde, who was then Chancellor; of the other party, Robert Earl of Orkney, and Iohn Kennedy, to these were added two Bishops, of Glasco and Dunkel; to the Queen was permitted the tuition of her son, but she was not to meddle with the affairs of State; she had also leave to educate her other children, to wit, the Duke of Albain, and the Earle of Marr, with the two young Ladies. Things at home being thus composed, the English Ambassadors who came to make peace, had audience, and a peace for fifteen years is con∣cluded, the next year the Kings mother died; Alexander the Kings brother returning from France is taken by the English, but released again upon the Scots complaint of the breach of peace. 1463. Scotland continued not long quiet; for Donald Lord of the Isles, hearing the King was dead, caused himself to be proclaimed king of the Isles, threat∣ning death to all that should acknowledge any other King there: being invited by the Captain of Innernesse-Castle to a feast, he seised on the Castle, and thrust out the garrison; then having
gathered an Army of malecontents and loose  persons, he falls upon Athol, and seiseth on the Earl and his wife, who had taken sanctuary in S. Brigets Church; but Donald violates the Sanctuary, carries away the Earle, his wife, and many others, with all their wealth, which for secu∣rity was laid up there, and then sets fire on the Church, and killed divers of the Priests for making resistance: but as he was returning home by water with his sacrilegious booty, a sudden storm sunk most of his vessels, and he narrowly escaped with his life, and after that time till his death continued mad; thus God useth to reward sacrilege. Many of his followers being touched in conscience, went bare-footed, and in white sheets to S. Brigets Church, offering gifts for their attonement. At Court Robert Boyd a potent man, and great with the young King, to whose counsels he too much hearkened, by his brother  Alexander Boyd adviseth the King to shake off his governours, and to manage the kingdome himself: Kennedy a grave man, and one of the kings governours, for advising the king the contrary, and for offering to stop him from hunting at an unseasonable time, is abused by this Alexander, who with his bow which he had then in his hand broke Kennedy's head, this caused a great fewd be∣tween these families, to the disturbance of the whole kingdome: shortly 1466. after Kennedy died to the great grief of all good men, for in his life and do∣ctrine he was exemplary and powerful; he had been a great benefactor to the University of St. Adrews: Patrick Grame is in his stead elected Bishop by the Canons, who repairs to Rome, for confirmation, which was a while hindred by  the Archbishop of Yorke, claiming a power over the Scots Bishops; but at last it is decreed at Rome that Grame should be Primate of Scotland, and the Popes Legat also for three years, that the Priests might be reformed, and Church∣discipline established, yet Grame durst not return home so long as the Boyds continued in their greatness, which came to that height, that Robert Boyd the elder was made Viceroy by the king during his minority, his son also Thomas is honoured with the marriage of the kings eldest sister, which brought much envy upon Boyd and his family, for the people began to repine at his greatness, and to ascribe all the distempers of the Kingdom to Boyds misgovernment, these coals were blown by the Kennedies. Mean while Ambassadors are sent to Denmark for a match between the young King and the Danes daughter, with instructions for removing the old controversie between the two Kings about the Islands of Orkney and Shetland, the chief Ambassador was Andrew Stewart Chancellor of Scotland, who sends word to King Iames that the match was concluded, and these Islands given to him for his wifes dowry, so that the Dane upon this parted with all his right: Thomas the son of Robert Boyd, and Earle of Arran, is sent with a great train of Nobility and Gentry to bring home the new Queen; in the interim the Kennedies begin to work upon the kings affections, and to draw him from the Boyds, against whose insolent government the people did much complain;  the time was fit for their purpose, Thomas being absent longer then was ex∣pected, because of the winter which makes the Northern seas unnavigable, and the two elder Boyds by reason of infirmities, were not able to frequent the Court as they were wont; for this end a Parliament is called at Edinburg, to 1469. which the two Boyds Robert and Alexander are summoned; Robert out of his guilt, and perceiving the kings minde was alienated, and that his enemies were grown very powerful, fled into England; his brother Alexander not being able to flie, because sickly, appears; it was there objected that he and his brother had by their own private motion made the king come to Edinburgh from Sterling against the will of his governours; he replied, that they had the kings  pardon under the broad Seal, and desired also the Records might be searched, which was denied him, and so having received the sentence of condemnation for abusing the young kings authority, is beheaded; Robert a few years after died with grief at Anwick in England; his son Thomas though now employed upon publike service, is before being heard proclaimed traitor, and his estate confiscated.
The next Spring the young Queen arrives with the Danish fleet. Thomas Boyd understanding by his wife who met him on the shore, the calamity that had befallen his family, the alienation of the Kings minde, and the 1470. power of his adversaries; though some of his friends would have had him re∣pair to the King, from whom in this publike joy he might obtain pardon, yet durst not venture, therefore sails back again into Denmarke, from thence he travels through Germany into France, and from thence he goeth to Charles Duke of Burgundy, whom he served in his wars, and was highly honoured by him: the King sends into Flanders to his sister Boyds wife, to come home, upon hopes that she might so far prevail with her brother as that he may again re∣ceive  her husband into favour; but when she was come, the King endeavours to make a divorce, which was effected upon the not-appearing of her husband within sixty dayes after his citation; so the marriage is dissolved, and she forced to marry to another husband, Iames Hamilton, far inferiour in birth and wealth to the former, her children also are called home by the king; mean while he dieth with grief at Antwerp, and is honourably buried there by Duke Charles of Burgundy: so that family of the Boyds in a few years flourished and faded; and they that overthrew it, were in hopes that things both in Court and Country would have mended, but it fell out otherwayes, for the king gave himself alto∣gether to his pleasures, and his Courtiers to rapine and oppression; among other  abuses there crept in one in choosing of Bishops, whereas hitherto they were elected by the Prebends and Canons, the covetous and sacrilegious Courtiers never left, till they got the king to assume that power to himself, perswading him that by these means his power would be so much the greater, not onely in punishing of vice, but also in rewarding of vertue and learning; whereas it came to passe that now Church-dignities by the Courtiers were ordinarily sold. Grame the Archbishop being now at Rome, and hearing of the great abuses crept into the Church of Scotland, resolves to come home, and sends before 1472. him the Popes Bull for being Legat; which procured to him much envy,  chiefly by those who had made or might make benefit by the sale of Church∣preferments, fearing this gain would be pulled from them; therefore they conspire together, and complain to the king, that by Grames power from the Pope, the priviledges of the Church of Scotland were infringed, and that the king himself should be brought into subjection: Upon this, messengers are sent to Grame, not to meddle with his function, untill the king had received satis∣faction about some complaints exhibited against him; who was therefore summoned by such a day to appear in Edinburgh; who being come, and ha∣ving produced his Patents for the Arch-bishoprick of St. Andrews, and Pri∣macy of Scotlan, and for being the Popes Legate to reform the Church abu∣ses, his adversaries appeal to the Pope, during which time the king forbids him to meddle with the Arch-bishoprick: mean while his enemies got one Sevess, who had studied Astrologie at Lovan, to be made Arch-deacon of St. Andrews, whom the Bishop would not admit; hereupon he combines with the Rector of the University to excommunicate the Arch-bishop, which he slighting, was by the king inhibited from medling with any Church within his Diocesse, and all his goods are confiscated; besides, the Popes Auditors send out an Excom∣munication against him, for non-payment of his Fees in the Court of Rome, for his Pattents or Puls: then they made him abjure his Bishoprick, and impri∣soned him in a Cloyster within a remote Island or rock rather, called Aemona;  Three years after, he is translated to Dumfermlin castle, and from thence to Lake Lommond, where he died of grief: thus was that good man persecuted for his pious intentions. About this time, the Lord of the Isles understanding of great preparations 1476. making against him both by sea and land, comes humbly to the Court, ac∣knowledgeth his faults, and is pardoned: Onely Rosse, Kintyr, and Knapdale
are taken from him; the command of the Isles is left to him. This year the peace is renewed again with England, which was like to break out into an open war; because the English had seised on a great ship which was built by Kennedy, being driven in by storms: King Edward gave order, that the value of the goods taken should be estimated, and satisfaction made. The king was much addicted to the study of Astrologie; therefore understanding by the Scots Merchants in Flanders, of one Andrew a Physitian and Mathematician, who had foretold the Duke of Burgundies death, he sends for him, and pre∣fers him in his Court: by him he understood of his own danger, and how the Lion should be killed by his own Whelps; wherefore he became very tyrani∣cal, suspecting every man that was neer him: He was jealous of his Lords also, and therefore conferred honours on mean men, which angered the Nobility. The kings younger brother Iohn, for speaking too freely against the corrup∣tions of the Court, is imprisoned, condemned, and by the opening of a Vein is forced to bleed to death; It was given out that he had consulted with Witches against the King, and that it might appear the more probable, twelve Witches are condemned and burned: The other brother Alexander upon suspition also is imprisoned in Edinburgh Castle; but he having feasted his keepers and made them drunk, escaped with his man by his sheets, which he fastned to the bars of the Window; his man broke his leg in the fall, so that his master was  fain for a mile to carry him on his shoulders, so having a bark ready, and a fair winde, they set faile to Dumbar Castle, which he fortified, and from thence to France. Not long after this an Ambassadour comes from king Edward of England to renew the peace, and to conclude a match between his daughter and king Iames his son, when they should be both of years; but this correspondency held not long, for the borderers made divers incursions upon each other; Be∣sides, Douglasse an old exile, and Alexander the kings brother, lately being retur∣ned from France into England, blew the coals of sedition: King Lewis also sends into Scotland, to rouse up their drooping spirits against the English, who under Glocester were preparing an Army: but the Scottish Nobility being more dis∣contended with the misgovernment of their own king, then with the English preparations, assemble, and are by Archbald Douglasse Earl of Angus animated first to reform the abuses of the Court before they invade England; For he lets them see, how carelesse the king was in his Government, how much addict∣ed to Magick and unlawfull studies; how the chief officers at Court were mean men, how the Nobility was slighted, how the kings own brothers were used, the one being murthered, and the other banished, and now by the English em∣ployed in the head of an Army against them; therefore he wisheth them to consider how much more dangerous a domestick enemy was then a forreign,  and what condition they now were in under such governours, whose avarice (saith he) is neither satisfied with our wealth, nor their cruelty with our blood: Upon this a great tumult arose in the Assembly, and a resolution to break in upon the king and his guard, but that motion was disliked, for fear the kings person might be endangered, who hearing of an assembly of Lords in the Church near the Court, sends Cocheran one of his Court-officers to see what the matter was; as he was comming, Douglasse apprehends him by his gold-chain which hung about his neck, and delivered him to be secured; mean while Douglasse with some officers of his Army breaks into the kings bed∣chamber, and there presently apprehends all such servants that were there, or  within the Court-walls, whom the souldiers suffered not to come to a triall, but presently hanged them up in their horse-bridles for want of ropes. Whilst these things were thus acting, the Duke of Glocester enters Scotland with his Army, and demands restitution of the portion-money which was disbursed by the king of England upon hopes of the match, and the surrender
of Barwick Castle; It was answered, That the children were not fit for mar∣riage, nor was the day of repayment of that money come; as for Barwick, the English should have it, if they could take it. Mean while, Argile, with the Chan∣cellor and two Bishops, of St. Andrews and Dumblain, send to Alexander then in the English Camp to return home, and to enjoy his estate, which in the next Parliament should be established on him. This businesse he imparts to Gloce∣ster, who kindly dismisseth him, who being returned home, a Parliament is called, in which he is made governour of the kingdome; and because the State of Scotland was then unsetled, it was held dangerous to make war with 1482. England; therefore they resolve to deliver Barwick, after one and twenty years possession, to the English. King Edward fearing lest the Scots should disinherit their kings Posterity, with whom they were highly offended, sends to Scotland to disannul the match between the two young Princes; and to de∣mand back the portion-money; which at a day appointed, was repaid. Alexander, out of his affection to the king his brother, sets him at liberty out of Edinburgh-Castle, and restores to him the government: But the king being more mindful of old injuries, then of new courtesies, intends to dispatch his brother, being thereto animated by his enemies, who accused his popu∣larity and affectation of the kingdome: therefore by the advice of his friends he flies into England, and delivers up Dumbar Castle to king Edward. Where∣upon he is condemned of treason, for sending underhand messengers thither, for going thither himself without leave, and for combining with the king of England against his native Country. VVilliam Crichton also his chief Coun∣sellor and Abbettor is proscribed, and his estate confiscated: after this, Alex∣ander and Douglasse with five hundred English horse fals upon a party of Scots, who defeated them, and took Douglasse prisoner; Alexander escaped again. 1484. The Earle of Richmond having got the crown of England, makes a progresse to Newcastle, whence he sends Ambassadours to Edinburgh to conclude a lasting peace, or truce for some years: King Iames returns answer, that the Scots being a warlike people, would not hearken to any long peace; yet he would pre∣vaile  so far, as to procure a Truce for seven years; which was accordingly effected, and so king Henry returns Southward. Not long after, the king lost his Queen at home, and his brother in France, which two kept him in some aw; but now they being gone, he returned to his old wayes, in slighting the No∣bility, in pillaging of the people, in filling places of trust with new upstarts: Among the rest, was one Iohn Ramsey, whom he made steward of his house; this man fearing the Nobility, which was beginning to raise arms, causeth a Proclamation to be made, that none neer the Court should bear arms, except Ramsey and his followers; which incensed the Lords so much the more against him: the king in the interim studieth by all means to suppresse the Lords.  Therefore one day he openeth his minde to George Earl of Angus, telling him that he meant suddenly to seise upon, and cut off the chief Lords and heads of this faction: the Earl disswades him from this, as being dishonourable, to cut off treacherously so many great personages, being reconciled to the king, and having the publique-faith; but his better way were to arrest them openly, one after another, that they may in open Court plead for themselves. The king being satisfied with this advice, dismisseth the Earl, who presently ac∣quaints the other Lords with the kings intention: Upon this, they take arms; the king finding his own danger, takes shipping, and gets over to Fife side, where he raiseth an army out of the Northern parts: The Lords seise upon the young Prince, whom they make the head of their army: the king, in the interim, sends to the French and English kings for aide against his rebellious Lords, shewing the like danger may befal themselves; He sends also to Pope Eu∣genius the eighth, that he by his Apostolical authority would command them to obey their king; but the Lords who knew of all these messages, hasten to fight the king before either forreign
aide or Ambassadours should come; the  King contained himself in Edinburgh-Castle, till his Northern forces were come; but upon the perswasions of some, he was content to remove thence to Sterling Castle hoping there to be more secure and nearer his forces; but when he came thither, the governour being made by the adverse faction, denied the King entrance, wherefore not knowing whither to flie, and being followed close by the enemy, he was forced to fight with such forces as he then had, which being defeated, and the king having his horse slain under him, fled into a water-mill near Sterling, hoping from thence to escape by some ships that lay near the place, but he was pursued so eagerly, that he and such as fled with 1488. him thither were slain; this death of the king was adjudged just in the next ensuing Parliament: he died the eight and twentieth year of his reign, and of  his age the five and thirthieth. To Iames the 3. succeeded his son Iames the 4. being fifteen years old; a Parliament is called, at which few were present except those that had a hand in the kings death; the best of the kings ships held out against the new king, Edinburgh-Castle is summoned to surrender to the young king which it did, and so likewise did Sterling-Castle; many grumbled at the kings death, com∣plaining that things were not thereby bettered, but worsted, for the young king did not command, but was commanded by those who had a hand in his fathers death: mean while the English took occasion by these intestine broiles of Scotland to invade the kingdome; the young king labours to reconcile the Sea-men, lest they might cause troubles in his absence, therefore he wins with fair promises Andrew Wood an expert Sea-captain, who had the command of two men of Warre, with which he surpriseth five English ships before Dumbar and brings them all to Lieth; mean while the adverse faction cries out, that the kingdome was abused by a company of traitors, who had murthered one king, and kept the other as a prisoner; withall Alexander Lord Forbes, chief of that family, carried about the streets of Aberdene, and some other chief Towns, the kings bloody shirt, exhorting all good people to take Arms, and to revenge the kings death; Matthew Stewart also Earl of Lenox endeavoured to raise what forces he could in the Southern parts: in the interim the English were mad that five of their best ships should be thus surprised by two Scots∣men of war, therefore they furnish Steven Bull with a fleet, promising a great reward if he could bring Andrew Wood dead or alive; Bull watcheth his oppor∣tunity, and sets upon Woods fleet furiously, they fought so long till the night parted them; the next morning they fell to it again with such eagerness, that they perceived not the tide fail them, wherefore the English ships being of a 1490. greater bulk were forced to yeeld, being stuck on the sand; Bull with the other English Sea-captains are brought by Wood to the king, who restores both the Captains and Ships to king Henry of England, who took this very kindly, and  returns great thanks to king Iames. About this time a strange monster was born in Scotland, which beneath the navel was one body, but above two distinct bodies, having different senses, souls and wills; any hurt beneath the navel is equally felt by both bodies above, but if any of the upper members were hurt, one of the bodies onely felt the pain: this monster the king caused to be instructed in Musick and divers languages; one of the bodies died some dayes before the other, which also shortly after pined and consumed away, it lived eight and twenty years. A Par∣liament is held in Edinburgh, there all differences are composed, an Act of ob∣livion passed, and friendship between the great families confirmed by mutual  marriages, so that after great storms follow halcionian dayes: and that the King may testifie to the world, how his father was killed without his consent and knowledge, he wore an iron chain instead of a girdle so long as he lived, to which every year he added a linke or ring. About this time Warbeck the counterfeit Duke of York comes into Scotland, insinuates himself into the Kings favour, obtains in marriage the Earle of Huntly's daughter, and an
Army  against England, by which all Northumberland is wasted and spoiled, and great booties are carried into Scotland; this wrong king Henry meant to repay, but that he was retarded by the Cornish rebellion; after this the Scots invade Eng∣land again, but are hindered from doing any great hurt by Fox the Bishop of Durham, and the E. of Surrey who enter Scotland, & having burned some places, return home; In the interim an Ambassador comes into England from Ferdinand and Isabella of Spain about the marriage of Katherine with Prince Arthur; the same also is sent into Scotland to negotiate for a peace with England; the Am∣bassador with Bishop Fox, could not draw the Scots Commissioners to deliver 1497. up Warbeck to King Henry, for King Iames did not think it could stand with his honour to expose to the enemy an humble suppliant who had cast himself upon his protection, who was of the Royal blood, and affianced to him, having passed his word and faith to the contrary, yea a truce for some months is made, that Warbeck might in that time shift for himself as King Iames advised him to do. Warbeck being gone, a peace is concluded, which was like to break off a∣gain, upon a quarrel between some of the borderers; but upon complaint made by the Scots, satisfaction is promised by king Henry. The Bishop of Durham is sent into Scotland, who there adviseth with king Iames about his marriage with king Henry's daughter, which three yeares after was consum∣mated, 1500. after which followed peace and plenty for divers years, the Court and Country began to abound with riot and luxury; the King gave himself to building of stately houses, monasteries, and great ships, one whereof was said to exceed any that had been built before: Francis the French king, and Henry the 8. of England strove to exceed this ship in greatnesse, but both their ships proved unserviceable. The king having exhausted his coffers upon these needlesse expences, is advised by Elphinston Bishop of Aberden, to make the Gentry compound for their Wardships, and such also as had sold half of their lands without their Lords consent. This and some other waye proposed be∣ing distastefull to the Gentry, the King resolves (partly to lessen his charges  at home, and partly to make satisfaction for taking arms against his father) to make a journy into Syria: for this purpose a Fleet is made ready, a great many bind themselves by vow to wait thither on the king, who had acquaint∣ed the neighbouring Princes with his resolution. Mean while a war was breaking out between France and England: For, Pope Iulius, Ferdinand of Spain, Maximilian the Emperor, the Venetians and Switzers, with the English, were entring into a league against France, the affairs of which had lately succeeded well in Italy. King Iames was not willing to side with either party, yet was earnestly importuned by the French faction, who to pick a quarrel with king Henry, sends the Bishop of Murrey to demand  a great sum of money due to his Queen by legacie from Prince Arthur. King Henry knowing this message was a preparative for a breach, returns this an∣swer, That not only this debt, but whatsoever else is due to king Iames, shall be truly satisfied: upon this he resolves not to invade England, yet to help France, therefore sends his fleet thither which he had lately built, of which Iames Hamilton Earl of Arran is made Admiral; but he in stead of going into France, goeth into Ireland, and takes Knockfergus, which he burned, and so returns home. In the mean time letters from France come to the king, complaining he was not so good as his word, and that the promised ships were not come; whereat  the king was so displeased, that he sends Archibald Douglasse Earle of Angus to take Hamiltons Commission from him, and to succeed in the Admiralty; but he understanding the Kings mind beforehand, hoised anchor and was gone to sea, where his fleet by storms is torn and shattered, and the great ship is made unserviceable and left in Britany. Besides some private quarrels fell out among the borderers, about killing of Sir Robert Car king Iames his
favourite, by three  English-men, and the taking of some Scots ships by the English, without making satisfaction, occasioned a breach between the two kingdoms: The English borderers began to drive booties out of the Scots ground, where A∣lexander Hume Governour of the three Scotish Marches, with three thousand horse enters England, and plunders the seven next villages before any help could come; the booty was carried safe into Scotland, but Alexander with some part of his forces staid behind, and were set upon by three hundred English which lay in ambush, divers of the Scots were killed, and two hundred taken prisoners. In the mean time the King calls a Parliament, to advise about making war against England; the wiser part were against it, but the French Ambassador and his faction mainly for it; the King inclines to the French  party, and so open war is proclaimed both by sea and land against England; a Herald is sent to King Henry then before Tournay, to denounce war against him, for the wrongs done by the English without satisfaction, as also for mo∣lesting Lewis the French king his ancient friend, and Charles Duke of Gelders his kinsman. King Henry returns answer, That he heard no more then what he expected from a King who kept covenant neither with God nor man; His threatenings should not make him give off his enterprise, nor should he care to lose his friendship, who was so inconstant in his affections. Mean while, whilst the King was at Divine service in his Chappel, an anci∣ent man of a venerable aspect, with long haire, a long garment, and a linnen∣girdle,  came bare-headed to the king, and leaning on his chair told him, That if he proceeded in that war, he and his Army should repent it; and with that vanished away, nor could he ever after be found, though diligent search was made for him. But the King notwithstanding marcheth on with his Army, and entring England takes divers Castles and overthrowes them, Northumber∣land is pillaged; he was advised to besiege Barwick, which then might have been easily taken, but he slighted that opportunity. In the interim Heralds come from the English, to know of King Iames what day and place he would appoint for a battel: the King was advised by his friends to return home with his Army, rather then to venture himself with so few (for many of his forces  had forsaken him) against so numerous an Army of English, which was in∣creased by six thousand old souldiers sent thither out of France; and if he will fight, he were best fight upon his own ground, where he will find more provi∣sion and advantages then in the enemies country. When the day appointed for the fight came, the English appeared not; wherefore the King is desired again to retreat home, for the enemies policie was by delayes to increase their own Army, whilst the Scots did daily diminish; and that it was no more shame for him to retreat, then for the English to fail of the day appointed: but the King was so obstinately bent on a battel, that he told his Lords, if there were an hundred thousand English, he would fight them. This rash answer did much displease the Lords, chiefly Douglasse Earl of Angus, who told him that he had done sufficiently for the French king, to divert a great part of the English Army from France hither; and that it was unreasonable, why to please the French Ambassador, he should expose himself and his handfull of men to six and twenty thousand expert English souldiers: The king bid the old Earl go home, if he was afraid; who answered, That his former actions in defence of his Country shew how little afraid he was, but now being aged and weak he was content to take his ease, yet was willing to leave his two sons behind as pledges of the love he bore his Country; and so departed. The Scots now are resolved to fight, and by reason of their paucity take the advantage of the ground; which the English perceiving, to draw them upon even ground, make shew as if they were resolved by the way of Barwick to enter Scotland, which the Scots fearing left their advantage, and so the Armies encounter: Alexander Gordon who commanded the Scots right-wing, defeated the English left-wing; but the Scots other wing, in which
were Lenox  and Argile, was utterly routed by the English; the body of the Scots Army where the king was, fought stoutly, till night parted both Armies; great slaughter on both sides; of the Scots were lost above five thousand, of the English about the same number, but these were of the meaner sort, the most of the Scots that were slain were Gentlemen, this battel was fought neer the hill Fluddon: what became of king Iames is uncertain; some think he was 1513. killed there, others, that he escaped, and afterwards was murthered by the Humes; but whatever became of him, he was a brave Prince, had he not been too head-strong, who for his zeale in the Christian Religion was stiled by the Pope, Protector of the Faith. CHAP. XXIX. The Scotish History, under King James the fifth, and his young Daughter Queen Mary, from the year 1513. till 1544. KIng Iames the fourth left his Queen Margaret, and two sons behind  him; the elder was two years old, whom the Parliament at Sterling de∣clares King; Hume is made governour of all that part of the kingdome on this side Forth, Gordon Earl of Huntley of all beyond. The Queen is Regent, for so King Iames had ordered it in his last Will, which he had made before he went to battell; This dignity she was to enjoy so long as she continued un∣married, which was not long, for within few moneths she married with Archi∣bald Douglasse Earl of Angus, a Youth endowed with all the parts of fortune and nature. A great part of the Nobility being slain, the Clergy began to rule in Parliament. Stewart Archbishop of St. Andrews being killed at Fludon, three fell in competition for that place, one named Douglasse, who was chosen by the Queen, being of her husbands family; the other was Hepburn Abbot of St. An∣drews, whom the Monks (as they were wont) elected for Archbishop; the third was Forman Bishop of Murry, on whom also Lewis the eleventh of France bestowed the Archbishoprick of Biturix; besides, the Pope conferred on him the Archbishoprick of St. Andrews, with the two rich Abbies of Dumfermling and Aberbroth, and made him also Legatus à latere. Alexander Hume upon promise of the Abby of Coldingam to his youngest brother, causeth the Popes Bull for electing of Forman to be proclaimed in Edinburgh, which occasioned much mis∣chief, for Hepburn sought by all means to be revenged on the Humes for this. The Queen perceiving the distractions of Scotland, wrote to her brother of England, to forbear making war against her and her children, who were suffi∣ciently troubled already with domestick broils; who returns this answer, That he will not quarrel with the Scots, if they quarrel not with him. And now the Queen by her marriage having lost the Regency, the kingdome is divided in∣to two factions: the Douglasses would have the Queen continued, pretending that would be a means to keep peace with England; but the Humes would have another elected, because the times were troublesome; The Queen had lost her Regency, and it was not the custome of Scotland to be ruled by women; at last after much debate, Iohn Duke of Albany being then in France, is chosen  by most suffrages, he was the son of Alexander brother to king Iames 3. Francis the French king was glad of this election, for he knew it would be for his ad∣vantage; therefore he furnisheth him with men and money for his journey: In the interim, for want of one head, the kingdome is much vexed with high∣way men. Forman fearing lest Hepburn would crosse him in his title to the Arch∣bishoprick, remits all the profit he made of it, during the
vacancy; besides,  he resignes to him the Bishoprick of Murry, and promiseth to allow him a large yearly pension out of the Church-revenues. The Duke of Albany upon his arrival into Scotland, is declared Earl of March and Vice-roy during the kings minority: King Iames 4. his bastard son is made 1515. Earl of Murry: Hepburn insinuates himself into the Viceroys affections, and discovers to him the humors, greatnesse, and factions of the Scots Nobility; he acquaints him being a stranger in Scotland, with the qualities of each family, chiefly of the Douglasses and Humes, which he hated; therefore wisheth the Viceroy to send for French forces, to suppresse in time the growing factions of these great families. Hume perceiving which way the game was like to go, and that Hepburn had accused him to the Viceroy, as if he had murthered king  Iames; repairs to the Queen, and makes her believe that the Viceroy inten∣ded to murther the young king, that he being next in blood might transfer the Crown to himself: therefore how dangerous and unreasonable it was, that a stranger, and the son of him who would have murthered his brother the king, and hath therefore lived still since in exile, should have the custody of the young King; he wisheth her therefore to flie into England with her son, and cast her self upon her brothers protection. This comming to the Regents ears, he presently seiseth on Sterling Castle, where the Queen was, and removes her with the Douglasses from the king, whose tuition he committed to three of the Nobility, whom he most trusted, with a sufficient guard. The Humes upon this flie into England, and so doth the Queen shortly after with her hus∣band Douglasse; whom king Henry ordered to stay in Northumberland, till his further pleasure was known. The Regent troubled at their departure, sends Ambassadours to king Henry, to assure him, that neither the Queen nor her fol∣lowers had reason to leave their country, but their causelesse jealousies; he also deals so with the Douglasses and Humes with large promises, that he perswaded them to return home: the Queen was fain to stay, because of her great belly; for shortly after, she was delivered of a daughter Margaret: When she was fit to travel, king Henry sends for her. The Regent banisheth the Earl of Angus his Uncle, with some other prime 1516. men; and summons Alexander Hume to appear in Parliament, which he refu∣sing to doe, is condemned, and his estate confiscated: Upon this, he suffers or countenances the highway-men to doe much mischief; for suppressing of whom, and taking of Hume, ten thousand horse and foot are raised; but be∣fore they come, he submits himself to the Regent, who sends him to Edinburgh, and confines him to the Earl of Arrans house his sisters husband; Hume per∣swades Arran to undertake the government himself, being the sisters son of king Iames 3. and fitter to be Regent then a stranger, and a banished man: Upon this, they go away; the Regent presently takes Hamilton Castle upon surren∣der; Hume destroys with fire and sword a great part of the town of Dunbar:  To these, the next spring, was added Iohn Stewart Earl of Lennox; these seise upon Glascow Castle, which upon the comming of the Regent they forsook, and afterward all of them are pardoned and received into the Regents favour, but not long after, upon new suspitions, are condemned and beheaded; they were accused of the kings death, and of treachery in Floden battel; but Hep∣burn the Abbot was their cheif persecutor, ever since they crossed him in the Bishoprick of St. Andrews. Alexander had three other brothers, two of whom were banished, and the third was murthred by Iames Hepburn. The December following, the Regent brings the king from Sterling to Edin∣burgh, where having obtained leave of the Nobility, he takes shipping for  France: The charge of the government lyeth upon the Earls of Huntley, An∣gus, Arran, and Argile, with the two Arch-bishops of St. Andrews and Glascow. The Queen about a year after her departure, returns into Scotland, where 1517. new troubles arise upon the killing of the Governour of Dunbar by David Hume, whereupon
the Vice-roy is sent for: quarrels also arise between the  Earl of Angus and the Kars. A Parliament is called at Edinburgh, where complaint is made against the greatnesse of Angus, who falling foule with the Hamiltons in the streets of Edinburgh, a great slaughter was made, so that 1520. about seventy two were killed; among the rest, Arrans brother, and Eglentons son: The Hamiltons to be revenged on the Douglasses, besieged one of their Castles, but to no purpose. The next year, Douglasse with the two banished Humes, enter Edinburgh, and take down the heads of Alexander and Wil∣liam Humes, which had been set up all this while on an eminent place of the City. So the whole five years of the Regents absence, was filled with slaugh∣ter and rapine: When he was come, he intended to weaken the power of the  Douglasses; therefore banisheth the Earl of Angus into France, his Uncle the 1521. Bishop of Dunkell he sends to the Pope, to be punished by him, but by the way he died of the plague in London. The next year after the Regents return, a Parliament is held at Edinburgh, and an Army raised, which is sent into Annandel, with an intent to invade England: When they were come within three miles of England, Gordon Earl of Huntley disswaded the Nobility from entring, pretending it was unsafe to provoke a forreign enemy, when they had so many enemies at home; but this was indeed to crosse the Regents design, who to please the French, intended to invade England. The Regent to save his credit, had a party with Musgrave  and some other English, in which a Truce was agreed on: The Regent short∣ly after goeth over into France, where he stayed some moneths longer then he expected, because the English fleet lay in wait for him: Therefore he sends five hundred French souldiers before with a fleet, which falling upon the Eng∣lish neer the Isle of Man beat them. In the interim, Howard Earl of Surry is sent with an Army of ten thousand mercinaries, besides others, into Scotland, where having no ressistance by reason of the Regents absence, and the domestick di∣stractions, they waste Marcia and Teviot; upon his return, the Scots borderers plunder Northumberland, so that Howard is forced to come back again; who with much losse to his own party, took Iadburg. About which time, five hun∣dred  English horse being suddenly affrighted in the dark, broke their halters, and run away as if mad, at last they became a prey to the Scots; three dayes after the English Army disbanded. The Regent perceiving that the English fleet lay still in wait for him, gave out that he would not remove from France till the next spring: Whereupon the English fleet returned home; but as soon as they were gone, the Regent claps three thousand French foot besides one hundred courisiers in fifty ships, and arrives safely in Scotland. King Henry of England at this time did much court the Scots for an Union, alledging divers reasons why their union with England would be more ad∣vantagious then with France, in respect of vicinity, identity of language,  soile, aire, conditions, countenances and habit of bodies: shewing also that the marriage of his daughter Mary with king Iames, would make a perfect Union, and much increase the happinesse of Scotland. Notwithstanding all this, the French faction being bribed, carried it against king Henry; for they alledged that this was not the first time the English deluded them under shews of friendship and union: Edward the first, against his oath, by which he was bound to end the controversie between the two kings, Bruce and Balliol, he in∣creased it, by making Balliol king; Edward the fourth also pretended to marry his daughter Cicil to king Iames the third's son, but when it came to the up∣shot, upon some divisions in Scotland, he fell off; therefore king Henryes aime  was not to inrich, but to impoverish and enslave Scotland, being destitute of all forreign aide: they deny also that greater benefit can accrue to Scotland by their union with England, or more security, then with France: Therefore they advise them not to exchange without a cause, their old trusty friends, for new and slipery pretenders. The news also of the Regents being landed with forreign forces, confirmed the French, and cooled the English faction.
The Regent having made his Rendezvous at Glasco, and from thence be∣ing come to Edinburgh, he assembleth the Lords, highly commending their constancie to the French, and the old league, and exhorting them to unity: then having refreshed his Army, and united the Scots forces with the French, he marcheth into England with the French, but the Scots would not follow, knowing this expedition was onely to gratifie the French king; the Regent with his French besieged Werk-Castle, and battered down the outward wall with their ordnance, but they were beaten off again; the Regent seeing no good could be done by the French, and that the Scots would not fight, hear∣ing also of an Army of forty thousand English comming against him, return∣ing  home, the snow having done much hurt both to his men and horse, which made the English also return without action: the next Spring the Viceroy prepares again for France, desiring the Lords to keep the King at Sterling, and to make a peace with England before his return; but in his absence all growing out of order, the young king by divers of the Lords is conveyed to Edinburgh, where at Holy-Roods he undertook the government himself, and all took the oath of allegiance to him, most officers of State were changed for a while, he rode in state to the Parliament; shortly after the Bishops of S. Andrews and Aberdene for disliking this change are imprisoned, who to be revenged, curse all within their jurisdiction with bell, book and candle, but all are reconciled  again within a moneth; Archibald Douglasse who was banished into France, returns home through England, and is kindly used by king Henry, purposely to crosse the Regent; Lenox and Argile who were out of publike employment, are glad of his comming; but the Queen whose affections were alienated from him, and Arran, which two ruled all, were much troubled at it, so was also Hamilton who feared his greatness, these with the King kept themselves in Edinburgh-Castle; but the adverse faction of Lords chose Douglasse, Lenox and Argile, protectors of the King and kingdome, these presently seise upon Ster∣ling, and thence without opposition enter Edinburgh, the Castle being unpro∣vided then for a siege is yeelded up to them, out of which all are dismissed ex∣cept the king; these Triumviri were to rule four months by turn, but this government lasted not long, for under the Douglasses such corruptions and disorders crept both into the Church and State, that the other two fell off, and the king grew weary. Whilst Douglasse waited on the king into Teviot, there to suppresse the Bandito's or high-way men, who having summoned the chief of each family injoyned them to find out and apprehend these robbers, which they did ac∣cordingly, and many of them were put to death: I say, at this time a plot was laid by Lenox and the other Stewarts to get away the king from the Douglasses, which because they could not effect by secret plots, they resolved by open hostility to get him away, therefore on a sudden news are brought that the Stewarts were in Arms, the Douglasses with their friends in a great tumult flie also to their Arms, a hot skirmish followed in which the Stewarts were wor∣sted, 1526. the king all the while stood as a spectator: after this the Douglasses to strengthen their faction, procured the Hamiltons (who had been a great while kept from the Court) to enter into league with them; the Stewarts on the other side, got divers Lords and Bishops to joyn with them, and in the kings name to call a Parliament at Sterling, and to set upon the Hamiltonian forces, before they joyned with the Douglasses; Lenox with his party being too hasty, fell upon the Hamiltonians having the advantage of the ground, by whom they are defeated, and Lenox to the kings great grief was slain; the Douglassi∣ans were hasting with their forces, and the king from Edinburgh; but the king faining himself to be ill-disposed, came so slowly, that George Douglasse sus∣pecting he did this purposely to retard them from joyning with Hamilton, told him, Sir, rather then the enemy shall take you from us, we will cut you in two peeces, and reserve the
one half for our selves: this speech made so deep an impression on the young king, that he could never after be reconciled to him, though he was to others. The work being done before the Douglassians came, inquisition by them is made of those prime men that took up arms against the king, among the rest the Earl of Cassels is summoned to appeare, his kinsman Kennedy appeared for him, shewing that the Earle fought not against, but for the king, and by his command, and with that he produced the Kings letters. Iames Hamilton the Bastard was so mad at Kennedy, that not long after he caused him to be mur∣thered: Douglasse takes the murthered Earls son into his protection, and be∣stowes his daughter on him; he also plunders Archbishop Betons Castle, for  his complying with Lenox. Beton, that he might not fall into Douglasse his hands, was glad to hide himself, and so was the Queen, who both feared and hated her husband. Shortly after, one of Iames Stewarts Grooms, being grieved for the death of his master, stabs Hamilton the Bastard in sixe several places of his body, in revenge of his masters death: This fellow, though pinched all over with burning irons, shewed no manner of grief either in word or gesture. Not long after this, the King in the night-time, accompanied with a few horse, made an escape out of Falkland, and came to Sterling, where being now out of the power of the Douglasses, he sends for the Lords, who counsel him to remove the Douglassians from all government, and that neither they, nor any of their  friends, kindred or servants come within twelve miles of the Court upon pain of death: this kept off the Earl and his brother George from comming; a Par∣liament is called at Edinburgh, out of which the Douglassian faction removes, when they heard the King was coming with an Army: the Earle of Angus is ordered to be banished beyond the Spey, his brother George and Archibald his uncle are to be imprisoned in Edinburgh-castle; but they refused to obey this Order, therefore they are summoned to appear in Parliament, in the interim the Chancellorship and Treasurership are taken from them: but when the King was gone, they thought by the aid of their friends to take possession of Edinburgh, and to hinder the meeting of the Parliament; but the City was so well guarded, they could do no good; upon this, Douglasse goeth to his Castle  of Tantallon, fourteen miles from the town. In this Parliament the Douglasses are proscribed, and their estates confis∣cated; whereupon they flie out into open hostolity, and let loose the reins. to all high-way-men, so that much mischief and robberies are committed. The king besiegeth Tantallon-castle, but could do no good on it: Argile is imployed by the king to suppresse the Bandito's: the Douglasses being forsaken by the Hamiltons, flie into England. King Henry of England preparing to make war against Charles the Emperor, sends to make a peace with Scotland, and to have the Douglasses restored: king Iames would not heare any thing of restoring Douglasse, and so the peace could not be concluded, only a truce is made for five years; in the mean while Tantallon-castle is delivered by Douglasse to the king. The next year, the king makes Iames Earl of Murrey Viceroy, whom he sends to the borders to meet the Earl of Northumberland, concerning the peace, and reparation for wrongs, but nothing was concluded: The king sends the Earl Bothwell and some other Lords into Edinburgh-castle, upon in∣formation given, that they were underhand raising war against England; then he goeth in person with eight thousand men to suppresse the rebellious bor∣derers, whose Chief Maxwell with divers others he caused to be apprehended and hanged, at which the English were glad, for he had done them much mischief: shortly after this, the king releaseth the imprisoned Lords out of the Castle. About this time, one Iohn Scot a mean man in Edinburgh, grew famous with 1531. Fasting; for when he pleased, he could abstain thirty, or forty, or fifty dayes together without meat or drink: Experiments of this he gave both to king Iames in Scotland, to the Pope at Rome, to the Venetians, to the
English in London,  where he was imprisoned for preaching at Pauls-Crosse against king Henry's divorce, and falling off from the Church of Rome: when he was asked by what means he fasted so, he still answered, By the help of the Virgin Mary. The Duke of Albany obtained of the Pope, that the Clergy should out of their revenues allow an yearly salary for Judges to end controversies between man and man about bargains or pecuniary matters: Dumbar Bishop of Aberdene in 1532. this point appeals to the Pope, and then at Edinburgh was set up the Colledge of Justice: the king to please the Pope, makes strict inquisition against the Lutherans, in recompence of which, the Pope bestows on him all the Tithes for three years. This year the English having entred into a league with France against Caesar, are willing to pick a quarrel with Scotland, therefore upon some  small pretences they invade the Scots borders, and did at first much harm, till they were beat out, and then they were contented by mediation of the French to imbrace a peace; David Beton is sent into France to complain that the old league with Scotland was neglected; an Ambassador is sent from France to compose the differences between the Scots and English; Caesar sends an 1534. Ambassador from Toledo by the way of Ireland into Scotland, to draw the Scots into a league with him against England and France, complaining of the wrongs done to his Aunt Katherine by King Henry; then a match is proposed either with Mary of Hungary, or Mary of Portugal, or Mary of England; but King Iames inclined rather to the king of Denmarks daughter by Isabel  sister to Charles Caesar. About this some time was required for delibe∣ration. Things being setled at home, the King resolves to sail about Scotland, for reducing the Islanders to obedience; first he sails to the Orcades, which he setleth, and puts garrisons both in the Kings and in the Bishops Castles; then he settles the other Islands, and sends away their chief disturbers to Edinburgh and Dumbar-Castles; the Lutherans are severely enquired after, and some burnt: the Earl of Murry, and the Bishop of Aberdene, are sent into France about a wife for the king, to whom king Henry of England sends by one of his Bishops a book containing the Articles of the Reformed Religion, which  king Iames upon perswasion of his Clergy rejected as heretical: then king Henry sends to desire king Iames to give him a meeting about setling of both kingdomes in one, which was by marrying king Henries daughter, whereby king Iames after king Henries death should be heire of both, in assurance of which, king Henry proffers to make him Duke of Yorke, and his Deputy or Viceroy of England: king Iames intended to give king Henry a meeting, but was at last disswaded from it by the Hamiltons, who being next heirs to the Crown, would not have the king marry at all; by the Bishops also, who preten∣ded that king Henry meant to have the Religion of Scotland altered; they al∣leadged the danger that might befall the king if he should trust his person in  England, whereas king Iames the first, Malcolme the first, and his brother Wil∣liam kings of Scotland, were drawn into England upon great promises, and then forced to assent and act such things as stood not with the honour and safety of their kingdome. With these reasons, and with promises of great sums of money, king Iames his minde was changed, and so king Henry was angred, which occasioned new quarrels. King Iames being impatient of caelibate, and finding that his Am∣bassadors in France trifled away their time, resolves to go thither in person, but without the knowledge of his Lords; the first time he set to sea he was  forced back by storms, the next time he landed in Deep, being accompanied with many of his Lords, who suddenly comming to Paris before king Francis knew of his arrival, was most courteously entertained, and a match presently concluded between him and Magdalen the French kings daughter; after 1537. much joy and solemnity they both sailed into Scotland, but not long after she fell into an hectick feaver and died, to the great grief of all except the Priests,
who feared she would incline the King to Protestanisme, for she had been bred by her Aunt the Queen of Navar; after her death, Ambassadors are sent to marry Mary of the house of Guise, and widow to the Duke of Longevil: Bothwel for suspected treason is banished out of Scotland, England and France: the Lord Forbes is beheaded, being accused by one Straughen of treason, and persecuted by Huntlies faction: the Earl of Angus his sister was burned for conspiring with some others to poyson the king; her husband thinking by a rope to escape out of Edinburgh-Castle, fell and so bruised himself that he died presently; the next year Mary of Guise is with great solemnity married at St. Andrews by the Archbishop to King Iames. Many Protestants that year suffe∣red  either death or banishment: George Buchanan escaped out of prison: 1539. The Queen this year was brought to bed of a son, and the next year of an∣other. King Henry sends again to have King Iames give him a meeting at Yorke, which he refused upon the disswasions of his Clergy. Iames Hamilton for treason is beheaded, and his limbs set up in four several places of Edinburgh; not long after, the King dreamed that this Hamiltons ghost appeared to him in a ghastly manner, brandishing his sword against him, with which he cut off his right hand, and then his left; the king being awakened, and thinking much of the meaning of this dream, news is brought him that both his sons were dead about the same time, the one at St. Andrews, and the other at Sterling. Not long after this, the two kings quarrel, the borderers are wasted on both sides; at last Armies are raised, the Scots Army mutined because the king had by his letters named one Oliver Sinclar for their General, and so in a confused manner were marching home, which the English perceiving, they set upon them with their whole Army, and routed them; the news of this overthrow so vexed the king, that shortly after he sickned and died, having left one daughter heir to the Crown five dayes old, he was entombed in the Abbey-Church of Holy-Roods, near his first wife Magdalen. The losse of the Army, and the kings sudden death, put the Scots into a great deal of anxiety;  the Hamiltons were now in hope to obtain the Crown, at least during the nonage of the childe Mary: the Scots prisoners at London are for two dayes shut up in the Tower, and from thence being brought in solemnity through the streets to the king, were checked by the Chancellor for breaking the peace, and then were dispersed into some private houses; but when news came that king Iames was dead, having left one daughter, the prisoners are sent for to the Court and kindly used by the king, who having tried how they were inclined to a match between his son and their young Queen, he sends them home into Scot∣land, 1543. the two Douglasses return with them after fifteen years banishment: The Cardinal of St. Andrews got himself to be made Viceroy before they came, but as soon as they were come he was thrust out, and Iames Hamilton Earl of Arran is named Viceroy. The next March a Parliament was called, whither Sir Ralph Sadler is sent Ambassador from king Henry to conclude a peace, and to make up the match, his proposal was much opposed by the Queen, Cardinal and Clergy; the Car∣dinal is confined, and great hopes appear of a full union, so that the Mer∣chants begin again to traffique freely; but the Cardinal (being set at liberty) with his Clergy and the Queen, strive what they can to hinder any union with England, therefore they cause affronts to be put upon the English Ambassador, and withall the hostages which were promised upon the setting of the Scots  Lords free in England, were denied, for they feared this union would be pre∣judicial to France, and that it would bring in with it an alteration in Religion: Sir Ralph complains of the affronts, to whom the Regent promiseth repara∣tion, but shews it was not in his power to deliver any hostages: the Earl of Cassils alone professed openly, that he would return to England, and there re∣main a perpetual prisoner, rather then
his two brothers which were his  hostages should suffer for him, and so he went streight to London; the King highly commending his resolution, sets both his brothers at liberty, and sends him also back again with some rich presents. Mean while King Henry staye all the Scots ships that were within his harbours, threatning war and de∣struction against those who had broke the peace, and violated the Laws of Nations: but the Queen and Cardinals faction sends to the French king, that he should now or never hinder the Scots union with England, and to that pur∣pose should send home Matthew Stewart Earl of Lenox, who was the Hamiltons great enemy, to suppresse them and their claim which they laid to the Crown, he being next heir by King Iames his last Will; they promise also to marry him to the widow Queen, and to make him heire to Iames Hamilton lately dead, for the Regent was a bastard; besides the French king promised his as∣sistance to Lenox, if he would go home. The young credulous Earle upon these great proffers and promises goeth for Scotland, where having saluted the Regent, he repairs to the Cardinal, to whom he shews the causes of this his journey; his friends to the number of four thousand accompany him to the Queen: Hamilton to avoid blood, pro∣poseth some Articles for peace, to wit, that the Queen should be transported into Sterling, and that she should be educated by four of the Nobility which were of neither faction; hereupon she was crowned at Sterling: the Regent finding himself too weak for the other faction, in the Gray-Friars at Sterling  in the presence of the Queen-mother, and chief Lords of the Court, recan∣ted his opinion concerning the controverted points of Religion, and totally submitted himself to the Cardinal, who was Regent in effect, the other onely in name; thus the Queen-mother and Cardinal having got the Regent to be at their beck, strive underhand to get Lenox out of the way, by writing to the French king, and desiring him to call back Lenox again, for he had done what they desired in diminishing the Regents power, but they were afraid lest his greatnesse may cause some faction; in the interim the Queen-mother bare him in hand that she would marry him, and entertained him at Court with feasting, masking and dancing; the Earl of othwel whom King Iames the 5. banished, is now returned, and was a great servant also to the Queen-mother, which bred emulation in Lenox, yet he at last got Bothwel to forsake the Court; but when he perceived that the Queen and Cardinal did put him off with long delayes, and that they went about to delude him, he grew angry, and with in∣tent of revenge went to Dumbritton, where he receiveth from the French king a great summe of money which he was to employ by the advice of the Queen and Cardinal, but he distributed a great part of this money among his friends, and some he sent to the Queen; the Cardinal finding that no share thereof came to him, in anger complies with the Regent, and wisheth him to send speedily an Army to Glascow which might unawares seise upon Lenox and the money also; but Lenox understanding of this plot, raiseth presently seven thousand Voluntiers, and with them he marcheth to Leith, and sends to the Cardinal that he was come to prevent his journey to Glascow, and withall to fight his forces; the Cardinal puts him off from day to day with promises of a fight, but when Lenox saw that he lost time, that his Voluntiers were be∣ginning to hold correspondence with the Enemy, and that he was not pro∣vided to make a siege, makes his peace with the Regent. Shortly after Lenox understanding that a plot was laid against him, he re∣tired to Glascow, where he fortifies and victuals the Bishops Castle; thence he  goeth to Dumbritton, where he understands that the Douglasses and Hamiltons were reconciled, and that King Francis affection was alienated from him upon the calumnies of his enemies; in the interim the Earl of Angus, and Robert Maxwel came to Glascow, to take up the differences between the Regent and Lenox; mean while King Henry of England sends his fleet which was intended for France, against Leith and Edinburgh, which had slighted his proffers,
and  affronted his Ambassador; ten thousand men being landed they quickly seise on the Town, most of the Merchants being gone elsewhere; here they stayed three dayes till their Artillery was landed, with which they battered the walls of Edinburgh which they took and plundered, and having set fire on some houses, they marched up and down that Country, wasting divers Gentlemens houses and villages; and so having done what spoil they could, return to their ships; Lenox in the mean time sends a messenger with letters to King Francis clearing his own innocencie, and accusing his enemies of false calumnies against him; but the King was so prepossessed by the Queen-mother, and the Guisian faction, that he would not admit the messenger into his presence; Lenox being much perplexed that he was thus abused by the Queen and Car∣dinal,  and slighted by the French king, who had employed him on a desperate service, and then forsook him, understanding also that the Regent was come into Glascow with an Army, and after ten dayes siege had taken the Castle, re∣solves now to comply with the King of England; and having received some encouragements thereto, intends first to be revenged on the Hamiltons, there∣fore with eight hundred Townsmen of Glascow and others, he encounters the Hamilton forces which were far more numerous; in the first encounter he beat off the enemy from their Ordnance, but fresh supplies comming to the Hamiltons got them that victory, about three hundred were killed on both  sides: Glascow is plundered, and Lenox having left the Castle of Dumbritton to George Sterling, set sails for England, where he is honourably received and en∣tertained by the King who marrieth him to Margaret Douglasse, King Iames the fifths sister, and daughter to King Henries sister. CHAP. XXX. A continuation of the Scottish History under the two Regents, Hamilton and the Queen-mother, from 1544. till 1560. THE Hamiltons being glad to be rid of so potent an enemy as Lenox,  call a Parliament, in which he and his friends are condemned, and their 1544. whole estates confiscated; whilest Scotland is thus pestred with home∣bred seditions, the English invade it with an Army, to resist which, the Queen∣mother with the Cardinal and Regent, raise between eight and nine thousand men, but the Regent out of cowardise fled with a few to Dumbar, the Army upon his sudden departure began to disband: Archibald Douglasse Earl of Angus, with some few of his friends, brought back the Artillery to Dumbar, even in the sight of the enemy, wherein he shewed great resolution and bold∣nesse; the English mean while wastes all the Country to the Forth, and so re∣turn  home: Thomas Howard the Duke of Norforlk, with some others, beg from King Henry in recompence of their good service in Scotland, all such lands there as either they had, or should subdue, and with all a sufficient Army, till the work were done; this was assented to, so they return with three thou∣sand mercinaries, besides the borderers who were voluntaries, and warred on their own charges: the Earl of Angus whose estate lay most about the borders repairs to the Regent, shewing him the danger the kingdome was in, and re∣proved him for suffering himself to be led by the Cardinal and his Clergy, for which he had lost the hearts of the Nobility; hereupon summons are sent abroad to invite the Lords to a meeting, that an Army might be raised, they two in the interim with three hundred horse ride towards the English quar∣ters; some of the borderers joyn their forces with the Regent, to whom came a supply of three hundred out of Fife, and some more forces under Walter Scot; these encounter with the English who had both the sun and wind against them, so that being blinded with the sun now in the West, and the gun-powder∣smoak, they wee presently disranked and confounded, and so suddenly flung
down their arms and ran away; the Scots pursued with great eagernesse and made a great slaughter; of the Scots two onely were slain; of the English a∣bout two hundred, and a thousand taken prisoners, eight hundred of which were Gentlemen. About this time, the Gourdons under George Earl of Huntly, or rather the Re∣ginaldins by his instigation, fought a battel with the Frasers; in which the whole family of the Frasers were killed, so that it had been utterly extinct, but that there were 80 of their wives left big with with childe; all which were brought to bed of sons, who lived till they all came to mens estate. Five hun∣dred horse and three thousand foot are sent out of France into Scotland, to re∣tard the English from invading France; an Ambassadour also is sent to enquire  into crimes objected against Lenox, that he suppressed much of the French mo∣ney, 1545. that he spoiled the publique cause by falling out with the Cardinal, and of his going into England; he had also order to leavy an army in Scotland, whereupon fifteen thousand make their rendezvous at Haddington, whence they march into England, wasting for six miles together all with fire and sword. So having spent ten dayes in plundering, they return laden with spoil. Mongomery the French Ambassadour enquires and findes that the Cardinal had wrongfully accused Lenox, and forced him to flie into England; Then the Re∣gent and Cardinal undertook a progresse into Perth, Dundee, and other towns, to punish and suppresse the Protestants; they take away the Provostship of Perth from the Ruvens, in whose family it had continued many years, and put one upon them, whom they would not admit, which caused great troubles and tumults in the town, so that sixty men were slain, and many in the confused presse of the people resisting their new Provost and his forces, were trod to death. After this the Cardinal conveys the Regent to St. Andrews, where having sumptuously entertained him for three weeks, he goeth to the National Synod then held at Edinburg, where George Sephocard a Minister is accused of Heresie; him they fetch away with a troop of horse from Iohn Cock∣burns house where he was entertained, then he was carried to St. Andrews, where he was condemned by the Cardinal and his Clergie to be burned as an  Heretick, for the Regent refused to meddle with him: the Cardinal in great state with divers church-men sate in his window over against the place of Exe∣cution: George, as the rope was about his neck, and the fire ready to be kin∣dled, told the Cardinal, that ere long, for all his great state, he should be laid as low as he; so he was strangled, and his body burned to ashes: This severi∣ty procured much obloquie and hatred from the people and Nobility on the Cardinal, who to make his party the stronger, marrieth his eldest daughter to the Earl of Crafords son. Mean while, the Cardinal understanding that there was a great fleet from England comming to infest the coast of Fife, he sends to all the Nobility and  Gentry of that country to meet him on such a day, to consult about fortify∣ing of that coast. About that time the Earl of Rothus son, by the assistance of fifteen more that were of the plot, entred one day betimes in the morning in∣to the Cardinals Castle at Saint Andrews, the gate being opened to let in the work-men who were then repairing and fortifying of the place; these conspirators break into his bed-Chamber, and with many wounds they stab him to death: then upon a tumult in the Town, his dead body is ex∣posed to publique view in the same place where he beheld the Ministers execution; the murtherers are summoned to Edinburgh, who stand upon  their own guard in the Castle, and refuse to come; whereupon they are pro∣scribed: The Regent by the Queen and Clergies instigation takes arms, and layeth siege to the Castle almost 4 months, till the winter forced them to raise the siege and depart; but they in the Castle being rid of their enemies, waste all the Country about with fire and sword, and gave themselves to all li∣centiousnesse, notwithstanding
Iohn Knox preached damnation to them.  The English again invade the borders, and new levies are raised to resist them, about which time a French fleet in which were 21 gallies arrived; the French and Scots joyn their forces, and suddenly besiege the Cardinals castle, which they batter with their brasse-ordnance from the towers of the two next Churches, so that at last the besieged were forced to yield, being promised their lives; in this castle was found the Cardinals treasure, with much provi∣sion, furniture and housholdstuffe, besides much wealth hid there for security by the Citizens; the castle by command is pull'd down to the ground. About this time news came, that the King of England was preparing both by sea and land to invade Scotland, and to force the Scots to make good their 1547. promise about the marriage of their young Queen with king Henries sonne. The Regent raiseth what forces he can to oppose the common enemy; some skirmishes there were, and divers both English and Scots killed: at last the English perceiving the Scots army to increase daily, they send letters to the Regent and the Lords, desiring them to consider how unnatural this war was between Christians and neighbours, how happily and quickly it might be composed, if they would stand to their promise and league about the match, which would be so advantagious to them; how impossible it was to find a hus∣band so fit for their Queen, as one born of so great a Prince, in the same Island, of the same language, so neer in blood, and of such excellent endowments,  besides what unhappinesse will accrue in matching with a stranger: therefore if the Scots will consent to this match, they shall have the education of their young Queen till she be marriageable, and the English will forthwith return home with their Army, promising to make satisfaction for any hurt done on the Scots side, conditionally they will not suffer their Queen to be conveyed away to any other kingdom, nor suffer the French to marry her. These letters the Regent by advice of his Counsellors suppressed, presuming on an uncer∣tain victory, and giving out that the English came purposely to carry away their Queen, and to enslave the Nation: upon this they resolve to fight; Dou∣glasse Earl of Angus leads the Van, Gordon Earl of Huntley the Rear, the Regent  led the main body, the whole Army was about twenty thousand: the English being scanted of provisions, were retreating; but seeing the Scots Van follow∣ing them so eagerly, that they were a good way from the rest of their Army, they face about, and in the first encounter are disordered; but having again recollected themselves, at last worsted the Scots Van, which the main body perceiving began to flie, which the English horse perceiving from the higher 1547. ground, pursued, killed and took many of them; there fell of the English horse in the first encounter about two hundred, of the Scots the number is not cer∣tain, whose Rear retreated homeward in safety; all this while the Scots army suffered much harm by the English fleet, which plaied upon them with their  ordnance. This battel being fought, the English waste all the Country for six miles to∣gether, and take in certain Castles: The Regent repairs to both the Queens at Sterling, being sad for this disaster; but the Queen-mother was not much sorry, though she made shew, because she aimed to displace the Regent, and to get the government into her own hand: The young Queen is secured in Dumbritton, whilest the Lords consult about setling of the kingdome. Ambas∣sadours are also sent to Henry of France, for aide against the common enemy, with hopes that the young Queen shall be conveyed over into France, and married to the Dolphin; but the French aide came not so soon as was expect∣ed:  mean while the English invade Galloway by the assistance of Lennox, to 1548. whom a great part of that Country submitted; they waste also the Country about Haddington: In the interim three thousand German foot, two thousand French, and one thousand horse, are sent from King Henry of France; to these the Regent with eight thousand Scots doe joyn, and besiege Haddington: A meeting is had of the Lords about transporting of the
Queen; many were for  the union with England, cheifly those that desired a reformation of Religion; but the Catholicks, and all such as were bribed by the French, chiefly the Re∣gent, who was promised a yearly revenue of twelve thousand Francks, besides a Captainship over a hundred Curisiers; all these being the major part, vo∣ted the Queen should be sent into France: The fleet that waited for her at Lieth, sailed about the coast and took her in at Dumbritton; who after a stor∣my passage arrived in Britany, from whence she is conveyed to the Court. Whilst the siege continues at Haddington, the Scots surprise Hume-Castle with some other places from the English. Iames Stewart the Queens brother with some forces in Fife, fell upon twelve hundred English lately landed, and drove them back again to their ships, with the losse of six hundred of them, partly slain, and partly drowned, as they were hastening to their fleet; about one hundred were taken prisoners. Then the English fleet resolves to seise upon the town of Montrose in the night; but the governour of the Town per∣ceiving by the lights in their ships where they were, placeth divers armed men in ambush, who fell upon eight hundred of them as they were landing, and drove them back into the Sea, so that scarce the third part of them escaped. The siege at Haddington continues still: Thomas Palmer with one thousand foot and three hundred horse from Barwick are sent to relieve the besieged, but they were almost all cut off by the Scots in ambush; after these three hun∣dred  more are sent with powder and shot to relieve the besieged, for these the French lay in wait, but missed them: Then news came that a great army was comming out of England to raise the siege; whereupon the Scots army not willing to hazard all upon one battell, leave the siege, and send back the Ar∣tillery to Edenburgh; where the Provost was killed with his son and others by the French, because he resisted them as they were entering the City, fearing lest they should fall to plundering after their accustomed manner. The French return again suddenly to Haddington, where they killed the watch betimes in the morning, but as they were breaking open the gate, the English are a∣waked, who discharging the murthering piece before the gate, did such exe∣cution upon the French, that they ran away; but not long after, they made incursions upon England, and did much hurt there. Not long after this, Dessius the French General is called home, upon the Re∣gents letters complaining of his insolencies, and sedition raised by him at Edenburgh: but by the way he retakes from the English Keth-Island, and puts most of them to the sword. Termius is sent into Scotland with some more French supplies, who regain some Castles from the English; and upon the de∣parture of their Army into England, sits down before Haddington, which at last, the English garrison for want of provisions were forced to quit, having 1549. first set fire on some houses. Mean while, news is brought and proclaimed in Scotland of a Peace between France and England; whereupon the French are shipped away. But in this subsequent three yeares of peace, many disorders, insolencies and oppressions were committed by the Regent, and his brother the Archbishop of S. Andrewes, who was altogether ruled by his Concubine; for which their government grew odious to the people: whereupon the Queen-mother makes a journey into France, for she aimed at the government, which she hoped to obtain by the French assistance: the French king willing to advance her without tumult, bestowes great pensions and offices on the Regent and his son, and on Huntly, whose son had married the Regents daugh∣ter, on others also that were of the Queens faction, who were imployed to  perswade the Regent to resign his power to the Queen-mother; the Bishop of Rosse an eloquent man did the Queen good service in this busines, for which the French king rewards him with an Abby in France. The Queen-mother hoping now a way was made for her greatnesse, returns home through Eng∣land, being accompanied with a French Ambassador, who by their favourites perswade the Regent to resign his Regencie, so full of troubles and care, and
which he could not keep long, by reason the young Queen was almost of age, and that the French king would recompence him sufficiently; the Regent was contented to resign, conditionally that he might never be questioned for the late kings goods which he had used, not for any act he had done in his Re∣gency, which was granted him, and withall the title of Duke of Castellerot, rich presents, and a yearly pension of twelve thousand Franks; it was also voted, that if the Queen died without issue, Hamilton should be declared next heir to the Crown; these Articles were sent to France, and there confirmed by the young Queen and her protectors, to wit, King Henry 2. of France, the Duke of Guise, and his brother Charles the Cardinal; but the Regent repenting  of his forwardness in promising to resign, began to use delayes, untill he saw all the Lords fall off from him to the Queen-mother; then he resigns, conditio∣nally that the Articles be ratified in Parliament, which was done accordingly; the Scepter, Crown and Sword were delivered up solemnly by the Regent 1555. to the French Ambassador, who received them in the name of the young Queen, and by her command delivered them to the Queen-mother, a thing not seenbefore in Scotland, that a woman should govern that Kingdome; but it was ordered that the Castle of Edinburgh should not be committed to the French, lest if the Queen should die childlesse, they would make it the place of their tyranny. The Kingdome being setled, Huntly is employed by the Queen-Regent to suppress the high-way-men, which he undertook, but performed not, where∣fore he is imprisoned, and not released untill he had resigned his right to Mo∣ravia, and his offices he enjoyed in the North, and then he was dismissed, and made a Privy-counsellor; then the Queen-Regent makes a progress as far North as Innerness, where she caused divers delinquents to be executed, and sent the Earle of Athol against the Rebels, who brought with him their chief Commander Muderac with his whole family to the Queen, but shortly after he made an escape, and did more mischief then before; some of Cardinal Betons murtherers are advanced by the Queen; a new project is set on foot by  the French, for raising of monies to mantain an Army of mercinaries, that each man should be rated according to his estate, but this was wholly disliked and rejected, as being both dangerous and needless; it was thought that Huntly was the aurhor of this project, purposely to bring the Queen-Regent in dislike wit the people. The French king sends to the Regent of Scotland, that she would according to the old league denounce war against England, because Queen Mary assisted 1557. her husband King Philip against the French; but the Lords would not consent to any war against England at this time: then a plot was laid to build a Fort near Barwick, purposely to induce the English to quarrels, which fell out ac∣cordingly,  so that quarrel arose, and war is denounced; but the Scots fall out with the French Ambassador Osellius, for taking upon him to rule the King∣dome; at which both he and the Queen-Regent were offended, but know not how to help it, except by hastning the marriage between the young Queen and the Dolphin, by which means the power of the Lords would be curbed: After divers excursions, a great skirmish there was between the Duke of Norfolk and Andrew Car, in which many were wounded and killed on both sides, and Car taken prisoner: After this, a Parliament is held in Edinburgh, in which the French kings letters were read, desiring the Scots to send away for con∣summating of the marriage, and confirming of the old league, some of their  prime men; whereupon three Peers, two Bishops, one Prior or Abbot, and two Provosts were sent away, two ships of that fleet were sunk with stormy weather, the Earl of Rothuse, and Reed Bishop of Orkney saved themselves in a Fisher-boat; when all the Commissioners were come on shore they hasten to the Court; the Guises who had now the command of all France, use all the celerity they can to consummate the marriage; there were five
brothers of them, the  eldest was General of the French forces in France; the second of the Ligurian forces; the third of their Army in Scotland; the fourth commanded the Gallies at Marsieles; and the fifth who was Charles the Cardinal, had the disposing of the whole treasure of France: after the nuptial solemnities were finished, the Chancellor of France desires the Scots Commissioners that the Queens husband might be solemnly installed and created King of Scotland, and that it might be confirmed by Parliament, which motion was rejected by them as unreasonable, and as no wayes contained within their Commission: shortly after four of the prime Commissioners, with divers of their at∣tendants died suddenly, not without suspition of poyson; Iames the Queens  brother recovered, but never perfectly, for he had still after this an infirm stomach. About this time the borders are infested on both sides with mutual incur∣sions, a fleet of English was sent to infest the Scots coast, which arriving in Orkney, landed many men to plunder and burn the Bishops seat, and Town of Orkney, but the ships were scattered and torn by storms, and all that came on shore were cut in peeces by the Islanders: great troubles fell out in St. Andrews about the burning of one Milvins a revolted Priest, whose tombe was erected and taken down again divers times, till at last the stones were quite carried away for other buildings: At Edinburgh on the festival day of S. Aegidius the Cities Patron, his statue that should have been carried about in Procession,  was stoln out of the Church, and another little one being made, and carried about solemnly, was thrown down and trampled upon by the rude multitude, and all the Procession ornaments torn in peeces. Shortly after, Paul Mefan a Minister, is summoned to appear at Edinburgh, which he refused, being backed and supported by Dundee; upon this divers prime men out of Fife and Angus, dispersed themselves through the kingdome, exhorting the people to shake off the old Religion, and to subscribe to the Reformation, and withall they send to the Queen Regent, that the Divine-service might be used in the vulgar tongue, that the people might chuse their own Ministers, and have power to  depose them; this motion was rejected by the Papal-Clergy with much indig∣nation, but the Regent for quietness sake gave way that Divine-service be said in Scottish, conditionally that no Minister be suffered to preach at Leith and Edinburgh; the Priests notwithstanding ceased not to persecute the Mini∣sters, and caused some old Canons to be printed and fastened to the Church∣doors, the copies of which, because sold up and down for farthings a peece, therefore the people called the Roman religion, The Farthing-faith. In the Parliament at Edinburgh the French Ambassador, with his faction, labour hard to have the Crown of Scotland set upon the Dolphins head, which at last after much debate was assented to; the Earl of Argile, with Iames the Queens brother, are appointed to convey the Crown into France, but they  fearing this would prove an enslaving of Scotland to France, put off the journey with long delayes; in the interim Queen Mary of England dieth, and Mary of Scotland claimeth that Crown, therefore assumes the Title and Arms of England, which her husband likewise did: the Queen Regent also began to carry herself more imperiously then before, petitions were preferred to her in behalf of the Protestants, which she rejected; whereupon threatning speeches are given out of shaking off her government. The Town of Perth publickly receives the Protestant Religion, for which she threatens Raven the Provost; then she sends to Haliburton Provost of Dundee, to apprehend Mefan,  and send him to her, but he conveyes him away out of danger; she commands that the next Easter should be kept after the Roman manner, but this her command was generally slighted; wherefore in a rage shee summons to Sterling all the Ministers of Scotland, who at the day appointed came with multitudes of their own side to guard them, so that the Regent was afraid, and dismissed them without acting any thing against
them,  save only that she proscribed such as had not appeared there, as contumacious. At this time Knox is Preacher at Perth, who with his knocking tongue beat down the quires and chancels of Cathedrals, with the religious houses, beginning first at Perth, where the mad multitude in a few dayes destroy the the buildings of the Franciscans, Dominicans, and Carthusians; The like fury was seen in Cuper of Fife, and afterward like a Gangrene it crept into other places. This so highly incensed the Regent, that being assisted by the Earls of Argile and Athol, with the French, she suddenly raised an Army against Perth: The Lords of the Reformation with seven thousand repair thither to defend the Town; but by the mediation of friends, a peace is made without sheding  of blood, and the Regent upon the disbanding of her Army is permitted to enter and stay in the Town with her ordinary attendance during pleasure, but the French are not permitted to come within three miles of the place: But after the Regent had been there three dayes, she banisheth divers of the Townsmen, and divers of them she plunders, and changeth all the officers of the Town; and then having left a garrison of Scots there, she goeth to Sterlin. This much incensed the people against her; wherefore they assemble in great numbers, being countenanced by some Lords, and fell upon S. Andrews and other Towns, spoiling all the Religious houses, so that the Archbishop with his guard were forced to flie: whereupon the Regent in a rage commands all the French and Scots of her side to be in arms at the sounding of the trumpet; about three thousand Scots and French repaire to her, but the number of her enemies was far greater; wherefore she sends to make peace with them, which they refuse, because she did not use to keep promise with hereticks, and they knew also that she laboured to gain time, whereby she might have forraign aid; yet some hopes appeared, if she would dismisse her garrison at Perth, and suffer the Town to enjoy her old liberties, which she refused to do; where∣fore the Protestant army from Cuper besiegeth Perth, which shortly after is surrendred to them, and Ruven is restored to his Provostship; then they march to the town of Scone, which they burn, for murthering a Protestant against their promise: after this they seise upon Sterlin, understanding that the Regent was sending thither a French garrison, and there they pull down the Mona∣stery, thence they march towards Edinburgh, which put such a terror in the French and Scots Catholikes, that they flie to Dunbar; the Protestant Lords in the interim set up preaching Ministers every where. Mean while news came of the death of king Henry of France, which made the Scots secure, and the Queen doubtful lest she and her French should be 1559. expelled the kingdome: but hearing that most of the Scots army was dis∣banded, she hasteneth with her forces to Edinburgh, where being met with Duke Hamilton, and Douglasse Earle of Morton, they obtain a truce for some moneths, in which it was agreed, That no man should be forced against his conscience to any ceremonies, That Priests should not be debarred of their Tythes and other duties, That no garrison should be left in Edinburgh, That no religious houses be demolished or converted to other uses, That the Mint and Palace with all the Royal furniture be restored to the Regent. These things being agreed upon, the Regent causeth strange reports to be spread abroad, that the Scots Protestants made religion a pretence of their rebellion, and that Iames the late Kings bastard strove by undermining the lawful heire to usurp the Crown: letters also are sent to him from king Francis and Queen Mary, complaining of his ingratitude and defection, to which he answers by pleading for his own innocencie and conscience. In the mean time a thousand French mercinaries land in Lieth; the Earl of Arran also fled out of France and came home, being threatned with death by the Guises for promoting the Pro∣testant cause in France; He perswades his father Iames Hamilton, lately Regent of Scotland, to joyn with the Protestant party, who now were preparing to besiege the French in Lieth, to whose relief the French king sends two
thousand  men; the Bishop of Amiens also with three Sorbon Doctors are sent to dispute if need were; the Regent upon their comming was so lifted up, that she vowed to be revenged on the Kings and Churches enemies, therefore divers of the Lords are summoned to appear, who refuse to come, because they saw the Regent and the French were bent to enslave the kingdome, by fortifying Leith, and filling it with garrisons of strangers; to these she sends a Herauld of Arms, shewing that her whole aim was to mantain the ancient Religion, and to keep the kingdome in quietness, not for her self, but for her daughter that was the sole lawful heir; therefore she commands them to lay down Arms, and appear to their summons, or else they must be proclaimed Rebels: the Lords  return this answer, That by reason the Regent aimed wholly at the destruction of the kingdome and Protestant Religion, therefore they forbid her to ex∣ercise her power any more, but to depart from Leith with the Ambassador, Sorbons and garrison, or else they must force her, which they are loth to do, by reason of the league between Scotland and France, and the nearness of blood between her and their Queen. Presently upon this it is ordered, that the Queen-Regents power and autho∣rity was void, that the Embassie from her daughter and son-in-law was of no validity, and withall an Herauld is sent to Leith to command all the Scots there to depart within four and twenty hours, after this some light skirmishes there  were; in the interim the Regent by fair promises inticeth divers of the Lords to her side, and for want of pay the Protestant souldiers mutiny, which much advanced the Regents cause, who had secret intelligence of all their consultations; besides the Duke of Castellerot was fearful and wavering to help these evils, chiefly to content the souldiers, they send into England. To borrow a sum of money, for they could not supply so great a sum of them∣selves, nor could they coin their plate, because they had not the command of the Mint; but Cockburn who was sent to bring money out of England, is ap∣prehended by Bothwel, and brought to the Regent with his money; the Earl of Arran and Iames Stewart thought to have rescued Cockburn, but were pre∣vented  by Bothwel. The Provost of Dundee, with his Trained-bands of foot, and some mercinaries, as they were marching towards Leith, were driven back by the French horse in great disorder; so that many who seemed to be Pro∣testants, slide back again to Popery; Arran and Stewart, with some forces brake out of Edinburgh upon the French very rashly, by whom they were de∣feated, and forced to forsake the City, which they did in the night-time, and the next day came to Sterling, where Knox encouraged them to per∣severance. The Protestants perceiving the French side increase daily, resolve to send to the Queen of England for aid, shewing her the danger that might redound  to England, if the French should have the command of Scotland: hereupon supplies are promised; mean while some part of the Protestant forces stay at Glascow, and the rest march into Fife; the French before the English came fall upon those in Fife; plundering and wasting all the Protestant Towns, houses & villages in their way. The Protestant forces assemble at the Town of Disert, and for twenty dayes together have light skirmishes with the French, and lying in ambush apprehended about a hundred Savoyans, half of which they killed with their Captain, the remainder they send prisoners to Dundee; in the interim a league at Berwick is made between the English and them on these Articles, That they should help each other against any strangers in either King∣dome;  That Queen Elizabeth should pay both the Scots souldiers in England, 1560. and the English in Scotland; That the booties should be permitted to the English, but the Towns and Castles to their right owner; and upon this the Scots were to give Hostages.
CHAP. XXXI. The continuation of the English History under King Edward the 6. and Queen Mary, from the year 1546. till 1558. TO King Henry succeeded his son King Edward the 6. over whose mino∣rity and Kingdome, his uncle Edward Lord Seymour, Earl of Hereford 1546. and Duke of Sommerset is made Protector: He began his Reign with altering of Religion; Mean while the Protector not obtaining the promised  marriage for King Edward, marcheth in person with a great Army to Scotland, and sends about by sea a strong fleet; the Regent of Scotland, caused the Red or Fire-crosse to be set up, a custome used in times of sudden danger, thither all from sixteen to sixty must repair; the place of Rendezvous is Musselburgh, there the two Armies meet, divers skirmishes before the battel, some killed and taken prisoners on both sides; the Earl of Huntley, to avoid effusion of blood, sends a challenge to the English Protector either to fight man to man singly, or ten to ten, or twenty to twenty; this demand was denied and a battel is fought, in which the Scots first encounter was so furious, that the English horse were forced back, and in retiring bare down a part of their own  foot-men, and the English Standard was like to be carried away; divers English Captains were slain, and the Lord Orey hurt; the Scots hoping too much to a deceivable victory, and being too couragiously forward disranked themselves for haste, and fell upon the disbanded English, who being brought again into array, pressed hard upon the enemy, who for want of shot, con∣fusedly retired to the main body, which thinking the day had been lost, turned their backs and fled, the chase was followed almost five miles, divers men of quality were slain, besides ten thousand commons souldiers, and a thousand taken prisoners. The Protector upon his return, calls a Parliament at London, in which all  Chantries, Colledges, and free Chappels are given to the King. The six Ar∣ticles were repealed, and some other Statutes against heretical Tenents; In∣junctions are sent forth to pull down all Images in Churches, beginning at St. Pauls in London, which caused great stirs, chiefly in Devonshire and Cornwal, where one of the Commissioners were stabbed, and a great insurrection against the King is hatched; ten thousand take Arms, and besiege Exeter, which was in such distresse, that the Townsmen fed upon bran and horse-flesh, for this loyalty the Cities Charters were confirmed, their liberties inlarged, and the Mannor of Exilend bestowed on them; the Rebels mean while spoil the Country, of which at last growing weary, and not finding the aid they looked  for, sent their Articles of peace to the King: 1. That Baptisme be admini∣stred in all times of need. 2. That children be Bishoped or Confimed. 3. That the Lords body be consecrated and reserved in Churches, and Masse celebra∣ted as before. 4. That holy-bread and holy-water be used. 5. That the Priests sing or say Masse in the Quire of the Parish-Churches. 6. That Priests live chaste without marriage. 7. That the six Articles of King Henry the 8. be used. The King upon this sends them a general pardon, blaming them for their presumption and folly, shewing them that their demands were not to be granted, and that if they did not submit, they should feel the dint of his sword; notwithstanding all this, they persist in their rebellion till Sir Iohn Russel, Lord Privy-seal, was sent with some forces against them, with whom he en∣counters  near Honiton; a cruel fight was maintained by the Cornish till their hearts failing them, they began to give back and flie; the Royalists disorderly fall to the spoil, which the Cornish perceiving, suddenly returned, and gave a new onset, a cruel encounter followed, three hundred Rebels are killed, and the rest take to their heels.
After this, the Royalists being now a thousand strong, by the addition of an Italian-band intended against Scotland under the Lord Grey of Milton; the Lord Russel marcheth over the Downs to the relief of Exeter; the Rebels encounter with him again, and are again defeated, with the losse of most of their lives; the rest got into the Town of S. Mary Clift, who were aided presently with multitudes of people, carrying into the field the Crucifix under a Canopy; another battel is fought wherein the Rebels are utterly defeated and slain, their chiefe Captains are taken and executed by Marshal-law; Boyen the Maior of Bodmin in Cornwall was commanded by the Provost-marshal to set up a paire of Gallows; on which he was im∣mediately  hanged himselfe, the Millers man also who called himselfe by his Masters name was hanged upon the next Tree, being told by the said Knight that he could never do his Master better service then to hang for him: At the same time also there were great troubles in divers places about laying open of Inclosures, which the poor people began to put in practice themselves, presuming upon the Kings Commission; but the greatest 1549. commotion was in Norfolke raised by Iohn Flowerdew, and Robert Ket, casting down one anothers fences and hedges: At last this Ket is made Captain of this commotion, to him multitudes flock, the High-Sheriffe made Pro∣clamation for them to depart; but had not his horse been the swifter, he had been killed by them; they make Monshold the place of their Rendez∣vous,  their behaviour was very barbarous even to all their friends, for Sir Roger Woodhouse for his kindnesse in bringing them two carts laden with beer and victuals, loseth both his horses and apparrel, and almost his life, having his body abused and cast in prison; to these the scum both of Norfolk and Suffolk assembled, who by ringing of bells, and firing of Beacons set all in an uproar, they forced divers good subjects to dance after their pipe; in the Kings name they gave out warrants to apprehend and im∣prison whom they pleased, their number now was increased to sixteen thousand; Ket the Tanner sits as supreme Judge in an old Tree, which  hee called the Oake of Reformation, from thence hee delivered his oracles. These men were now so high, that they scorned the Kings pardon, which by an Herauld at Arms was proclaimed to them; they batter the walls of Norwich, and enter into it, seising upon all the provision and munitions, im∣prisoning the Maior and other Citizens; thither Par Marquesse of Northampton is sent by the King with one thousand five hundred horse, to whom presently the Magistrates surrendred the Cities Sword, and so he enters; the Rebels that same night assaulted it with the losse of three hundred of them, the next day they enter the Town and began a bloody fight, in which the Lord  Sheffeild was cruelly slain, having fallen from his horse, and the Marquesse forced to forsake the City; Sir Thomas Cornwallis is taken prisoner, and at last the Town is ransacked and set on fire by the Rebels: After this the Lord Dudley is made General against them, who shewing him∣selfe upon the Plain before Norwich, sent againe the Kings pardon, which is rejected, wherefore he plants his Ordnance against Saint Stevens Gate, which being forced open, the Earle of Warwick enters, and in the Market place, with small resistance, executes threescore Rebels by Marshal-law; but they seised on the Earls powder and shot, and conveyed it to their Camp, they manned the streets and kill many  Royallists, but at length are forced backe to Monshold, against which place Warwick planted his Ordnance, but the Rebels fell with such violence upon his forces, that they gave back, leaving the Artillery to the Rebels. The Earl being over-mastered, was advised by some to be gone, but he drawing his sword, caused his friends to do the like, who with a mutual
kisse
confirmed their courage and resolutions; then they stop all provisions from the Rebels, but they arose thence and entrenched themselves in the valley called Dussindale, upon a vain prophesie that [Hob, Dick, and Hick] that is, the Rusticks with their clubs should fill that valley with dead bodies; the next day the Lord General prepares to fight, having received a supply of one thousand and four hundred Lances, but first sends a pardon which they reject again; the Rebels place all their prisoners coupled in irons in the fore-rank of their Army, and with a shot struck the Kings Standard-bearer in the thigh, whereupon the Earl dischargeth his whole Artillery upon them, and so opened their battel that most of the captive Gentlemen escaped; the Royalists  fought so stoutly, that the Rebels gave back and fled, the fore-most of which was their Captain Ket; the chase continued three miles, with the slaughter of three thousand five hundred Rebels, some resolute men staid to keep the Ordnance, to whom the General proffers a pardon, which they refuse, chusing rather to die like men then to be hanged up like dogs, as was intended; the General sends again that he would come in person and confirm the pardon if they made any doubt thereof, which he did accordingly, and so they flung down their Arms and prayed for the King. Captain Ket the next day hid himself in a barn, and was betrayed by two of his servants, then with two hundred horse was conveyed to Norwich, nine  chief Rebels are hanged upon the Oak of Reformation; William Ket the younger brother was hanged upon an high steeple, and Robert Ket the Arch-rebel in chains upon the Castle of Norwich; the Townsmen solemnised yearly the day of their delivery. The North also was not a little troubled about Religion, divers parts of York-shire standing up for the old Faith, the flame brake out first at Seimer in the North-riding, the Beacons are fired, and multitudes flock together, who first murthered White a Gentleman, with some others, whose naked body they left upon the Wold before Seimer, then they carried many prisoners away, and being now increased to three thousand began to grow formidable; but when the Kings pardon came, Ombler a yeoman, and Dale a Parish-clerk, the chief Ring-leaders, were forsaken by the multitude, and shortly after with some others were executed at York. Not onely is the Country disquieted, but the Court also by the Kings two uncles Queen Ianes brothers, to wit, Edward Duke of Sommerset the elder, and Protector of the Kings person and Kingdome; and Thomas Lord Seymour the younger, Admiral, who married Katherine Par King Henries last wife: she stri∣ving for precedencie with the Protectors Dutchesse, raised such a Tragedy, that Lord Thomas is accused, attainted and condemned of Treason, and under his brothers hand-writing, beheaded on the Tower-hill for purposing to destroy the King, and to translate the Crown to himself: shortly after this seventeen Counsellors, and many Lords accuse the Protector of ambition, misgovernment, pride, sedition, and divers treasons, for which they desire the Londoners help to remove the King from him; the Protectors party on the other side, desire the Londoners aid against these mutinous Lords: in their assembly the Citizens were divided, till the Recorder stood up, and told them what danger it might be to act any thing against the King, as the Londoners once did by aiding the Barons against King Henry the 3. for which they lost their priviledges, therefore he adviseth them to petition the King that com∣plaints may be heard against the Protector; whereupon the King is sent to,  the Protector commanded from his presence and sent to the Tower, where he is accused by the Kings Counsellors for acting without the assent of the last Kings Executors, for subverting Laws, and stopping of Justice, for releasing divers traytors and murtherers out of prison, for making Captains under his own seal, for communicating alone with foreign Ambassadors about matters of State, for threatning the Privy-counsellors who dissented in
any thing  from him; for erecting a Court of Requests in his own house; for selling of Offices, Bishopricks and some of the Kings lands without consent; for com∣manding multiplication by Alonmistry, to the abuse of the Kings Coyn; for setting forth Proclamations against inclosures, causing thereby divers insurre∣ctions; for giving Commissions against law, concerning Commons, High∣wayes, and Cottages; for not suppressing the Rebels, and for encouraging divers of them; and for setting forth Proclamations in favour of them; for neglecting the Forts of New-haven and Blacknesse; for sowing discord among the Lords, and incensing the king against them; and lastly, for accusing the Lords of high-treason, because they consulted how to have these abuses re∣formed. The protector notwithstanding these accusations, is by the king set at liber∣ty, though not restored to his former dignity, and so he remained untouched two years: Mean while the Lord Grey was not idle in Scotland, but took in some forts; before him one Newton and Hamilton fought a duel, accusing each other for some opprobrious words uttered against king Edward, Hamilton is slain, and Newton rewarded with a gold Chain and the Lord Grey's Gown: But not long after, the English by the Scots and French are totally driven out of Scotland, and all the Forts retaken by them. The French also attempt to sur∣prise Bulloignebergh, but were prevented by one Carar an English souldier,  who discovered the plot; many of the French were slain in the attempt, so that fifteen waggons went away laden with dead bodies: after this they at∣tempt the Iles of Iersey and Gernsey, but were repulsed with the losse of one thousand of their men, which made them ashamed to divulge this expedition. But not long after, the French obtain by surrender, Hamiltonne, Blacknesse, Balloignebergh, and Bulloigne it self. About this time the sweating sicknesse 1550. raged fiercely in England, and on the English onely beyond seas, which made them to be shunned in all places. The Duke of Sommerset is now again apprehended, after he had married his eldest son the Lord Lisle to the Earl of Warwicks daughter, which Earl had  been his greatest enemy; who now by Sommersets means is made Duke of Northumberland; but is accused notwithstanding by Warwick and the other Counsellors, for wearing a coat of defence under his garment at the Counsel-Table, as if he intended the death of some Counsellour; wherefore he is at∣tached, 1551. and sent to the Tower, with the Lord Grey of Milton and some others; and the next day the Dutchess of Sommerset is committed, all upon suspicion of Treason: The Duke was indicted of treason and fellony; but having put himself upon his Peers, is cleared of the treason, but not of the fellony; for which he is condemned to die; therefore is sent back to the Tower, where he kept a sad Christmasse: the 22 of February after, he was brought to the Scaffold upon the Tower-hill, where he acknowledged how willing and ready he was to dye, and to pay that debt, which God might on a sudden have exacted from him: Upon this a great tumult arose among the spectators, upon the comming in of the Hamblets to guard the Tower-hil; some supposing they were come to rescue the Duke; which was no sooner quieted, but another en∣sued upon Sir Anthony Browns riding towards the Scaffold; the people think∣ing a Pardon had been come, for which they were glad; but the Duke de∣sired them to be quiet, that he might die without trouble; and praying for the prosperity of the King and his Councel, laid down his head to the Axe. The king takes the Dukes death so much to heart, that he fell into a Con∣sumption:  Mean while, to alter the succession of the Crown, three marriages are solemnized in one day: betwixt Dudley Northumberlands fourth son, and Iane, Suffolks eldest daughter; the other was betwixt Herbert, Pembroks heire, and Catherine, Suffolks youngest daughter; the third between Hastings, Hun∣tingtons heir, and Catherine, Northumberlands youngest daughter. Iane the eldest daughter of Suffolk was thought
fittest for the Crown, to whom king  Edward left it by his Will, being perswaded thereto by those who would have disinherited Mary and Elizabeth. This was subscribed by the Kings Council, the Lords, the Bishops, and Judges; onely Sir Iames Hales Justice of the Com∣mon-Pleas would not subscribe; shortly upon this the king died. He was a Prince, though young, yet of great hopes and parts; much enclined to mercy, so that he could hardly be induced to set his hand to the Warrant of Ioan But∣chers execution, a notable Heretick, till he was urged thereto by Cranmer his God-father, and Archbishop of Canterbury; He was very zealous for the Pro∣testant Religion, so that he could not be moved by Charls the Emperour, to give way that the Lady Mary should have Masse said in her house, but wept  when he was urged to it; and wrote a passionate letter to his sister, disswading her to continue in her Catholick resolution. Upon a Sermon which Dr. Rid∣ley preached before him, concerning mercy to be shewed by rich men to the poore, he was so touched in conscience, that he conferred after dinner with the Do∣ctor of some way, whereby he might doe most good to the poore; the Doctor adviseth him to take directions from London: The king upon this writes to the Lord Major about this businesse, and sends his letter by Bishop Ridley, who having conferred with the Major and his Brethren, returns to the King with the Cities advice: Hereupon, he gives to them St. Bartholmews Hospital by Smithfield, and the Gray-Friers Church neer to it, with all its revenews; also his house of Bridewell (new built by king Henry for the reception of the Emperor) to be a House of Correction for idle and dissolute persons: He gave also the Hospital of Saint Thomas in Southwark, with seven hundred Marks by year out of the rents of the Hospital of Saint Iohn Baptist or the Savoy, with bedding and other furniture; other charitable works he also did, and then 1553. died at Greenwich the seventeenth year of his Age, and the seventh year of his Reign, and lieth buried at Westminster, neer Henry the seventh. To him succeeded his sister Queen Mary; but the Statesmen concealed his death two dayes, intending Iane should succeed, as being more firm to Prote∣stantisme then Mary; for this cause the Counsel sends for the Major of London, six Aldermen and twelve Commoners, who all swear for the Lady Iane: But the Lady Mary hearing of this news, writes to the Lords, accusing them for con∣cealing her brothers death; for neglecting her who was next heire to the Crown, ordained by act of Parliament, and her fathers testament; therefore wills them to Proclaim her Queen in London, and other towns: To these let∣ters the Lords made answer, that according to the last Kings Will, Iane daughter to Henry Duke of Suffolk should succeed to the Crown; they also put her in minde of her mothers Divorce, and her own illegitimation; there∣fore they wish her to desist from any such claime: this letter was subscribed, by the Archbishop, the Chancellour, and divers Lords. The Lady Mary upon  reception of this letter removes to Freminsham Castle, to whom the Suffolk-men resorted first, hoping she would establish Protestantisme: The Lords at London Proclaim the kings death, and Queen Iane his successour by his last Will; but at Norwich Queen Mary is proclaimed, and assisted by the Earls of Sussex, Bath, and Oxford, with the Lord Wentworth, and divers others: To encounter these, Queen Iane's father is appointed with an army to repair into Norfolk, which so grieved Queen Iane, that with tears she got him to stay; then was the Duke of Northumberland assigned Lord Lieutenant for Queen Iane, whom his son had married; he fearing the worst, wished the Lords to be carefull of what they went about, and so with six hundred men he marcheth  out of London through Shoreditch, the people shewing no signe of joy at all, which the Duke observed. Mean while the Lord Windsore with others, raise the Commons of Bucking∣ham-shire, and proclaim Queen Mary; the like is done in Oxford-shire, and Northampton-shire; all these made forward towards Norfolk: besides six tall ships, appointed to have taken the Lady Mary if she had fled, being driven by
storms into Yarmouth haven, revolted to Queen Mary; at the report of this, the Lords in the Tower began to be afraid, and their Tenants to deny them any aide; Northumberland still sollicited the Lords for more assistance, but little came; Dr. Ridly Bishop of London by command maintains Queen Ianes cause in his sermon at Pauls Crosse, but could not work upon the people; which the Lords perceiving, fell off from the Duke then at Bury, and proclai∣med Queen Mary in London: the Duke willing to follow the stream, returns to Cambridge, where being forsaken by most of his souldiers; he proclaims her Queen himself without Trumpet or Herauld, and in signe of joy threw up his Cap: yet all were pardoned by her, except this Duke and Sir Iohn Gates  Captain of the guard: the Duke was first arrested by a Sergiant at arms, and the next morning by the Earle of Arundel, and thence was conveyed with his three sons, the Earl of Huntington and divers others to the Tower, where also the Lady Iane and her husband Dudly were imprisoned. At the Queens entrance into the Tower, Thomas Duke of Norfolk was re∣leased, who had lain there from the last of Henry the eighth; so was Edward Lord Courtney, whom she makes Earl of Devon-shire, Tunstall Bishop of Durham, and Gardiner of Winchester are released also; Doctor Ridly and some other Pro∣testant Bishops are deposed, Ridly, and Cranmer Arch-bishop, are sent to the Tower; so constantly devoted she was to the Catholick Religion, that her  brother king Edward could never work upon her; nor any worldly respects alter her resolution: The Duke of Northumberland upon the Scaffold renoun∣ces 1554. the Protestant Faith, and exhorts the people to the Catholick Religion; yet he was beheaded with Sir Iohn Gates and Sir Thomas Palmer. The Queen is crowned at Westminster by Gardiner Bishop of Winchester; the Lady Iane with her husband are condemned in Guild-hall; she was pittied, because she was in a manner forced to accept the title of Queen; therefore she had the li∣berty of the Tower, and had been pardoned, but that her father the Duke of Suffolk went about to hinder the Queens marriage, with king Philip of Spain; and to this purpose instigates Leicester-shire and Warwick-shire against the match: Upon this, the Earl of Huntington is sent who takes Coventry, and after∣ward the Duke, whom his own servant betraied, and his brother Iohn Lord Grey; the other brother Lord Thomas escaped, but was retaken, and all three sent to the Tower: Lord Gilford Dudley is first beheaded, whose bleeding body was in the sight of his sad Lady brought into the Tower Chappel; who was the next that suffered, and was much lamented for her innocency: Judge Margan that condemned her, fell mad eleven dayes after the Duke of Suffolk was executed on the Tower-hill, and about two moneths after his brother Lord Thomas Grey in the same place suffered. Gardiner, now Lord Chancellor, sets forth highly the match with Spaine, to  the Lords in the Presence Chamber; yet many of them so disliked it, that combinations were made, and arms taken up by Sir Thomas VVyat of Kent, who at Maidstone published a Proclamation against the Queens match; from thence he goeth to Rochester, and breaks down the Bridge; divers sided with VVyat and many in Kent were against him, so that the Country is much divided. The Duke of Norfolk is sent to Gravesend with five hundred Londoners to maintain the Queens cause: when the two adverse factions met, a cruel skirmish en∣sued; but at length the Queens party prevailed, and the other fled; but shortly after, the Duke by his own treacherous party was so betrayed, that he was forced to flie, and leave behind him to VVyat eight brasse pieces of Ord∣nance; with these VVyat assaileth Cowling-Castle, but was resisted by the Lord Cobham: Shortly after, he had a Parly at Dartford with Sir Edward Hastings, Master of the Horse, and Sir Thomas Cornwallis, who demand of him the cause of this Rebellion; he answers, that he feared the Land would be over∣run by strangers: Then they desire him to come and communicate the cause before the Queen, which he refused
except he might have the custody of the  Tower, and the Queen in it, with power to place and displace the Queens Counsellors; to which Hastings replied, That Wyat and twenty thousand more should die, before he should have his traiterous demands granted; so they parted, and Wyat approacheth with his forces towards London, at which both the Court and City were afraid, who all take Arms, even the Lawyers in Westminster pleaded in harnesse. The Spanish Ambassadors steal away by water. Mean while good news came, that the seditious Carews and Gibs in Cornwall were defeated and fled; the Queen comes in state to Guild-hall, where before the Maior, Aldermen, and chief Citizens, she made a speech, declaring her  right to the Crown, the unreasonablenesse of Wyats demands, making her marriage a cloak for his pretended purposes against her person and dignity, she also shews her true love to them, and that she will not marry but by their consent, and for their good, therefore she wisheth them to be as careful of her honour and safety, as she will be of their weal and happinesse; the Queen having said, returns to the Court, and makes Herbert Earl of Pembroke her Field-General, and proffers a hundred pound land by the year to him that shall bring Wyat dead or alive, who understanding all passages marcheth to∣ward London with four thousand men, at whom the White-tower shot but did no hurt; he enters Southwark peaceably, the people there joyning with him; Winchester house is rifled contrary to his Proclamation. Wyat having got Southwark, comes to the Bridge, but finding the gate shut, he planteth his Ordnance against it; the Lord Maior cuts down the draw-bridge, and fortifies the City every where, causing the Ordnance in the Tower to be levelled against the Bridge-foot: much Artillery is planted against Southwark, which made the inhabitants with teares to be∣seech Wyat to be gone, who presently marched to Kingston upon Thames, where finding the bridge broken down, he quickly again repairs it, and so marcheth to Branford; the Queens Army takes S. Iames fields; Wyat marcheth towards Charing-crosse, the Ordnance playing upon each other, but to little purpose; the Lord Chamberlain at Charing-crosse made some resistance, but was forced back to the gates of White-hall, which were shut, the Court being affrighted with a report that the Lord General was revolted to Wyat, who in the interim hasteneth to Ludgate, but could not there have any admittance; some of his straglers that had taken into Westminster, comming before the Court-gates, shot their arrows into the garden and into the windows, but no hurt was done: At Charing-crosse as they were going to joyn with Wyat, they are encountred by the Captain of the guard and defeated, twenty of them being slain; Wyat returns discontented from Ludgate, and is staid at Temple∣bar by some of the Queens horse, some bickering there was, but upon the  counsel of an Herauld at Arms, Wyat submits to the Queens mercy, who with Cobham and some others are carried to the Court, and thence to the Tower; in London 50 were hanged for Wyats conspiracy, and 400 more led through the City to Westminster with halters about their necks, who were all pardoned by the Queen; Wyat having acknowledged his offence upon the Scaffold, and exhorted the people to take heed they rise not against the higher powers, submits his neck to the stroke of the Axe. In Kent divers persons were executed for this rebellion; the Lord Courtney and Lady Elizabeth the Queeens sister are suspected as aiders unto Wyat, and therefore are sent to the Tower; the Lady Elizabeth being sick at Ashridge, is conveyed away by a Troop of horse to the Court, where she was for a forth∣night in the nature of a prisoner, none being suffered to visit her but they that kept the door; she was accused by Bishop Gardiner and nine more of the Councel, that she was privy to Wyats conspiracy, and the stirs in the West, all which she constantly denied; then they told her she must go to the Tower, at which she was much troubled, desiring the Lords
that they would mediate  for her; but about an houre after her attendants are discharged, except her Gentleman-usher, three Gentlewomen, and two Grooms of his chamber, and withall a strict guard is set over her; the next day she is commanded to the Tower, and her Barge was ready for her; she desires to stay till the next tide, which was denied her, then she intreats so much time as to write a letter to the Queen, one of the two Lords that came to her would not yeeld to her re∣quest, but the Earl of Sussex granted it, and promised to deliver it with his own hand to the Queen; in the interim the tide was spent, and they durst not trust her to the next tide, which fell out in the night, for fear she might be forcibly taken from the guard; therefore the next day being Palmsunday, and the Londoners then all at Church, she is conveyed to her Barge, casting her eyes towards the windows as she passed through the garden, hoping some would pity her; such haste was made to have her away, that they would not stay till the water was level, whereupon as she passed the Arch, the stern of the boat struck against the ground, so that she was forced to step into the water before she could come to the stairs. When she entred the Tower, she rested her self a while upon a cold stone in the rain, and then was put into a room which was locked and bolted upon her, so with her family she went to prayer; the Lords would have had her been a close prisoner, but the Lord Sussex would not yeeld to it; then after two dayes it was commanded she should have Masse in her lodgings: Winchester with  some others of the Councel examined here in the Tower of the talk she had with Sir Iames Croft a prisoner, and of her removing from Ashridge to Dunnington-Castle, and of such other frivolous matters, at which the Lord of Arundel was offended that she should be vexed thus causelessely: growing sickly in her close prison for want of aire, liberty was given her to walk in the Queens lodgings, and in the garden, all prisoners being inhibited to look that way whilst she was there; she took delight in a little boy that brought her flowers every day, but upon suspicion the boy might convey letters be∣tween her and the Lord Courtney, he was kept from her; some of her enemies had got a warrant to be signed for her execution, at which Mr. Bridges the  Lieutenant being troubled, went to the Queen to know her further pleasure therein, who denied she knew of any such warrant, blamed the doers, and gave a contrary command: but shortly after the Constable is discharged, and Sir Henry Bennifield was placed in his room; she was not long after removed from the Tower to Richmond, where upon the removal of her servants, and placing of souldiers about her, she thought she should have died that night, but the Lord Tame who then attended her, assured her of the contrary. From Richmond she is conveyed to Woodstock; the people who wished her well, not being suffered to salute or pray for her; some were put in the stocks for ringing the bells, hoping she had been delivered: when she was at  Woodstock, it was suspected that some Ruffians had been sent to murther her, but they could not have any accesse to her; one night (whether accidentally or purposely it was not known) her lodgings took fire, to the great endange∣ring of her person; so comfortlesse was her life to her, that one day seeing a maid milking her kine in the Park, she wished that her self was a milk-maid. Queen Mary shortly after her Coronation called a Parliament at Westminster, and a Convocation in S. Pauls Church, where she commanded a disputation 1553. to be had of some controverted points of Religion; for six dayes disputations were had, but to no purpose, wherefore she by Bonner dissolves the Assembly;  not long after, Cranmer, Ridly and Latimer, sometime Bishops, were sent to Oxford to dispute upon the same points, but these three at the end of the dis∣putation are condemned to die, and were burned as hereticks: at London a Rain-bow inversed, and two Suns at once were seen, which were held bad pre∣sages of the marriage with Spain, much disliked by the people; but the queen gave order that London and other
places should be informed of the benefits  which would accrue to this Kingdome by that match; the Earl of Bedford and the Lord Fitz-waters were sent into Spain to conduct King Philip, the Lord Admiral with eight and twenty ships secured the seas, Philip with a Navy of 150. sail arrived in England, and lands in Southampton, he was the first of the fleet that landed, all the way as he went he bare his naked sword in his hand; but before he went to his lodging, he betook himself to his devotions in Holy-Roods Church, the like he did at Winchester; the Earl of Arundel Steward of the Queens house presents him with the Garter, and the Maior with the keyes of Southampton; the Queen meets him at Winchester, where these Articles were agreed on: 1. That Philip should be stiled King of England during the Matri∣mony,  but not dispose of any lands or offices. 2. That Mary should be Queen of the dominions of Spain. 3. That her dowry should be yearly sixty thousand pounds Flemish. 4. That their issue male or female should succeed according to the Laws. 5. That if Charles the Infant of Spain died issuelesse, then the eldest son of this Matrimony should succeed in all the dominions of Charles the Em∣peror. 6. That the dominions of the Low-countries and Burgundy should be ex∣cluded from the said Charles his issue if they remained, and should be enjoyed by the eldest born of this marriage, without further claim to any other domi∣nions of Spain. 7. That the eldest female of this marriage, for want of male, should possesse these dominions, provided she marry a Nobleman either of Belgium or of England. 8. That the eldest daughter of King Philip and queen Mary should succeed to the Realms of England, Spain and Belgium. 9. That these several dominions be governed by their Natives. 10. That a firm peace be concluded betwixt these Nations for ever. Besides these generals, the King articles, That he will bestow no English pre∣ferments on strangers, That his Court shall be replenished with natives of the land; That he shall not violate any priviledges of England; That he shall not carry the Queen out of her Kingdome without her consent, nor her children, but by the assent of the Lords; That if he die issuelesse, the succession shall come to the nex heir; That he suffer not to be carried away the Jewels of the Crown, neither guns, nor any furniture of war; And lastly, That he  shall not entangle England with the wars of his father, and the French King. 1554. Things thus ordered, the marriage is solemnized at Winchester on S. Iamses day, where Caesars Ambassadors pronounced, That their Master in considera∣tion of this marriage had given to his son Philip the Kingdomes of Naples and Ierusalem; whereupon their titles were there solemnly proclaimed; then they went from the Church, having two swords carried before them. So dis∣contented were some Protestants at this match, and advancement of the Roman faith, that one Bourn preaching at Pauls-crosse, had a dagger thrown at him, which caused the Crosse the next Sunday to be guarded by the Queens  guard; The next year Dr. Pendleton had a gun shot at him; A maid was taught to speak in a wall, as if it had been an Angel, against the Queen, the Prince of Spain, and the Masse; a Cat was hanged on a gallows in Cheap, her head shorn, and wearing a vesture like a Cope, and many other abuses were offered, which made the Queen and Bishops ever after jealous of the Londoners. Queen Mary, to be better directed in matters of Religion, sends for her kinsman Cardinal Pool, the son of Margaret Countesse of Salisbury, the onely daughter of George Duke of Clarence, King Edward the 4. second brother, he had been bred in Oxford, and made Dean of Exeter by K. Henry, at  Padua he studied seven years, where understanding the King had cast off the Pope, refused to return into England, wherefore he is proclaimed Traitor and his Denary taken from him, to recompence which losse, the Pope made him a Cardinal; he did sollicite foreign Princes against King Henry, for which he not being able to be revenged on Pool, wracks his anger on his mother, being now eighty years old, whom he caused to lose her head; then he was made Legate
of Viterbion, and is appointed by Pope Paul the third to be one of his Vice∣gerents in the Council of Trent; he was afterwards chosen Pope, but being ac∣cused by Cardinal Caraffa, as a favourer of Protestants, he cleared himself, and was chosen again; but he not being nimble enough to strike the Iron while it was hot, the Cardinal de Monte, afterward Iulius the third, steps be∣tween him and the Papal-chaire, who caused Caraffa to ask Poole forgivenesse; then Poole retires to Verona, where in the Monastery of Saint Bennet, of which order he was both Professor and Patron, he resides a while. Shortly after this, Queen Mary sends for him into England, for she had been bred under the Countesse his mother, and he was also of the blood royal, which put him in some hopes he might change his Hat for a Crown: But Cae∣sar  mistrusting his intent, kept him back, till the match was concluded between his son and Queen Mary. Caraffa being now Pope, sends Friar Peto to dis∣charge Poole of his Legative power, which much incensed the Queen; so that the forbids Peto to enter the land, till the Pope and Poole were reconciled: The queen caused all the acts made by king Henry against Poole to be repealed, and the house of Parliament upon their petition to him is absolved, and re∣ceived again into the bosome of the Church: All the ancient Ceremonies of the Church are restored again, and all Church-livings that had been assumed to the Crown; The queen affirming, that she preferred her souls happinesse to ten kingdoms. Though queen Mary was pious and zealous in her Religion, yet many bar∣barous cruelties were by her Officers exercised on Protestants, her power in this case being much abused; so that five Bishops, one and twenty Divines, eight Gentlemen, eighty four Artificers, besides many others, even women and children, were cruelly put to death; many were forced to fly the land, amongst whom was Catherine Dutchesse of Suffolk, who had married Richard Bartie Esquire, these were persecuted by Bishop Gardiner, because she had per∣secuted him and other Papists in king Edwards dayes; she was forced to go disguised on ship-board, with her young daughter, her husband being gone away before: she suffered much by storms at sea, and more by want, persecu∣tion, and cold on the land, in those places of Belgium and Germany where she travelled; till she was relieved with her husband and childe, by Perusel a Mi∣nister in Wiesel: After this, they endured much more hardship, till they got into Poland, where they staid till queen Maries death. Queen Mary being supposed to be with childe, caused Te Deum to be sung, and solemn prayers made for her safe delivery; in hope of which, Mid-wives, Rockers, and all things else were provided. An act was made, that king Philip should be Protector of her issue and realm; but yet king Philip had no great confidence that his queen was with childe, nor dust he trust the English, or think that they could be kind to strangers, who were so cruel to their own  Princes, for he found that the Lord Paget and some others had consulted to cut off the Lady Elizabeths head; therefore in compassion to her, he never gave off, till he got the queen to set her at liberty; so she is brought to Ham∣pton Court, where after fourteen daies she was admitted into the queens chamber; there falling on her knee, she prayed for her, and declared her loy∣alty to her Majesty, which the queen questioned, and checked her for not ac∣knowledging her offence; but she still pleaded for her own innocency: seven daies after the Lady was discharged of Benefield her Jailour, her maids are sent to the Tower; and Gardiner died shortly after. About this time, one Fether∣stone  a Millers son gave out, that he was king Edward 6. but being taken at El∣tham in Kent, he was brought to Hampton Court, where being found by his simple answers little better then frantick, is sent to the Marshalsie, and from thence with a paper-crown on his head to Westminster, and from thence whip∣ped to Smith-field, and then banished into the North: but the next year fal∣ling into the same madnesse, is apprehended, condemned of treason and hang∣ed at Tybur.
The time of Queen Maries deliverance being come, it was given out that a Prince was born, which caused great joy and triumph, both in London and Antwerp; but all this came to nothing, for she was never with childe: Here∣upon King Philip, in anger, went over the Seas, pretending to visit his father, and to take possession of Belgium, where he staid one year and a half, to Queen 1555. Maries great grief; who met him on the way as he returned, and brought him with great pomp through London. In his absence, some plotted to rob the Queens Exchequer at Westminster, to raise war in the land; but the plot was discovered, and the plotters executed. One Clebeck a School-master, read pub∣liquely a traiterous Proclaimation against the Queen, perswading the people to take arms. Thomas Stafford dispersed slanderous books against the Queen, and by stealth took the Castle of Scarborough, incensing the people against her; but he was suppressed by Thomas Piercy Earl of Northumberland, and sent to London, where he was beheaded. About this time, Charls Caesar called his son Philip into Brussels, where he resigns to him all his dominions, counsel∣ling him to entertain peace with the French, for the general good of Christen∣dome; 1557. a peace for five years was made, but held not long; for the Pope be∣ing then besieged by Duke Alva at Rome, sends to the French for aide, who by the Guise made his way open into Rome; but the French falling away for want of pay, the Pope renounced his amity with France, and entertains it with Spain. Queen Mary to shew her love both to the Pope and king Philip, fals out with France, pretending divers wrongs from thence; so she sends a Defiance unto King Henry of France, and proclaims wars against him in Lon∣don, contrary to her promise and articles. King Philip passeth over to Flanders, after whom the Queen sends one thousand horse, four thousand foot, and two thousand pioniers under the Earl of Pembroke as Generall, these joyned with king Philip, whilest the Dukes of Savoy and Brunswick, with some Lords, had invaded the French confines, and besieged St. Quintins; which Montmorancy Constable of France came with great forces to relieve; but he so miscarried, that he was hurt, and taken prisoner with eight Knights of the order: Shortly  after St. Quintus is taken by king Philip and the English. Upon the taking of this town, the English grew secure, and negligent of Calice, so that the Duke of Guise with great celerity approached the English frontier, under colour to victual Boloigne and Ard, he divided his Army in∣to two parts; the one he sends to Ricebank, whilest the other battered two forts at once, which they wan in twelve houres space; Ricebank is also aban∣doned by the English, and left to the Guise: then the Duke batters the walls of Calice three dayes together, and made a great breach, He planted also fifteen double Cannons against the Castle; they within finding themselves too weak, thought to blow up the French with Gun-powder, as they entred,  but the train would take no fire, being wet with the drops of water that fell from the French-mens cloths, having waded through the ditch; so that they got the Castle, with the death of Ager Marshal of the Town, his son and heir, and eighty English more. The Lord Wentworth, Deputy of the Town, sent to the Castle for a parly, which was granted, and these Articles agreed on. 1. That the Town with the Artillery, Victuals, and Munition should be yeelded freely to the French. 2. That the lives of the Inhabitants shall be saved. 3. That the Deputy with fifty others remain prisoners till they pay their ransom. The English were shut up in two Churches, where they remain a whole day and night without meat or drink. The Duke commanded that all their plate,  mony and jewels be laid on the altars, upon pain of death; so the Town was voided of five hundred ordinary souldiers, of townsmen women and children four thousand and two hundred, and all these stript of the wealth they had been long in gathering: In the space of eight dayes wa this Town lost, which cost king Edward 3. eleven moneths siege, and had been possessed by the Eng∣lish two hundred and eleven years, fifty prisoners are sent away into France.
King Philip being sollicited by Queen Mary to recover this lost honour, makes an attempt upon Brest, and takes Thermes the new Captain of Calice prisoner; yet Calice could not be regained, which so grieved Queen Mary, that she said, The losse of Calice was written in her heart, and might be therein read when her body should be opened. The losse of this Town, and long absence of king Philip, increased her melancholy, which ended in a feaver that was her death, at 1558. S. Iames; she reigned 5 years, 4 moneths, and 11 dayes, and lived 42 years and 9 moneths. Cardinal Poole died the same day with Queen Mary. CHAP. XXXII. The English History, interwoven with the History of Spain, France, Ireland, and Netherlands, under Queen Elizabeth, from 1558. till 1602. QUeen Elizabeth succeeded, being twenty four years old. She presently 1558. orders that the Liturgy be said in English. As she was passing through Cheap in her Chariot, the Bible was presented to her, which she took  and imbraced, professing to make it the rule of her government: then she as∣sures the Lord Maior and City of her care and love to them: then being come to Westminster, she is crowned by the Bishop of Carlisle, the See of Canterbury being vacant. In her first Parliament, the title of Supremacie, with the Tenths, First-fruits, and Benefices are restored to the Crown; Queen Maries Acts are repealed in favour of Catholikes. A Conference was held at Westminster con∣cerning the English Service-book, the changing of Ceremonies, and the Masse; but this Conference came to nothing. She was petitioned by her Parliament to marry; but she told them, that she meant to reigne, live, and die a Virgin. A peace being on foot between France and Spain, the Queen interposeth for England, and demands restitution of Calice, being lost not in the quarrel of England, but of king Philip, against the will of the English Councel. It was alleadged, that great sums of money for arrearages were due to the English from the French king, all which the Queen was willing to remit, conditionally that Calice may be restored, without which restitution no peace could be con∣cluded between England and France; it was at length agreed, that Calice should remain French for eight years, and then return to the English, upon forfeiture of five hundred thousand Crowns, but neither the one nor the other were ever performed. The Lord Wentworth Deputy of Calice, was arraigned at Westmin∣ster  for the losse of the Town, but was acquitted by his Peers. The oath of Supremacie is offered to the Clergy: in place of Poole deceased, Porker is made Archbishop of Canterbury: the Monasteries are again suppressed, and Images abolished: then care is taken for refining the Coyn, and for furnishing the king∣dome with munition, armour, and powder. The French king, in favour of his son the Dolphin, and Queen Mary of Scotland, caused their right to the Crown of England to be proclaimed at Paris, commanding England to be put among their Titles, and the Arms thereof to be impaled with Scotland and France, in their Seals, Plate, and Tapistry: but afterward upon Articles of Accord be∣tween England, Scotland and France, it was agreed, that the Arms and Titles of  England and Ireland should not thenceforth be used by the French king, nor his Queen of Scotland. Gustavus King of Sweden proposeth a Match between his eldest Son Ericus and Queen Elizabeth, which suit afterward was renewed by Ericus himselfe being King, but is both times rejected by Queen Elizabeth. Who sends aid first into Scotland for supporting of the Protestant religion, then into France
1560.  for the same purpose: her Forces are received into New-haven, Roan and Deep, under the command of Ambrose Dudley Earl of Warwick, who is assisted by some Scots forces from Deep: but New-haven, after eleven moneths possession, 1562. was lost again by the English, for want of water, which the enemy had cut off, and by reason of the Plague which raged there, and afterward in England re∣ceiving infection from thence. About this time fell out the Massacre at Paris, in which the Admiral was barbarously murthered, mangled and abused, be∣sides many thousands of men, women and children. About the same time Ireland rebels under Shan or Iohn O-Neal, who claim∣ed an hereditary right to the Province of Ulster, as the O-Neals had formerly  done of all Ireland; for when Edward Bruce named himself king of Ireland, Donald O-Neal stiled himself king of Ulster and heir of Ireland; but the English quashed his title, till in the wars between York and Lancaster, they forsook Ulster. At this time Henry O-Neale raised his family, by marrying the daughter of Thomas Earl of Kildare, from whom issued Con O-Neal, sirnamed Bacco from his halting, who cursed his posterity, if they learned the English tongue, sow∣ed wheat, or built houses. But king Henry the 8. so crushed Kildare, that he submitted, and was content to hold his revenues in fee of the King, with the title of Earl of Tiron or Tir-Oen to him, and to Matthew his false reputed sonne, and to their lawfull heirs. Shan O-Neale upon this murthers Matthew, and  drives his father Con Bacco out of his house and all his possessions, so that he died for want and grief. Shan being then chosen, and inaugured by an old shoe cast over his head, seised upon his fathers estate, and to secure himself, he mur∣thered Brian Matthews eldest son, the other two Hugh and Con-mack escaped: so being seated in Ulster, there he playes the tyrant, declaring that he was the son and heir of Con O-Neal lawfully begotten, and that Matthew his supposed brother was a Black-smiths son, and was obtruded upon Con by his Concubine the said Smiths wife; he pleads also the Irish law Tanistry, whereby a man at his full years is to be preferred before a boy, and an uncle before a nephew. So bearing himself as absolute king of Ulster, he overthrew O-Raily in the field,  took O-Donel prisoner with his wife and children, and committed adultery with her. This Shan hearing of the Lord Deputies preparations against him, went over into England, and humbly submits himself to Queen Elizabeth, who sends him back upon promises of allegiance, and for a while he carried himself loyal and civilly; but afterward fell off again, fired Armach, besieged Dundalk, and spoiled the Country. Against him Sir Henry Sidney then Deputy of Ireland came with seven Companies of foot and a Troop of horse; O-Neal in a pitch'd field is overthrown, and in divers other skirmishes so foiled, that he purposeth with an halter about his neck to submit himself to the Deputy: but his Secre∣tary 1565. adviseth him to try his fortune once more by the sword, in making amity with the wild Scots then in Claneboy; this counsel he takes, and repairs with O-Donels wife his Adulteresse-concubine to the Scots camp, where being at first welcomed and entertained, was afterward hacked in peeces by Mac Gil∣lespic and Alexander Oge two Scots Captains, because Shan had killed heretofore this Alexanders brother; a few of Shans followers escaped by flight; and so Ulster is freed from its oppression under O-Neal. The eight years being expired for restitution of Calice to the English, Sir Thomas Smith is sent with Sir Henry Norris, to demand the Town and Forts a∣bout 1567. it, according to agreement; but the Towns-governors will not be spoken  with; whereupon they repair to King Charles, who told them, That none had right to Calice but himself; the Queen-mother also added, That the English by invading Scotland and New-haven, had forfeited Calice: Sir Thomas replies, That the French had lost Calice by sending forces into Scotland, and solliciting the Scots Lords to invade England, which they refused to do, as being against their late treaty and league with Queen Elizabeth; the French
also had armed  Normandy and Britany, and hired divers German forces against England, and did beare also the Arms of England: The Queen-mother replied, that the English did beare the Arms of France; but however she affirms, that what the King of Scotland did in his Wives right, should not be imputed to King Charls her son. Then the King willed the Ambassadors to absent themselves a while, till he had talked with his Councel; and so after an houre they were sent for again, and told, That five thousand French onely were sent into Scotland to suppresse the rebellion of the Protestant Lords there, and not to invade Eng∣land, whereas Queen Elizabeth had sent fifteen thousand thither to assist the Rebels: Sir Thomas answers, That the Queen hearing of such great prepara∣tions, was necessitated to send great aid both by sea and land, not to assist Re∣bels, but to maintain such as were oppressed for their conscience. The Chan∣cellor of France also tels him, that Calice stood upon French, not English ground; and as the English had right to it by the fortune of war, so now the French have the same, besides that they enjoyed it long before the English took it, who had also once possessed and enjoyed Aquitain and other places, which long since they have lost; the English claim two hundred years possession, the French above five hundred years; if prescription then could stand among Princes as among private men, the French can prescribe a far longer time then the English: As for king Francis the 2. he did not therefore intend to invade England, because the English thought so, for suspitions and thoughts are no realities; but the English Queen did really invade France, upon a fair pretence of keeping the Towns for the Kings use, but she kept New-haven as a pledge for Calice, whereby she hath lost her right to Calice: withall he shews, that God having divided England from France by the sea, the English should content themselves within their own confines: therefore he wisheth them to enter∣tain peace with France, which will do them more good then the gaining of Calice. To this Sir Thomas answers, That the English made no invasion upon France, but were invited thither by divers of the Nobility and others then in danger; nor when they were landed did they use any hostility, or take an hen or egge but what they paid for; and if that aid had not come from England;  much of France had been ruined: As for the Queens keeping of New-haven, she had reason so to do, having been at so great charge and cost; she deserved to have some reason offered her in her right to Calice. But (saith the Constable) so much provision of victuals, men and ammunition, and so many ships, could not be for New-haven alone; therefore the Queen must have had further de∣signes: No (saith Sir Thomas) it was onely out of providence that this provision was had, because sea and winde doe not serve at all times. At last after much debate, both the King and Queen-mother, and all the Councel told him plainly, that they would entertain amity with the English Queen, but France would not part any more with Calice. At the same time the troubles of Scotland were so great, that the King was 1569. shamefully murthered, and the Queen banished; who setting sail for France, was by contrary winds driven into Cumberland. Queen Elizabeth solliciteth the Scots on her behalf, but they could not be induced to admit her again, so she is forced to stay in England. Mean while the Earls of Northumberland and Westmorland with some others, pretending Religion, flie out into Rebellion, intending to surprise the Earle of Sussex Lieutenant of the North; but they were prevented, and the Queen had notice of their intents, wherfore she sends for Northumberland to the Court, who out of feare removed from his Castle of Topcliffe in York-shire, and goeth to Branspth, where meeting with the Earle of Westmorland, they command the Country to take arms, pretending it was to aid the Queen, and to restore the old Religion; which if they should neg∣lect, forraigne Princes would do it, to the danger of the whole kingdome. From thence they go to Durham, where they tore the Bible; at Rippon they heard Masse; thence they went to Bramham-Moore,
where they mustered  sixteen hundred horse and four thousand foot; then they fall upon Barnards Castle, which in eleven dayes they took; they grew so high, that in their let∣ters they called the queen, Elizabeth the late and pretended queen: Upon this they are proclaimed traitours; Carlile-Castle is kept against them by the Lord Scroop and Earl of Cumberland. The Earl of Sussex Lieutenant of the North with an army follows the enemy, who was both heartlesse and moneyless, the one hundred thousand crowns failing them which the Pope promised. The chief heads of these Rebels finding their inability to resist so great a power as was comming against them, resolve to flie into Scotland to those Lords that stood out for the Roman religion, which they did accordingly, and left their army  to the mercy of Sussex, who surprised them without resistance, so that at Dur∣ham and about in the country many were put to death. This execution made many desperate, who in revenge of their friends put to death, gather head under Leonard Dacres; these neer to Naworth fought de∣speratly with the Lord Hunsdon, who at last caused them to give back, and 1570. Dacres to flie into Scotland; where Northumberland is taken by the Regent, and sent into England, and beheaded at York, declaring the Popes supremacy, the Queens heresie, and the kingdomes misery, being now in a schisme. Westmer∣land was shifted away into Flanders, where he died miserably of ulcers. About this time, Nicholas Morton an English-man, made Bishop by Pope  Pius Quintus, procures at Rome a Bull against queen Elizabeth, whereby she is declared an Heretick, an usurper, and uncapable of the Crown; therefore all her subjects are absolved from their allegiance to her, and curses denounced against such as should obey her: this Bull was hanged up at the Bishop of Lon∣dons gate, and had many patrons and abettors, who came to untimely deaths; among whom was Dr. Story a Civilian, who having escaped out of prison, got over into Antwerp, where being imployed by the Duke Alva to search all ships for English-bibles, was catcht by one Parker a Merchant, as he 1571. was searching his ship, and carried over into England, where he was executed at Tyburn. One Sommervel intended to murther the queen, but was preven∣ted, 1573. apprehended, imprisoned and condemned, but in the prison he strangled himself to death. One hundred and twenty Jesuits were apprehended, fifty three of which were banished, the rest executed, among whom was Edmund Campian; Robert Parsons escaped. In Cornwal, Cutbert Mayne disswades the people from obeying the Queen; In other places, Nelson and divers others were imployed to the same purpose: Thompson brought holy-oyle to anoint the Priests, and Hemford a dispensation from the Pope: Haidock was imploy∣ed to find out the fittest landing-place for strangers, and to prepare aides at home: Iohn Pain with fifty more were encouraged to kill the queen by a vio∣lent assault. Francis Throgmorton was imployed by Mendoza the Spanish Ambassadour in London, to collect the names of the English great-men who stood for the Ca∣tholick 1583. cause; to whom was joyned Charls Paget: abroad divers were set on work, to sollicite the king of Spain to invade England. The Duke of Guise un∣dertook to be the leader, if Rome and Spain would bear the charges. Throg∣morton delivers to Mendoza his chard of the Havens of England, with a list of Catholick aiders; Arundel in Sussex was held the fittest place for landing: but Throgmorton upon suspition is apprehended, and his study searched, where were found the list of his Catholicks, the Havens for landing, with pedigrees touching the English Crown, and some libels against the Queen; but a casket  with some other things unknown were secretly conveyed to the Spanish Am∣bassadours. This whole conspiracy Throgmorton confesseth, & suffereth. William Parry for burglary was to die, but obtained pardon from Q. Elizabeth; yet after∣ward he went about to take away her life, by pretending that he would disco∣ver 1584. the names of divers who had plotted against her, but still his heart failed him, when he came to speak with
her. At last his treason was discovered by  one Mr. Nevil whom he thought to be sure on his side, which Treason he confessed himself, and by his letter to the Lords of the Councel seems to ab∣hor it, and craves pardon for it, but when he saw he was to be executed, he denied his former confession. One Appletree (whether purposely or casually was not known) discharged a bullet, and shot the water-man in the Barge where the Queen was, within six foot of her seat, but she pardoned the offen∣der. Henry Percy Earl of Northumberland, being of Throgmortons conspiracy, was sent to the Tower, where he murthereth himself by discharging a dag with three bullets under his left pap. There were besides these, divers other Treasons hatched by the Earl of Arundel, Sir Iohn Perot Deputy of Ireland, Babington, Tichburn, Ballard, and  divers others, some of these suffered at Tyburn; Babington, Charnock and Savage in Lincolns-Inne-fields. Cullen an Irish Fencer undertook the death of the Queen for thirty pounds, he suffered at Tyburn. Sanders wrote against the Queen, so did Creswel under the name of Philopater, and Parsons under the title of Doleman concerning titles of the Crown. Dr. Lopez the Portugal Phy∣sitian for a rich jewel given him by a Spanish Counsellor, and a promise of fifty thousand crowns, undertakes to poyson the Queen by a potion; but the matter was not carried so close as was thought: Lopez was appointed to give the Queen physick, purposely to try him, the physick being brought, the Queen wisheth him to minister to the Treasurer Cecil who had more need of physick  then she; when he came to Cecil he is apprehended for a Traitor, the ingredi∣ents of his potion are examined by other Doctors, and it was found poyson; so he is arraigned, and with his two consorts hanged at Tyburn. After these, Yerk, Williams and others, were animated at Bruxels by Holt the English Jesuite to kill the Queen, but the plot was discovered and prevented, and the plotters hanged. The last that publikely attempted the Queens death was Squire, first a Scrivener, and then a Purveyor in the Queens stable, he be∣ing taken at sea (as he was sailing after Sir Francis Drake) by some Spaniards, is set upon by Walepool an English-man, to poyson the pommel of the Queens saddle, which he did as soon as he came into England, being exchanged for a  Spanish prisoner; but the poyson had lost its vertue, for it did no hurt neither to the Queen, nor to the Earl of Essex, as was intended; but Walepool hearing no news of his plot, suspected Squire for a false brother, and fearing he would reveal divers secrets, prevents him, by dispatching one into England to inform against Squire; this Informer at first was not credited, yet Squire was examined, and some passages in his answer laid hold on, which made him be sus∣pected, and so upon advice of his friends he confessed, and accordingly suf∣fered. The thirteenth year of her Reign an Act was made that none should name 1571.  any particular person to be the Queens heir or successor: Thomas Howard Duke of Norfolk, for favouring too much the Scots cause, is beheaded on the Tower-hill. This year was seen that strange Star or Comet in Cassiopaea, it was 1572. observed to be higher then the Moon, and not much lesser then Venus. Queen Elizabeth sends fifteen hundred men to aid the Regent of Scotland against the 1573. other faction; Edinburgh-Castle is battered with thirty Canons, and at last for want of water is surrendred by composition to the use of the young King. 1576. About this time the Royal-Exchange was built by Sir Thomas Gresham. Sir Martin Forbusher made sail into the North-East-seas, further then any other had done; he attempted the next year thirty leagues further, and a third time he assayed further. Sir Francis Drake with five ships, and a hundred sixty four 1577. men past the line three and thirty degrees of latitude, and in the six and thir∣tieth degree enters the river Plate; with three of his ships he passed the strait of Magellan, leaving the other two as impediments to him, the Marrigold was also lost, Mr. Winters ship shaken off by storms recovered England, but the Pelican, whereof he was Admiral, held on her course
upon the West of Ame∣rica,  where he passed the line to the latitude 47 but finding no passage by reason of fogs and ice, returned South-west, and came to anchor eight and thirty degrees from the line, where the King of that Country pre∣sented 1578. unto him his Crown of feathers, admiring our men, and sacrificing to them as to gods: this place he calls Nova Albion at his departure he erects a Plate of brasse as a monument, wherein was engraven the Queens name, and her picture, with her Arms in a peece of silver under the Plate; from thence he came to the Isles of Molucco, and thence to Iava Major, and so to the Cape of Good-hope, and then he fell with the coast of Guinea, whence crossing again the line, he came to the height of the Azores, and then to England, having  been absent three years wanting twelve dayes; his ship was laid up in the 1580. Dock near Deptford, and the Captain Knighted. And now the English begin to trade with the Muscovites and Turks; the Sultan upon the request of the English Ambassador made peace with the Polander, which Sultan by his letter to Queen Elizabeth inciteth her to make war against Spain. Pope Gregory the 13. stirs up the King of Spain, having ob∣tained 1583. Portugal, to war against England, in favour of the Irish Rebels, offering to acquit him of the fruits of the Archbishoprick of Toledo, long retained in his hands; the Archbishop being suspended, wherefore they two joyn in hope to conquer Ireland; the Pope sends six-hundred men under the command of Thomas Stukely, whom he stiled Marquesse of Ireland; the Spaniard bears all the charge, with the addition of three hundred Spaniards, and sends money to raise four thousand men more; these landed in the County of Kerry, raised their Standart, and built a fort; by these means Desmond hoped to be King of Ireland. The Lord Grey Deputy of Ireland, with his forces fell upon these strangers, and puts them to the sword, a few being reserved for ransomes: the Fort had store of money, armour, shot, powder, and other provision; all the Irish there as well women as men died, and Desmond driven into the woods, was in a cottage wounded by a souldier, who at length cut off his head. The Earl of  Essex is sent over to reduce the wilde Irish in Ulster, which had been pretty quiet after the Queen had enacted, That no man should assume the name of O-Neale till Turlogh Leinigh, a brothers son of Con-More grand-father of Shan-O-Neal, of whom we have spoken already. This Turlogh disquieted the Scots of the Islands, and slew Alexander Oge, the slayer of Shan O-Neal his son in law; Hugh Baron of Duncannon escaped from him into England, on whom the Queen bestowed the command of a troop of horse, and a thousand marks per annum, and for his good service against Desmond he obtained the title of Earl of Tir-Oen; upon this old Turlogh resigns to him the government of Ulster on certain conditions, chiefly, that they both should joyn their forces to maintain the Roman Religion. Mac-Guyre encouraged by Guaran Primate of Ireland, began first to stir, but is discomfited by Sir Richard Bingham, and Guaran slain in the field. Mac-Guyre after this flies out into open Rebellion, whom Tir-Oen pursueth and receiveth a wound in his thigh, which made him gra∣cious at the English Court: he procured Fitz-williams the Deputy to be called home, in whose place Sir William Russel is put, whom he flatters with such fine words, that although the Marshal charged him with many subordinations of Mac-Guyre, yet he was dismissed, to the great discontent of the Queen, and disquietness of the land. King Philip of Spain had before this been incensed by Queen Elizabeth, for  entertaining the fugitive Netherlanders his subjects in her Kingdom, whom she thought she could not in honour banish, having fled thither for the safety of their lives, and liberty of their consciences: She also desires that Westmerland, with others of her Rebels should be banished the Spanish dominions. The Netherlanders abhorring the Spanish Inquisition, send to Queen Elizabeth to protect them, which at first she seemed to be unwilling, as being loth to pro∣voke
Spain against her, but sent to King Philip to commiserate his afflicted people, which he refusing to do, she sends (being sollicited the second time by the Netherlanders) in Bullion the value of forty thousand angels in part of an hundred thousand pounds promised, which made Don Iohn of Austria then governour of Belgium interpose himself in the Scottish affairs to disturb Eng∣land. The French to make England surer to them, send over Monsieur Duke of Anjou the Kings brother, to marry Queen Elizabeth, whom she magnificently entertained, but would not assent to marry him. The fame of this Monsieur was so great, that the Netherlanders (having de∣clared against the tyranny of King Philip) chose him for their Protector; but he died not long after in France, and William of Nassaw is proclaimed Traitor, his estate confiscated, and promised with twenty thousand crowns annual to him that shall bring him dead or alive, whereupon he is murthered at Delph; therefore the Queen is sollicited again, as also Henry the French King for re∣lief; the Queen sends the Earl of Derby into France in behalf of these Pro∣vinces, but he being in danger of the Guise and the League, recommends back 1585. again their distresses to the Queen, promising his relief; hereupon she under∣takes their protection by advice of her Councel, because she was bound (say they) to defend the Gospel, to relieve the oppressed Protestants, to keep off the strength of Spain from setling too near, and to revenge the invasion of Ireland: hereupon Articles being drawn, Sir Iohn Norris is sent over with  five thousand foot, and one thousand horse on the Queens pay during the war; for which money, Flushing, Bril, two Sconces, and the Castle of Ramekins in Holland were pledged to the Queen. The Pope and Spaniard were highly displeased with the Queen, who in two books taxe her of ingratitude to K. Philip who saved her life, and of intended murthering of the Prince of Parma, to which an answer was published, and reasons shewed why she undertook the protection of these Provinces, because of their scituation and vicinity, because of many ancient leagues between England and the Dukes of Burgundy, because of the Spaniards tyranny, and  the priviledges those Countries have to make choice of any other head, when they are oppressed by the present governour, and because Mendoza practised with Throgmorton to bring into England foreign power. Things thus ordered, Robert Dudly Baron of Denbigh, Earl of Leicester, and the Earl of Northumberlands son, is sent over as the Queens Deputy-General, who at the Hague took an oath of the States to the Queen, and claimed ab∣solute authority over them; at which she was offended, declaring she promised to be their Protector, but not their Sovereign; mean while all English ships and goods are arrested in Spain. Pope Sixtus 5. sends to the Prince of Parma a consecrated Sword, with a Hat. The Netherlanders are put in fear that the Queen meant to make peace with the Spaniard without them, but by her let∣ters she freed them from this fear. After this the Spaniards and English skirmish near Zutphen, in which though the Spaniard was worsted, Sir Philip Sidney be∣ing 1586. shot in the thigh lost his life: but the States grew discontented with Leice∣ster their governour, for making York and Stanly two Spaniolised persons governours of Towns, to wit, of Deventer and Sconce, which afterward they sold to the Spaniard, and for some other points of his misgovernment; but he hasteneth over into England to be present in Parliament at the handling of the Queen of Scots cause, who was beheaded at Fotheringhay-Castle; Queen 1587. Elizabeth seeming much grieved at it, by punishing her Secretary the chief  actor therein, with imprisoment, and the losse of her presence and his place: the body of Queen Mary was interred in Peterborough-Church under a hearse of black-velvet, and was translated thence by her son King Iames to King Henry the 7. Chappel, and laid under white-marble. In Leicesters absence, many disorders were committed by the English; wherefore Maurice the younger sonne of William
Prince of Orange is chosen  Governor. Buckhurst is sent into Holland to examine complaints, at which Leicester is offended, who recalls Sir Iohn Norris, (to the dislike of the States) and sends him into Ireland; then he returns into Belgium, where he is blamed for the surrendring of Sluce; factions did increase, and many Towns reject his government; hereupon he is recalled into England by the Queen, and commanded to refign his government, which done, it is proclaimed through all the Provinces. Mean time king Philip is preparing of his great Fleet, and withall bears the Queen in hand that he aimed at a generall peace, which she believed, but could not perswade the States to give credit that he intended peace, who was head of the Holy-league, persecuted Protestants, and was pre∣paring of a Fleet; therefore they to be in readinesse, fit their War-ships, and presse a thousand Sailers to aid her, if need be. Notwithstanding this, Com∣missioners 1588. are sent out of England to confer with Parma about the peace, with king Philips Commissioners; much time is spent about precedencie, and the place of meeting, at last the English have the priority, and the place is Ostend. The Queen demands a Cessation of arms, a present Truce, a dismission of foraign souldiers, a restitution of the monies lent by her to the States, an enjoyment of their ancient Liberties, and a Toleration of Religion for two years, and a Confirmation of the Articles of Gaunt; so she promiseth to de∣liver up the Towns again. All these demands are rejected by the Spaniards.  Meanwhile Pope Sixtus 5. sends out his Bul to confirm the Excommunications of his two former Predecessors against the Queen; and Cardinal Allen sets out a bitter book, wherein he exhorts all to joyn with King Philip and Parma a∣gainst her: This book the Queen sent to Parma, but he slighted it off with a complement. In the interim it is given out, that King Philip had kept fifty thousand men in pay almost a whole year, by means of that Treaty: And at last the great Armado begins to appeare, in which were 72 Gallions and Galli∣asses, 47 Ships and Hulks, 11 Pinaces and Carvals, 2843 great Ordnance, 8094 Sailers, 18658 Souldiers, 2088 Gally-slaves, 220000 Bullets for great shot, 4200 Kintals of Powder, 200 Kintals of Match, 7000 Muskets and Cali∣vers, besides incredible store of other provisions, Bisket and Wine for sixe moneths, with Bacon, Cheese, Flesh, Rice, &c. this Army cost king Philip thirty thousand Ducats every day. The Generall was the Duke of Medina, the Admiral Don Martinez; Don Martin Alorcon was Vicar-general for the Inquisition, with whom were an hundred Monks and Jesuites; Cardinal Allen is Superintendent of Church-matters, he translates the Popes Bull into Eng∣lish and sends it away; In this Fleet were divers of the Nobility and Gentry of Spain and Portugal. The Duke of Parma also prepared a great Navy, with 300 small Boats, and 70 flat-bottom'd, every one able to beare 30 horses, with a world of all sort of furniture and provision: Neer Newport he had 30 com∣panies  of Italians, 2 of Walloons, and 8 of Burgundians; at Dyxmew he had 80 Companies of Netherlanders, 60 of Spaniards, and 60 of High-Dutch, besides 7 of English. The Pope sends forth his Crusado, and promiseth a million of gold, with a proviso that he should hold the English Crown as feudatory to the See of Rome. To prevent this storm, Charles Howard High-Admiral of England is sent in∣to the seas; the Lord Seymer with the ships of Belgium kept betwixt Calice and Dover: The Queen being advertised by the French king, that this fleet was for England, caused all the Trained bands through the kingdome to be mustered and in readinesse, the Earl of Leicester is made Lieutenant over  them, Tilbury i Essex was the place for the Camp; there were two and twenty thousand foot and sixteen hundred horse; the Queens guard consisted of two thousand two hundred and fifty two horse, and of foot thirty four thousand and fifty. But the great Spanish Navy is so tossed with a storm, that the Duke of Medina is driven back into the Groine, and eight other of their ships disper∣sed and torne, besides three Portugal gallies which fell
upon the coast of Bayon  and were set upon by their own slaves, who freed themselves by the slaughter of many Spaniards. Sir Francis Drake Vice-Admiral goeth westward, and joyneth his fleet with the rest, which made up an hundred saile. The Admiral hearing in what distresse the Spanish fleet was, did bear saile towards Spain; but the wind turning South, he returns homeward and An∣chored his fleet in Pliniouth haven; the Spaniards put again to sea, and at last cast anchor in the Channel of the Narrow-seas; some Pinaces are dispatched to Parma, to forward his charge for the kings service: sudden news is brought to the Admiral, that the Armado was come, which by reason of sicknesse, and the former storm, was not expected that year: Wherefore all hands are set on work to warp out the ships then in the harbour, and many of the men on shore;  at length they got out to sea, and having advantage of the wind, discharged their Cannon on the Spaniards, and were answered in the same language; the next day, the two fleets fought within musket-shot; the English Admiral fell fiercely on the Vice-admiral of Spain; a Gallion in which were some Dons, was sorely battered by the English, whose ships were lower and nimbler, whereas the Spanish high Vessels were fitter for defence then offence: The next day Drake commands this Gallion to yeeld, Don Pedro at first refused, but understanding that it was Drake, who had him in chase, came on board his ship, where after some complements, he is kindely used by Drake, and lodged in his own Cabbin; the rest of that company were sent to Plimouth, where they staid eighteen moneths till their ransome were paid; in that ship were found five and fifty Ducats in gold: that same day Oquendo's great Gallion fell on fire, the upper part whereof, and most of the persons were consumed, the Hulk was brought into Plimouth. Neer Portland a fierce encounter was between the English and Spaniards, wherein a great Venetian ship with some smaller were surprised. The 24. day of Iuly, a great fight was between four Galliasses and the English fleet, in which though the Spaniards were galled with chain shot from our ships, yet they had the advantage because our powder failed; which being supplied, our fleet is  divided into four squadrons, under four Commanders; namely, the Admiral, Drake, Hawkins, and Forbisher. Iuly 25. against the Isle of Wight, was a cruel en∣counter, each discharging their whole-sides. The 27 of Iuly, the Spaniards an∣chored in sight of Calice, intending for Dunkirk, there to joyn with the Duke of Parma, to whom Medina sends to hasten his forces; but the Spanish ships were so planked with beams, that Bullets could not pierce them; wherefore eight English-ships are filled with powder, brimstone, and other combustible matter, which Iuly 28 about midnight were let drive with Wind and Tide a∣mong the Spanish fleet; this caused the Spaniards, being suddenly affrighted, to cut their cables, or else they had been all fired; in this confused haste, one of their Galliasses of Naples fell foule on another ship, and lost her rudder, and so  was assaulted by the English on a shelve in the shore of Calice; her General Moncado was slain in the fight, and many more Spaniards, many leaped into the Sea and were drowned: In her were four hundred souldiers, and three hun∣dred slaves, which were now freed from their fetters; and a booty found of fifty thousand Ducats; the governour of Calice would not suffer the vessel to be set on fire. The 29 of Iuly, over against Greveling, a sore conflict continued that day, in which a Gallion of Bisca perished, wherein the Captains in madnesse killed each others: Two great ships besides presently sunk; Francis de Toledo, with o∣thers, committed themselves to the Skiff, and arrived at Ostend. The St. Philip a Gallion of Portugal, in which he was, with the souldiers in her, were taken by the Plushingers. The St. Mathew, another Portugal Gallion was so shot, that her leaks could not be stopt. Don Diego Pimentelli, refusing Medina's courtesie, who would have saved him in a skiff, was afterward taken on the coast of Flanders by five men of war, and carried into Zealand; In the interim, Seymer with his
squadron is sent to joyn with the 35 ships of Holland, that lay on the coast of Flanders to keep in the Duke of Parma; but the Armado being weary of fight∣ing, spread their main-sails and put to sea, the English Admiral following lest they should put into Scotland, but they bent their course toward Norway, so about the degree of latitude 57. our Admiral left them. The Spaniards considering with themselves, how they had lost five thou∣sand of their men, that many maimed and sick souldiers lay on their hands, twelve of their greatest ships were sunk, lost and taken, their tackling spoiled and anchors lost, their victuals failing and fresh-water spent, which made them fling their horses and mules overboard, knowing also that Parma could not,  and Scotland would not help them, by reason of their correspondencie with England, they held it best to return into Spain; so sailing between the Orcades, about Caithnes and the coast of Ireland, kept westward in the main ocean, and returned at length into Spain, where the Duke is deposed from all his autho∣rity and confined to his house; The residue of the ships, about forty in num∣ber, were so battered on the coast of Ireland, that divers of them perished, amongst others Oquendo's great Galliasse and two great ships of Venice, some were driven on the English, some on the French coast, and were taken; so that of 134 ships only 53 returned to Spain, of the whole fleet were missing 81 ves∣sels, and of 30000 souldiers 13500. above 2000 prisoners were taken in  England, Ireland, and Low-Countries. All danger being past, the Camp at Tilbury is disbanded, and not long after Leicester died. The Queen on the 8. of September gives solemn thanks to God for this Victory in S. Pauls, where on the lower battlements eleven Spanish Ensigns are hung up, the next day they were spread upon London-Bridge; the 19. day of November was appointed to be kept holy throughout the Land; the Queen upon the Sunday following, being the 24. of November, went in state from White-Hall to S. Pauls, where at the West-door she fell down on her knees, giving solemn thanks to God, and exhorting the people to the same duty. The Zelanders on their Coyn stamped the memorial of this day and  victory, so did the Hollanders. It being reported that king Philip was preparing a new Fleet to recover his lost honour, It was resolved by the Lords and Commons of England, That an attempt be made upon Spain, and aid given to Don Antonio the expulsed King of Portugal, who was given out by king Philip to be a bastard; after he had driven him out of Portugal, he proclaims eight hundred thousand crowns to him that should bring him either dead or alive, yet he was kept disguised eight moneths in Portugal; then he fled unto the Court of France, where he received aid from the Queen-mother, a competitor also for the Portugal∣crown. A fleet is sent to the Isles of Terceres, which by the Spaniards is over∣thrown,  eight of the tallest French ships are lost, and two thousand men slain; divers Portugal Captains for this losse were imprisoned as cowards. So Antonio having no more hopes of France, repaires into England, where he desires the 1589. Queen to land him safe in his country; whereupon six of her ships, and twenty more of war, besides others for transportation, accompanied Don Antonio from Plymouth, Sir Francis Drake was Admiral, Sir Iohn Norris Generall for land-service, with eleven thousand souldiers, two thousand and five hundred mariners; these landing in the Bay of Galicia neer the Groin, were encountred by the enemy neer the Town, who forced them back to their gates. Norris the next day, forced the Gallies which plaied upon his troops, to abandon the road; the Base-town is surprised, five hundred that fled thence to the rocks were slain; in this Town was an incredible magazine of mony, victuals, and arms provided against England; the English by immoderate drinking of wine, caused a great infection and mortality in the army; a great Gallion is set on fire by overcharging the great ordnance, this burned two dayes together, so that of fifty great pieces, sixteen only
were left; the higher  Town held out, being built on a rock; the Miners attempting to blow up the walls, overthrew a part of a tower, the other part falling down unexpectedly, slew Captain Sydneham with thirty souldiers; after this Norri with nine Re∣giments met a Spanish Army comming against him, and a hot skirmish ensueth, in which Sir Edward Norris, with some other Commanders are wounded, not∣withstanding the whole Army of Spaniards was routed in this service, the Kings Standard is taken, which was displaied before the General; then return∣ing to the Groine, the English fired the base Town, and so put again to sea, the Earl of Essex meets with the fleet, and they all land in Portugal, under shot of the Castle of oniche; the enemy fell presently on the English, but are beat so, that they take their heels and leave the Town undefended, which presently  yeeldeth, and so doth the Castle upon summons, understanding that Don An∣tonio was there. Seven Companies of foot being left to guard the ships, the main Army marcheth over-land to Lisbon, and took a Castle by the way: many of the English souldiers were poysoned with drinking of standing waters, and eating of poysoned honey left purposely in the houses. The 25. of May our Army came to Lisbon, whose Suburbs were abandoned and store-houses fired; the enemy in the night time (whilst the English were at rest, being wearied with six dayes march and watching) sallied out, and killed Collonel Bret, with divers Captains and others; but the Earl of Essex fell on them unexpectedly  and drove them to the City-gates: in the interim Cascu is surprised, the inha∣bitants being fled to the mountains, who understanding their King was come, professed their loyalty to him, but the Castle held out for the Spaniard. The Duke of Bragans, Francisco de Toledo and others, promised to aid Antonio with three thousand horse and other supplies, but could make no head, because of the Spanish Commanders every where: Antonio hoping aid would come at last, desired the English to stay before Lisbon for nine dayes, which could not be granted, because the English were sickly and much weak∣ned,  nor was there any forwardness in the Portugals; Antonio desires the Sub∣urbs might not be spoiled: Essex in a bravery run his spear and brake it against the gate of that City, challenging any Spaniard within to fight with him, but none appeared. The Castle of Cascais is rendred upon conditions. Sixty Spanish hulks laden with provision for Lisbon are taken. The English being at sea again, are overtaken in a calm by nine gallies which sunk some of our stragling ships; Captain Minshaw fought to the last after his ship was on fire; so continuing seventeen dayes on board, many dead souldiers are cast into the sea: Then they came to Vige a Town, which with the Country for seven miles compasse they set on fire: Then Drake arrives  safely at Plimouth June 21. and Norris July the 2. after. The state of France at this time was much distracted and out of order, therefore a meeting at Bloys is appointed of the three Estates for establi∣shing peace and union: For the Clergy appeared a hundred thirty four Deputies, among whom were four Archbishops, one and twenty Bishops, and two Generals of Orders; For the Nobility, a hundred and eighty Gentlemen; For the Commons, a hundred ninety one Merchants and Lawyers: To these King Henry the third made a speech tending to union, which was prosecuted by the Chancellor, by the Archbishop of Bourges, and by the President for the third Estate; whereupon an oath of union is ta∣ken, but the Leagures in the interim disgrace all the Kings actions, and make his government odious, purposely to set the Guise in his Throne, who temporised with both. The Clergy excommunicates King Henry of Navar as an heretick, and deprived him of the government of Guienne, but King Henry would have him to be summoned, and again to be sworn to the union. To this it was answered, That he
had been many times wrought upon to re∣nounce  his heresie, to no purpose; he was excommuninate by the Pope, and therefore king Henry was bound to subscribe thereto, otherwise Guise would dissolve the assembly; and so Henry of Navar is pronounced incapable of the crown of France. The king to be rid of the Guises, intended to destroy them both; notice was given to the Duke of this, but he would not believe it, presuming on his own greatnesse; but at last, he was killed by the kings guard, and so was his bro∣ther the Cardinal not long after; which so incensed the people, that they de∣famed the King, defaced his furniture, brake his pictures, dragged his image through the streets of Paris, and beat down his arms: The Sorbonists also con∣cluded,  that the people were free from their allegiance to him; whereas the Duke of Guise was highly commended and lamented. The Leaguers prevaile so against the Parliament, that all sorts of insolencies were permitted, besides, one Clement a Iacobin, vowed to kill the King, which he did at Paris; where he delivered the king a Letter, and with a knife wounded him in the belly, which the king drew forth, and struck the Iacobin above the eye, whom also the kings servants stabbed to death: So Henry died of his wound. Upon this, Henry of Navar is proclaimed by the Army, and named by the last Henry of France his successor, in his last Will; him Queen Elizabeth assisted against the leaguers with twenty thousand pounds, with ships, Arms, and Pow∣der, 1591.  and with four thousand souldiers at one time, and with three thousand at another; and to resist Parma who was entred France, she sends over Essex with four thousand foot and two hundred horse, these landing in Normandy, laid siege to Rohan, where his brother Devereux was slain: Henry finding the Lea∣guers too strong for him, and the Popes power so great; at last renounced his 1593. religion, and embraced the Roman Faith; so he is absolved and crowned. In Brittany the Spaniards are worsted, with the losse of Captain Forbisher, and di∣vers other English: The Leaguers by treasons lay wait for his life, and cross him what they can at Rome; at last, war is proclaimed between France and Spain. To Ernestus in Belgium, succeeded Albert Arch-duke, who prepares against the French, and fals first upon Calice. Richbank left unmanned, is seised on by him, and the town at length upon composition is surrendred: Queen Eliza∣beth not willing the Spaniards should possesse that Town, proffers aid to the French king against him; but he weakened by war, was more inclined to har∣ken to conditions of peace; whereat the Queen was displeased, and prepares 1596. another sea expedition, with a Declaration, shewing the causes of preparing this fleet, to wit, for defence of her friends and subjects; All which she wils to forbear helping of, or trading with the Spaniards: Then about 150 saile of English and Flemmins met at Plymouth, under the command of Charls Howard Admiral, and the Earl of Essex: before they put to sea, the Queen prayed so∣lemnly for their good successe: At sea, they met an Irish Bark from Cadiz shewing the strength of the Town, and shipping in the Bay, to wit, twenty Gallies, ninety ships, five great Gallions, two Galliasses, with divers other ves∣sels, all richly laden, and bound for divers places. On the twentieth of Iune the English attempt to land on the West side of Ca∣diz, but could not; the place was so strong, the next day the Spanish fleet prepares to fight: Lord Thomas Howard, with some Londoners, and a squadron of Belgick ships began the skirmish; Essex and Charls Howard seconded them: Wink field assailed the Gallies, which got passage at the bridge: The Spanish Admiral St. Philip is sore battered, and set on fire, and so was the St. Thomas; that they might not come into the English hands, the rest of the Spanish fleet ran themselves on ground. Then Essex lands his men; some Regiments are sent to the Bridge to impeach all supplies from the main, Essex with the rest took towards Cadiz, which at first plaid so sore upon the English, that the formost began to give back, till Essex caught his own Colours, and cast them
over the wall into the Town, to engage his men: a furious assault is made, the Colours regained, and the Town surprised, though with the losse of many En∣glish, among whom Sr. Iohn Wink field was slain. The Town and Castle being surrendred, the fury of the souldiers is staid by proclamation, great respect was shewed to religious Persons, women and children; the Ladies were suffered to depart quietly with their Jewels, the Generals standing by to see them safely shipped. The Bishop of Cusco is released without ransome, the spoile of the town is given to the souldiers, one hundred and twenty thousand Ducats are promised by the townsmen for their ransom; the ships also that ran on shore offered two millions and a half of Ducats for their ransom; but the Duke of Medina Sidonia, Admiral of Spain, caused them  all to be set on fire, yet the Matthew was saved, and so was the Andrew: thus was that rich fleet suddenly consumed, the town ransacked and burned, and the whole Island wasted. The English having abandoned Cadiz, set saile Westward towards Faro, a town in Algarva; where the Earl landing his men, took what they found in the town forsaken by its inhabitants, and forraged the Country for three leagues about. Thence they put to sea again, and landed safely at Plymouth, August 7. The next year, the Earl of Essex is employed by the Queen, both as Admiral 1597. and General in another Voyage against the Spaniard, with six thousand men, besides Mariners, in one hundred and twenty ships, which Iuly 9. set saile  from Plymouth for the Azores, but were driven back by storm; they set saile a∣gain August 17. and September 15. they arrived at those Isles, which submitted presently; they sackt the town Villa-Franca, took a Brasil-man, and three prizes, which they brought into England, worth four hundred thousand Ducats. The traffique of Spain failing by reason of these wars, the young king of Poland, Sigismund, sent an Ambassadour to Queen Elizabeth, who had audience at Greenwich; He complains that the Poland Merchants are hindred in their trade with Spain by sea, which should be open to all; therefore wisheth some redresse and restitution be made, or else his Master who is so neerly allied to the King of Spain and house of Austria, would seek some means to right him∣self: to this the Queen in latine answered, That his Master was too young and unexperienced in negotiating with Princes; and that his threatning speech sa∣voured more of ignorance and arogance, then of judgement and good man∣ners; She shews him that it was not against the law of nature for her to inter∣cept military helps from any to her enemy: so wishing him to wait for a fur∣ther answer from her Counsel, she riseth in anger. Another Ambassadour comes from Denmark, to intreat a peace between Spain and England, and amity between England and Denmark, and a free Traffique between Spain and Denmark; whereas hitherto the Danish Mer∣chants had suffered by the English; and lastly, he delivers to her the Garter, which the former King deceased had worn: For the peace with Spain, she told him, she broke it not, nor would she sue for confirma∣tion of it, especially by so young a King as the Dane was; as for peace with Denmark, she was willing to continue it; but for any wrongs done by her ships on the Danish Merchants, she knew not; if any should appear, satis∣faction should be made. Shortly after this, the English Merchants are arrested in the Sound, for which cause the Queen sends thither an Ambassadour, to whom all satisfaction and content is given by the Dane. Mean while Tir-Oen, whom the Queen had made an Earl, and pardoned  twice, begins to stir against her; and first he assails the Fort of Black-water, by which the entry lay into his country, and got it by surrender; Then he writes to Kildare, to side with him; and to Sir Iohn Norris appointed Lord General, to use him mildly, lest he should flie out into disloialty: In this mean time, his guard consisted of one thousand horse, and six thousand two hundred and eighty foot of Ulster, and two thousand three hundred of Conaught; all
which  are proclaimed traitours: The Queen willing to be quiet, sent Commissio∣ners to confer with the Earl, who complains of the wrongs done him by Sir Henry Bagnal Marshal: then he petitions that he and his may be pardoned, and restored to their estates; that they might freely exercise the old Religion; that no souldier or Sheriff should meddle with the jurisdiction of his Earldome; that he may be restored to his pay, and Company of fifty horse; that the spoi∣lers of his Country be punished; and that Bagnal should pay him the thousand pounds promised him in Dowry with his sister, Tirons wife: Then the Com∣missioners propounded these Articles to him, That he would lay down Arms and submit, reedifie the defaced Forts, admit the Queens Officers, restore the  spoils, confesse how far they had dealt with forreign Princes, and lastly to dis∣claim all forreign aide. Tir-Oen would not hearken to these demands; there∣fore Norris with the Deputies help, marcheth into Armagh; whereupon Tir-Oen forsakes Blak-water Fort, fires the Villages about, and plucks down Dun∣cannon town, with part of his own house: Norris sets a garrison in the Church of Armagh, and proclaims Tir. Osn traitour. Tir-Oen to gain time, presents a feined submission, prostrates himself be∣fore the Queens Picture▪ ungirds his sword, and craves pardon; where in the interim he deals with Spain for aide, and messengers thence are sent him with promises of men and arms: Hereupon he makes havock of the countrey,  and then sues for pardon again; and withall sends king Philips letters, and the causes of his own discontent to the Deputy: In the mean time, most of Con∣naught revolteth, and all Ulster rebelleth, except seven Castles that kept for the Queen. Thomas Lord Burrough is sent Deputy into Ireland, and Norris upon discontent dieth. The new Deputy makes forward to meet with the Rebels, who encountred him, but they loose Blackwater Fort again; and whilest they endeavoured to rescue it, Kildare interposeth, and discomfiteth them, but with the losse of some prime men, and dear friends; for which he died of grief. Tir-Oen rallieth his forces again, and in the Deputies absence, beleagures it 1598. with all his strength: The Deputy hearing of this, hasmeth to rescue it, but  by the way he dieth. Then was the Earl of Ormond made Governour of Ire∣land. Tir-Oen again complains of the wrongs he sustained, and oppressions of Ireland under the English, by which his disaffection to the English Nation was known: Bagnel is sent to raise the siege at Blackwater with fourteen compa∣nies; neer Armagh the enemy meets him, where in a bloody conflict Bagnal is slain, and the English quite defeated: here thirteen Captains were slain, and fifteen hundred common souldiers were routed and cut off; hereupon the garrison of Blackwater is surrendred, and Tir-Oen furnished with all sorts of provision and arms. Tir-Oen puft up with this successe, sends four thousand into Munster, who  prosecute the English there with fire and sword, and after a moneth return richly laden: He sends letters also to king Philip of Spain, promising to keep his allegiance to Spain, and enmity with England. In this sad condition of Ire∣land, the Earl of Essex is sent over with sixteen thousand foot, and four thou∣sand horse; being arrived thither, he fals upon the Rebels of Munster, and cha∣seth them into the woods, with great losse both of men and time; thence he made into Leimster, against the Rebels there, whom he vanquished; but Sir Conyers Clifford governour of Connaught is slain, and his forces defeated; where∣upon the Lord General enters Ulster; Tir-Oen desires a parly with him, which is denied: The next morning, the Earl desires a parly again, and is again refu∣sed;  but upon his third petition, it is granted. He had conference with Essex for an hours space, then both returned to their Companies, and some choise men are appointed to confer with Tir-Oen, and Commissioners for a treaty of peace. But the Queen was highly displeased, that so much blood and money 1599. had been spent in vain, and so much time lost without service upon the Arch∣rebel: Wherefore Essex
having received sharp letters from her, who was also incensed by his enemies, he hastneth into England, where at Non-such, he had accesse to the Queen; but shortly after, is commanded to his Chamber, and then committed to the custody of the Lord-keeper. The news of this commitment gave occasion to Tir-Oen to flie out again, who gives out, that he would restore Ireland to her antient religion and liber∣ty, and expell all the English; he receives from Spain money, and arms; and from Rome Indulgences, with a plume of Phoenix feathers, for a trophie of his victories: After this, in the midst of winter, he goeth on Pilgrimage to the holy-crosse in Tipperary, whence he sends Mac-Guire to spoile the Country; whom Sir Warham Saint Legar ran with a Lance through the body, and was by  him run through himself: Hereupon Tir-Oen returns from Munster. The Lord 1600. Montjoy at this time is made Deputy of Ireland, who in May prepares to in∣vade Ulster; where he forced Tir-Oen to draw back into his old corners; He kils the chiefest of the Rebels, he breaks through the Irish Pallisadoes, beats the enemy back, and plants a garrison eight miles from Armagh, which he na∣med Mount Norris, in memory of Sir Iohn Norris; at Carlingford he gave a total rout to the enemies. In the midst of Winter he clears the Glinnes or Val∣lies of Leimster from Rebels; he subdues divers other places, fortifies Armagh, and drives Tir-Oen from Blackwater. In the mean time, king Philip of Spain sends Don Iohn de Aquila with two  thousand Spaniards and some Irish fugitives to help Tir-Oen; these land at Kinsale in Mounster, where they publish their Commission, and Queen Eliza∣beths Deposition: The Deputy encamps neer Kinsale, and Sir Richard Levison, with two of the Queens ships incloseth the Haven; but hearing of two thou∣sand Spaniards more at Bere-Haven, makes haste thither, and sinks five of their ships; to this new supply of Spaniards, the rebels repair, who made up six thousand foot and five hundred horse: These intended to have put the Spa∣niards and eight hundred Irish into Kinsale, but they were prevented by the Deputies vigilancy, who followed the Rebels as they were retreating towards a Bog, where their horse were routed by the Earl of Clanricard; the main battel was charged by the Deputy, who quickly put the Rebels to flight; many of whom were slain, with twelve hundred Spaniards, and divers com∣manders taken prisoners, Tir-Oen flieth to his starting-holes in Ulster, and O∣donel driven into Spain. The General being returned to the siege of Kinsale, and having mounted his Canons, is sent to by D. Aquila for a parly, complaining of the Irish rudenes, perfidiousnesse, and cowardise; and shewing that he desired peace not out of want either in the town, or from Spaine: the Deputy willingly hearkened to a peace; and it was Articled, that D. Aquila should quit all places he had in Ireland, and should with his Spaniards depart; with arms, money, munition,  and banners displaied; that they should have ships, and victuals for their mo∣ney, that they should be used as friends, if driven into any harbours of Eng∣land or Ireland, that a cessation should be from war, that their ships should freely passe without molestation from English ships; Many of Tir-Oen's men were drowned in their flight by the Winter floods, and he himself shifted from one corner to another. The next Spring the Deputy marcheth from Dublin towards Ulster, where he forceth Tir-Oen to set his own house at Duncannon on fire, who flies from place to place; then the Deputy wastes all his Country, and takes in many places, so that now the Rebels exclaim against Tir-Oen, and resolves to come in  to the Deputy; which caused this Arch-Rebel to beg pardon again of the Queen, who granted it; then he came in a poor array to the Deputy, and fell twice on his face before him, acknowledging the Queens goodnesse, and his own wickednesse in rebelling so often, hoping he should finde her wonted clemency, and she should not faile of his true loyalty; but when he began to excuse himself in some
things, the Lord Deputy commanded him to be silent,  and to depart the presence, which he did, and had been sent over into England, had not the news of the Queens death hindred this designe. The Earl of Essex was ever held in jealousie, since his conference with Tir-Oen; yet presuming on his own merits and innocencie, carried himselfe so stoutly and stubbornly to the Queen, that the Lord Keeper by a Letter pru∣dently adviseth him to yield to the times, to submit to the Queen, and not to live such a discontented life as he did, whereby he wronged his friends, his honour, his fortunes, his country, and his Soveraign, and withall encouraged the foraign enemy to rejoice and insult: He intreats him therefore to yield, if he be guilty, out of duty; if not guilty, out of policie; for in this he would  shew both his honour, prudence, and piety, and withall his true valour in con∣quering himself. To this Letter the Earl answers, by laying the cause of all his discontents upon the Queens obduratenesse to him, who had deserved so well of her; He shewes, that willingly he doth not wrong either his friends, honour, fortunes, country, nor Soveraign by his retirednesse, seeing he is forced thereto, and driven by the Queen to a private life, who hath disabled him from serving his country in any publike way, but hath made him capable to serve it by sacrificing his life and carkasse to it: He is indeed bound to her Majesty in the duty of Allegiance, not of Attendance; in the first he will never fail, of the second there is no need: He yields to the time, for he saw the storm  coming, therefore put himself into the harbour; but he will never yield him∣self to be guilty, or the imposition laid on him just; however he will patiently bear all, for Princes may erre, and subjects may receive wrong; no power shall shew more strength and constancie in oppressing, then he will shew in suffering. The Queen notwithstanding this Letter, which laid all the blame of his sufferings on her, was contented he should be removed to his own house; then she sends some of her Councellors to convent him about the manner of his treating with Tir-Oen, and his leaving of Ireland, contrary to the Queens com∣mand: his answer was, That he had to do with bogs and woods, as well as  with men, and forced to do things there, which he would not have done else∣where. The Queen was contented with his answer and submission; yet he is suspended from the exercise of his office for a while, and shortly after he is set at liberty, the Queen hoping his surest guard would be his own discretion: But his liberty, without his offices and wonted power at Court, could not settle his discontents, which also were fomented by his followers; wherefore at Drury-house they consult and agree to bring the Earl by violent hand into the Queens presence, and to remove thence his opposites: but the Queens jealousies increased, by the continual flocking of Lords, Knights and Captains to Essex-house, by his refusing to come before the Lords of the Councel when  he was commanded; therefore she sends the Lord Keeper, with some others of his friends, to offer him justice for any griefs, and to dismisse his assemblies. These being let in, but not their followers, the Earle complains his life was sought after, and had been perfidiously dealt with: he was desired to expresse the particulars of his grievances, and he should have justice and satisfaction; and withall his Attendants are commanded to lay down arms and to depart: but the Earl shut up the four Councellors in his Bed-chamber under sure cu∣stody, and in a tumultuous manner made into London, his followers crying that Essex should have been murthered by Cobham, Cecil, and Rawleigh; so he past to Fanchurch-street, where he entred the house of a supposed friend, one  of the Sheriffs, but he absented himself; in the interim Essex is proclaimed Traitor; in Gracious-street he stood a while with a halbert in his hand, and a napkin about his neck, but no body came to assist him; Then he passeth to∣wards Ludgate, but there he is resisted by some Pike-men, and thrust through the hat, some of his company were hurt, and young Tracy slain; So returning thence to Queen-hive, he took Boat and lands at his own
house, which he forti∣fied,  and the Lord Amiral assaulted; upon resistance some are slain, which the Earl perceiving, presently yeelded, desiring civil usage and an honourable trial, so he was carried to Lambeth-house, and from thence, with some others, to the Tower. Upon the 19. of February, Essex and Southampton are arraigned; and Essex the 25. of February is executed on the Green within the Tower, having first 1600. confessed this great sin of Rebellion, but that he never meant to wrong the Queen, desiring all to think charitably of him, to hear the confession of his faith, to forgive him, and to pray for him, so his head was cut off at three strokes, to the endangering of the Executioners life by the multitude: divers of his accessaries died, some at Tiburn, some on the Tower-hill, the Earls death was much lamented both by the people, and the Queen her self till her dying day: Southampton was imprisoned in the Tower till he was released by King Iames. At last Queen Elizabeth having setled her dominions in peace, died the 24. of March, the 69. year of her age, and of her Reign the 44. She was a Queen of such eminent endowments, that to saylittle were to wrong her, and to say much 1602. were to flatter her, therefore let her own works praise her. She was happy in this, that never any Prince of this land had such wise Counsellors, such po∣litick Statists, such resolute and couragious souldiers. CHAP. XXXIII. The History of Scotland under Queen Mary, from the year 1560. till the year 1567. WHilst an Army is preparing in England to assist the Scots Protestants, the French plunder Disert and Wimes, two Towns in Fife, then they 1560. march toward St. Andrews, and in the way they spie eight great ships afar off in the sea, who being in hope that these were ships from France com∣ming to aid them, discharge for joy their great Ordnance; but understanding by some small barks that this was an English fleet comming to aid the Prote∣stants, and that a Land-army was upon the borders, their joy is turned into fear and grief, and they presently disperse themselves sundry wayes, the richer sort of those places send away their wealth into remoter Countries. The French plunder friends and foes, affirming that the Scots Catholicks were too sparing in helping their friends, for which cause many of them fall off from the French faction, so that all Fife turns Protestants, the example of which was followed by divers other Countries in shaking off the French tyranny; two ships in the interim with a thousand foot, and some horse are sent from France, the French were no sooner landed, but the two ships are carried away by the Scots in the night: shortly after eight French ships more arrive with men, money and munition, but finding the Frith so full of English ships, they re∣turn home again; another English fleet comes, so that now the Isle of Keth is beset round, and all commerce by sea kept from Leith; mean time the gover∣nours of Fife meet Huntly at Perth, where after three dayes conference, he with all the Northern parts come in to the Protestant party. The Lords of the Reformation hearing that the English Army of six thou∣sand foot and two thousand horse were come, they go to meet them at Had∣dington; the Regent with some few of her servants, to be out of danger,  betakes her self into Edinburgh-Castle; Areskin the governour, though he held the Castle for the Protestants, yet was content to admit the Regent, hoping thereby she would be the easier wrought upon, being now in his power; to this purpose the Protestant Lords send a letter to her, wherein they complain of the wrongs sustained by her means in filling the Kingdome with French, by whom the people are much afflicted; that they have often besought
her to dismisse them, which because she will not consent to, they have there∣fore intreated the Queen of Englands assistance, not thereby to cast off their allegiance to their own Sovereign, but to ease their own necks from the strangers yoke; therefore they beseech her to dismisse the French forces, who shall have safe conduct by the English either by sea or land; if she refuse this, they take God to witnesse, they are clear of the mischiefs that will ensue. Upon the approach of the English, thirteen hundred French came out of Leith to seise themselves of a hill not far off, there was skirmishing for five hours for obtaining that place: at last the Scots horse furiously breaking in  upon the French Army drove them back into the Town, and had the English horse been in readinesse, that French party had been all cut off; some parlies were held with the Regent about a peace, which took no effect, because the Scots would consent to nothing till the strangers were sent away; and now the English having shot often against Leith to no purpose, draw nearer to the Town with their Ordnance, a part of which casually fell on fire, and burned till the next day, so that much of the French provision was consumed; then the English set the water-mills near the Town on fire, which the French would have quenched, but could not; the besiegers assayed to scale the walls, but were beat off with the losse of a hundred and sixty of their men; whereupon the  siege riseth, and the English forbear to attempt any more till they have further directions from the Queen; in the interim letters come from the Duke of Norfolk, wishing the English to be couragious, and to continue the siege, pro∣mising them aid enough, and his own presence, if need required, withall he sends them his pavillion, and shortly after two thousand Auxiliaries, so the siege is renewed again, and divers skirmishes followed. In the mean time Queen Elizabeth sends some English Commissioners into Scotland to treat with the French Commissioners for a peace; about which time the Queen-Regent died of grief in the Castle of Edinburgh, a Lady of her own nature inclined to goodness and peace, but she was over-ruled by the  King and Queen of France, and they by the Guises; the Commissioners at first could not accord, because the French desired to carry home all their booty with them, which was denied; wherefore they broke out again into open ho∣stility, but the French sinding their provision almost spent, and no hopes of supply; the English also growing weary, and the Scots souldiers wanting their pay, they all inclined to peace, which was concluded on these Articles, That the French should be gone within twenty dayes, and some English ships should be provided for them: That Leith should be restored to the Scots, and the walls demolished: That the fortifications erected by the rench about Dumbar be thrown down: That the English should withdraw their Armies out of Scotland: And that an Act of oblivion passe. It was also agreed that sixty French should keep the possession of Kerth-Island and Dumbar-Castle, lest the Queen should think that she is quite deprived of all government. After the French were gone, Scotland was very quiet till Queen Mary came over, a Parliament is held in Edinburgh, where the Protestant faith is esta∣blished, and sent to Queen Mary for her approbation: Ambassadors are also sent into England to thank the Queen for her assistance; and now about this time King Francis dieth, at which the Scots were glad, hoping now to be quite freed from the French yoke. Iames the Queens brother hasteneth into France to his sister, who with her uncles was retired in Lorrain from her mother in law, who  now took upon her the government of the Kingdome: Queen Mary signifi∣eth to her brother, that she was willing to return into Scotland, and therefore appointed a day for that purpose, desirous rather to command as a Sovereign in her own Country, then to live as a subject to a mother-in-law in a foreign Kingdome; mean while she sends back her brother into Scotland, with her Letters-patents for calling of a Parliament, that the French
Ambassador who  was lately sent thither, might have audience; his demands were to have the old league renewed with France, and the new broken with England, the Priests restored again to their places and revenews: To the first, it was answered by the Lords, they never broke the league with France, but the French have broke with them, by endeavouring to infringe their liberties: as for the league with England, they can no wayes break without extream ingratitude to their deli∣verers; as for the Priests, they need none of their service, being they know no use of such, but are now better supplied. In this Parliament an Act was made for demolishing of all Monasteries, and Commissions sent abroad for that purpose; but the Queens friends advised her, that at her first comming into Scotland, she should not medle with matters  of religion, till she had got sure footing, and then she might shew her power; her Undes animated her to reestablish the Roman Faith: Charls the Cardinal counselled her to leave in his custody her richest houshold-stuffe, jewels, and robes, because of danger by sea; but she told him, that her life was more dear to her, then her jewels, if then she trusted the one to the sea, she would not leave the other behind: An Agent is sent to Queen Elizabeth to sound her how she was affected, if queen Mary should make her journey through Eng∣land; It was answered, that none should be welcomer to her then queen Mary her kinswoman; With this an English fleet is sent out, some thought it was to  intercept queen Mary, if she should go home without visiting queen Elizabeth; but queen Mary notwithstanding, by reason of a great mist, got into Scotland, upon the report of whose arrival, the Lords and Gentry flock from all parts of the kingdome, some for one end, some for another: At first it was agreed that the Religion should stand as it was now established in Scotland, onely the Queen should be permitted to have Masse at Court for her self and family. Shortly after, as the Priests were going into the Queens Chappel, one satcht the Taper out of the hands of one, which made a sudden bubburb, but all was pacified again by Iames the Queens brother; the Earl of Huntly, whose fami∣ly hath been ever constant to the Roman profession, took this affront in very ill part, and told the Queens Uncles (who were then present) that he would reduce all the Northern parts again to the old religion; the rest of that year was spent in feasts and masks to entertain the French Peers, who accompanied the Queen into Scotland: shortly after, an Ambassadour is sent by the Queen and her Lords to Queen Elizabeth, for confirming of the league, and continu∣ing mutual love to each other; withall she is desired to declare the Queen of Scots to be her next heir, as being next in blood, if so be she have no children of her own: To this she answers, wondring that Queen Mary and her Peers 1567. did not rather send a confirmation of the league at Leith; this the Ambassa∣dour excused, that he was presently sent away upon the Queens landing, and that as yet she hath had scarce time to conferr with her Lords about the affairs of the Kingdome, and settling of Religion: But saith Queen Elizabeth, she was tied by her hand and seal to confirm that League; therefore she needed no great time for that; to this the Ambassadour could say nothing, as being no part of his Commission: then saith the Queen of England, I grant that your Queen is next in blood to me; and all the world knows, I never attempted to doe her wrong, even when she wronged me, in usurping my titles and arms; but I impute this rather to others, then to her self; however, I hope, she will give me leave to enjoy my kingdome, whilst I live, and my children after me, if I have any, if I have none, I shall not any waies hinder her right,  neither doe I know any (I speak in the presence of God) whom I should pre∣ferre to her, or who hath any right after me to my Crown, but her self; and so desiring some longer time to think upon so weighty a businesse, she dismisseth the Ambassadour. A few daies after she sends for him again, and wonders what the Scots Lords meant, to send her such a message, upon the landing of their Queen,
and before  satisfaction be made for former wrongs; I am not (saith she) destitute either of force at home, or friends abroad, to maintain my own right: the Ambassador answers, That their intent was only to shew their affection to their Queen, and to avoid the shedding of much blood, and setting the two kingdoms at odds, if any question should arise about the title of succession: I dislike not their intent (saith she) but what needs all this, seeing I never went about to question her title? but however, I am not willing whilst I am alive to look upon my own winding-sheet; nor do I think it prudence in me to declare her my suc∣cessor, for that will breed many disputations according to peoples affections; besides, I am married to my kingdome, whilst I live this marriage cannot be dissolved, when I am dead let them succeed that have most right; again, my  declaration in this point may occasion rather some emulation between the two kingdoms, then confirm union; Princes use to be lesse affected to those whom they know shall succeed them, then otherwise; so was Charles 7. of France to Lewis 11. and he to Charls 8. and lately Francis to Henry his successor: again, I know the inconstancie of this people, and how more do worship the rising then the setting sun; my sister Mary was not willing to hear that I should succeed her; I know that many out of every discontent, and because I do not satisfie their expectations, their covetous and ambitious thoughts will be apt to fall off from me to my successor, who the more he or she shines in the peo∣ples affections, the dimmer will be my light, and the more I strengthen her title of succession, the more I shall weaken my own security: but I will take time to think more seriously of this busines, and shall endeavour in this to gratifie your Queen, when she shall confirm the League to which she is bound. After divers other discourses, Commissioners are appointed on both sides to review the former League, and to bring it into these heads, to wit, That Queen Mary should forbear the titles of England and Ireland, and likewise the Queen of Englands Arms; on the other side, That Queen Elizabeth should not either by her selfe or her posterity go about to hinder the succession of Scotland to the Crown of England. But whilst these things were in agitation, the Queen commits the Provost and Magistrates of Edinburgh to the Castle, for setting forth a proclamation, That all Papists must avoid the City by a certain day. The Ministers of Edinburgh complain against the Queen in their Sermons, for celebrating Masse with such solemnity upon All-Saints day, shewing that it was lawfull for the people to force the Prince to observe the Lawes established, and to abolish Popery: but the Nobility were loth to heark∣en to this doctrine. In the interim the Borderers fell to spoiling and plundring the neighbouring countries; against these Iames the Queens base-brother is sent with some forces, who suddenly surpriseth them, of whom he hanged eight and twenty, others upon hostages given he dismissed. The Queen also  made the people jealous of her, by securing her self with a stronger guard then her predecessors used to have, which was occasioned upon a report that the Earl of Aran (whom she did not affect for his religion, being a rigid Cal∣vinist) intended to seise on her person, and to carry her to his castle sixteen miles off; she angered also the Priests, by exacting of them the third part of their revenues for maintenance of Preachers, and the rest for her own use, having wasted much of the Crown-revenues. To make herself more gracious with the people, she creates her brother Iames Earl of Mar; but this honour being found to belong anciently to the Areskins, she makes him in stead of Mar Earl of Murry, and procures him the Earl-Marshals daughter for his wife;  but Huntly storms at this, having been governour of these two Provinces a great while, and challenged Murry for his inheritance; so that at this time he was the richest and powerfullest Peer of the Kingdome, and all the Northern parts were at his beck, only Makintose a great man among the Highlanders refused to be subject to him; which so incensed Huntly, that he unawares seised upon his person and imprisoned him, and in his abseuce his
Countesse  caused his head to be struck off, not without suspition that it was done by Huntlies command. The same Huntly was also highly incensed against the Earl of Murrey, whom he accused to the Queen that he aimed at the Crown, but his proofs were invalid. The Earl Bothwel at this time, having lavishly wasted his patrimony, knew not how to live but by fishing in troubled waters; therefore to set the Kingdome in a Civill-war, he endeavours to make dissention between Murrey and the Hamiltons; so he strives to perswade Murrey that the Hamiltons aimed at his and the Queens destruction, and promiseth assistance to cut them off, which saith he, will be a work acceptable to the Queen, for so she shall be rid of near kinsmen pretending to the Crown, besides that Aran is her great enemy:  Murrey refused to meddle in such a bloody businesse, therefore Bothwel incen∣seth the Hamiltons against him, accusing him as their great enemy, and that it was easie to seise upon him as he usually walked alone in Falkland Park. Aran abhorring this plot, by private letters informeth Murrey with it, who returns answer by the same messenger; but Aran being absent, his father openeth the letters, and withall imprisoneth his son, who escaped in the night to Falkland, where the Court then was, and discloseth the whole plot; whereupon Bothwel and Galvin Hamilton the chief actors are apprehended and imprisoned, the one in Edinburgh, the other in Sterling Castle, and Aran himself who faltered in his discovery, is sent to St. Andrews-Castle, where he feigned himself mad, lest he should detect his father who had a hand in the plot; but he so constantly accused Bothwel, that he offered in vindication of the truth to fight a duell with him. Mean while Huntly useth all the means he can to cut off Murrey his compe∣titor, divers wayes he attempted, but all failed; at length he procures some of his followers to fall upon him in the night-time as he was going home from the Queen, for he usually staid late with her; but Murrey hearing of the plot, got some of them who lay in wait for him to be apprehended in their Arms, Huntley excused the matter, that they meant to ride home in their Arms, and  had no other intent, and so the businesse was silenced; but the Guises with Huntley and others, did altogether aim at Murries destruction, not onely out of private respects, but also because he was a main supporter of the Protestants. The Queen is advised to bear Huntley in hand, that she would marry with his son Iohn, purposely to further his designs in promoting the Catholick cause; for this end she makes a progresse into the Northern parts: now she hated both Huntley for his greatnesse, and Murrey for his religion; she tells Huntley that she could not with her honour be reconciled to his son Iohn who raised a tu∣mult lately in Edinburgh, till first he were imprisoned in Sterling-Castle a while, this she intended, because she knew that during Iohns absence, she could  not be desired to marry; but Huntley was not willing his son should be com∣mitted to custody, chiefly under Mar, Murries uncle, who was governour of Sterling-Castle: but Iohn Gordon Huntlies son, who had escaped out of Edin∣burgh-Castle, was now near Aberden quartered with a thousand horse. About the same time Bothwel by a rope escaped out of Edinburgh-Castle: the Queen intends to go further North, the murther was put off till she came to Strathbogie the Earls house; but in the way when she could not perswade him to be content that his son should be sent a prisoner for a while, she turned aside and would not lie at his house, but went for Innernesse; when she came thither she is not suffered to enter the Castle which was kept by Huntlies forces, where∣fore  she is fain to lie in the Town, which she commands to be strongly guarded, and the ships which lay there to be ready to convey her away if any danger should be; when the Clanchatans, Frasers and Monroes, with divers other families understood in what danger the Queen was, repaired all to her aid, and presently lay siege to the Castle, which for want of necessaries yeel∣ded, and divers of the garrison were hanged; from thence she
returns to Aber∣dene,  where she expresseth her indignation against Huntley: he perceiving there was no way to obtain his will over the Queen, but by the death of her brother, he intended to dispatch him with all speed; Murrey understanding in what danger he was raiseth what forces he could and marcheth out against Huntley, a hot skirmish ensueth in which the Huntlyans are discomfited, 120. were slain, and 100. taken prisoners, among whom was Huntley himself with his two sons Iohn and Adam; the father being aged and corpulent, died as soon as he was taken, the rest are brought to Aberden, where Iohn was beheaded, or rather mangled by the unskilful Executioner to the great grief of the specta∣tors, and of the Queen her self, for he was of a comely presence, and in the flower of his age; Adam is pardoned because he was young: many Gordons were either fined or banished, George Huntlies eldest son fled to his father-in-law Hamilton, who came to the Queen, now being returned from Aberden to Perth, to beg pardon for his son-in-law; the Queen gave good words till she had got him out of Hamiltons hands, then she sends him to Dumbar-Castle; the next year he is sent to Edinburgh, where he is condemned of Treason, and 1563. remitted to Dumbar. Things being thus setled, Bothwel is summoned to return to his prison, which because he refused, is proclaimed Traitor; Matthew Stuart Earl of Lenox, after two and twenty years banishment returns home, and is restored again; his son Henry returns out of England: Mean while the Archbishop of St. Andrews 1564. for saying Masse is imprisoned in Edinburgh-Castle. The Queen falls in love with young Lenox, being her Aunts son, and a comely youth, and equally allied to Queen Elizabeth as her self, who seemed to approve of this match, thinking it safer for her that Queen Mary take him for her husband then a foreign Prince; yet she sends Ambassadors to Queen Mary, desiring her not to be too hasty in a matter of that consequence; a Parliament is called at Sterling, some of the Lords were for the match, some against it, chiefly Stuart of Ochiltry, who said he would never assent to have a Popish King over them, and it was held fitter for the people to chuse a husband for one, then that one should chuse a King for them all; at last her side prevailed, and to make this  young Lord Darly the fitter for so high a fortune as to marry a Queen, and the widow of so great a King, she honoureth him with the titles of Duke of Ro∣thesay, and Earl of Rosse. The Queen fearing lest her Uncles the Guises would hinder the marriage, makes what haste she can to finish it, being thereto also advised by David Riz, whom of one of her Musitians she had made her Secretary for the French-tongue, and who sowed the coals of dissention between her and Murrey, whom he intended to murther, who also advised her to send for Bothwel out of France, George Gordon Earl of Sutherland out of Flanders (who had been banished for Treason) and to release George Gordon of Huntly out of prison, which she did, and restored them to their honours. Murrey was much incensed at Bothwels return to advancement, so that he forsakes the Court, and sueth Bothwel for the wrongs he had done him in seeking to murther him; but Both∣wel presuming on the Queens favour and his friends, slighted his citation, and did not appear: mean while the marriage between the Queen and Darly is hastened by David Riz for his own private ends, and also for promoting the Roman Religion, whereof both Earl Matthew and his son Darly were stout assertors, and which the Guises were striving to advance through all Christen∣dome. The marriage is performed about the end of Iuly, and the next day Darly is proclaimed King, to the great offence of divers Lords, and of the people, who grumbled they should have a King imposed on them without consent of Parliament; divers Lords absented themselves, who are therefore banished, and their enemies called to the Court; the banished Lords met at Passet, the King and Queen with a guard of four thousand go to
Glascow, Hamilton-Castle  is summoned to be delivered up to the Queen, which is denied: the banished Lords were of different minds; the Hamiltons would have both the King and Queen to be slain, saying there could be no security for them but in their deaths; the other Lords (who perceived the Hamiltons drift in aim∣ing at the Crown as next heirs, by the death of the King and Queen) would have all differences composed in an amicable way; of this opinion were the Hamiltons at last, except Iames their chief: these discontented Lords repaire to Edinburgh to consult of raising an Army, but were so shot at from the castle, that they were forced to be gone thence towards Dumfrize; the Queen makes the Earl of Lenox Lieutenant of the West; the goods of those are plundred  that were fled into England, and an oath is taken of the Nobility of Fife to be in arms for the defence of King and Queen, if any forces should come out of England. The next year a Parliament is called at Edinburgh, for sequestring the estates of those Lords who were banished, for degrading of them, and tearing of their 1565. Arms, which the Prince cannot do there without consent of the Parliament. In the interim the Queen is advised by David to raise an Army for suppressing of her enemies; and because she could not trust her own subjects, to send for German souldiers, or Italians rather his country-men, who would be at his beck: thus divers strangers are brought in by parcels and privately, that there  might be no suspition. Divers discontents and jealousies are sown between the King and Queen, by which he became lesse gracious in her eyes, so that his power was lessened, and his outward estate and honour impaired: David is blamed for being the cause of this; wherefore the King by the advice of his friends conspired his death, which the Queen understanding prevented, but the second conspiracie was carried more closely; for as the Queen was one night at supper, the King with some armed men by the private stairs enters the room, pulls David from thence, and held the Queen in his arms, till in an out∣ward chamber the Favourite was stabbed to death by the Earl of Mortons ser∣vants, who were there waiting on their Lord purposely for this execution, at  which many were offended, because the execution was not done publikely by the Hang-man, as a fit spectacle for the people. Upon this murther, a great tumult arose in the Court: the Earls of Huntley, Athol and Bothwell, being at supper in the other side of the Palace, as they were upon the noise going out of the chamber, are by a guard kept in: Patrick Ruven a great actor in this tragedy, comes into the Queens chamber, and adviseth her to be more carefull of her Nobility and Lawes, without which she ought not to act any thing, and not to rely too much on strangers, who are altogether for their own ends, and which the Nobility cannot brook. In the interim, upon the fame of this murther, the Citizens take arms and come in great mul∣titudes  to the Court, to whom the King spoke out of a window, desiring them to return peaceably home, that he and the Queen were safe, that nothing was acted but what he had commanded, and which he would at another time ac∣quaint them with: so they departed peaceably, except a few that were left to watch. The banished Lords return, and are ready to answer their accusers, but none appeared against them. The Queen in the night-time escapes out at a back-door, where Seton with two hundred horse was ready to receive her, who first conveyed her to his own house, and thence to Dumbar; there having raised sufficient strength, she persecutes all those that had a hand in the death of David, some with banishment, some with fines, and some with death; she  causeth Davids body to be transferred from before the Church-door where he was buried, into the next Kings tombe, which occasioned great obloquies among the people. Not long after she betakes her self to Edinburgh-Castle, where she is brought to bed of a Son, called Iames the sixth. 1566. Iames Melvin is sent to queen Elizabeth to signifie the birth of this young Prince, who presently sends Henry
Killegrew to congratulate with her for her  safe deliverance, and to wish her not to favour any more Shan-O-Neal the Irish rebel, nor to entertain the English fugitives, and to punish the theevish borde∣rers. Not long after, the Earl of Bedford is sent from Queen Elizabeth, being Godmother, with a Font of massie gold for a gift; and commanded that nei∣ther he nor any of his followers, should call the Lord Darly by the name of king: after the ceremony was finished, Bedford dealt with queen Mary about composing the differences between her and her husband; and ratifying the treaty at Edinburgh: this last she refused to doe, as being derogatory to her and her sons right unto the crown of England; yet she promiseth to send Com∣missioners to queen Elizabeth about this Treaty; and that she will forbear to use the Arms and Titles of England, whilest queen Elizabeth lived: But before these Commissioners were sent, about a moneth or two after the Prince was Christened, Darly the Queens husband is in the dead of the night villanous∣ly strangled in his bed, and cast into a garden, so was his servant that atten∣ded 1567. on him in his chamber, and then the house is blown up with Gun-powder; a rumor is spread that this was done by Morton, Murry, and their confederats, who laid is from themselves upon the Queen. Bothwel being now reconciled to Murry, was the man who was employed to murther the king, in hope he might obtain the Queens marriage after: Murry goeth home fifteen houres before the murther, to avoid suspition; afterward  he with the conspirators perswades her to marry Bothwel, purposely to over∣throw her. Lenox the kings father accuseth Bothwel of the regicide, who is commanded to bring in his accusations before the Parliament, within twenty dayes, which he durst not doe, having so many enemies in the City, and Both∣well so backt with friends; so Bothwell is acquitted, Morton maintaining his cause; and most of the Lords under their hands and seais gave their consents to the marriage; Upon this he is created Duke of Orkney, and a suspition is raised that the Queen was consenting to her husbands death: wherefore the Con∣spirators intend to kill Bothwel and depose the Queen; Murry to avoid all sus∣pition goeth into France. Immediatly after, these men that perswaded the mar∣riage, raise arms against Bothwel, willing him secretly to be gone, lest being ta∣ken, he discover the plot; and withall, that they might lay hold of his flight, as an argument to accuse the Queen of killing the King; but when they took her, they used her contumeliously, putting an old cloak on her, they thrust her in prison at Lochlevyn, under the custody of Murry's mother, king Iames the fifths Concubine, boasting that she was king Iames his lawfull wife; which in∣solencies were highly resented by queen Elizabeth: Therefore she sends Throg∣morton into Scotland, to expostulate with the Conspirators for their insolencies against their Queen; she desires her restauration and justice on the Regicides, and that the young king be sent rather into England then into France for his security. But so much was queen Mary hated, that neither the English nor French Ambassadours could have accesse to her; some would have her restored, and Bothwel divorced; others will have her banished, others again desire she may be publikely arraigned and imprisoned; but Knox and his fellow-Ministers will have her deprived of life and kingdome, by a publike execution; at last by threatning her with death, for tyranny, incontinency, and violation of the laws, they forced her to put her hand to the Letters-pattents which she never read, wherein she resignes her realm to her son, now thirteen moneths old, makes Murry Regent, during the Kings minority, and if he refused, then  Iames Duke of Chastelroy, Mathew Earl of Lenox, with Argile, Morton, Glencarn, and Marre. Five daies after this resignation, Iames her son was annointed, and crowned King, the Coronation Oath in his name was taken by the Earls of Morton and Hume, That he will maintain the Laws and Religion, as it is now established.
CHAP. XXXIV. A continuation of the Scots History under King James the 6. from the year 1567. till 1602. WHen Queen Mary and Bothwel perceived that an Army was raised to apprehend them, they make an escape in disguised habits to Dumbar; in the interim the conspirators repair to Edinburgh, where Hamilton, Huntley, and other Lords of the Queens side were; these are driven into the Castle, being let in by Balfour the Captain, the City presently submits to the  conspirators; a great number of all sorts flock to the Queen, who having now made up a sufficient Army, marcheth presently towards Leith; the sudden news whereof awakes Edinburgh, all the inhabitants are in Arms and in the field by break of day: As the two Armies were ready to joyn battel, Crocus the French Ambassador endeavours to make attonement, by shewing them the uncertainty and danger of a battel, and the Queens willingnesse to give a general pardon, and her propensity to peace: to whom Morton answered, That he took Arms not against the Queen, but the murtherers of the King, whom if she will either punish, or put from her, they will lay down Arms and submit to her; Neither are we come (saith he) to desire, but to grant a pardon: So upon this resolute answer, Crocus takes his leave and returns to Edinburgh: Bothwel to end the controversie, challengeth any one of the conspirators Army to fight with him, three after each other present themselves, but the Queen would not give way: the Lords that were with her, finding the unwilling∣nesse of the common-souldier to fight in this quarrel, desire the Queen to forbear fighting till some other time, whereupon Bothwel perceiving his own danger, escapes to Dumbar in great haste and fear. The Queen understanding that Huntley, and Archbishop Hamilton were comming with some forces, she desires of the Army leave to meet them, pro∣mising  to return, but this is denied, divers of her souldiers railing against her, and holding out one of their colours, in which was painted King Henry lying dead, and his infant-son by him praying to God for vengeance on the pari∣cides; at which sight the Queen swouned, who towards the evening was brought to Edinburgh in great contempt, the streets being filled with people to see her. That Banner we spake of, was the next day presented again to her as she looked out at a window, complaining of her wrongs; the day after she is sent prisoner to Loch-Leven: Bothwel finding no security for himself, nor help for the Queen, flyes into the Orcades, thence into Shetland, and at last turns Pyrat. The Queen as we have said, is forced to resign her Crown, and  Murrey being lately returned from France, is by the conspiring Lords made Regent. Shortly after the Infant-King was crowned, a Parliament is summoned, where it was ordered that a fleet should be sent to catch Bothwel, who did much hurt in the Northern-seas; but though some of his fellow-pyrats were taken, yet he escaped into Denmark, where being known by some Merchants, is laid in irons, so he continued in much misery for ten years, and then falling mad, died. Not long after this, an Ambassador comes from France, shewing that his Commission was to speak with the Queen, or else to return instantly; the Regent told him, that it was not in his power to help him to the speech of  the Queen without their consent that imprisoned her, but to gratifie him, he promiseth to call the Lords together for that purpose; in the interim the Queen having bribed a boat-man is conveyed over the lake, they in the Castle made haste to follow her, but could not, for all the boats were drawn on the dry ground, and bored through with many holes; the Queen had horses laid for her, and so gets to Hamilton
a small Town eight miles from Glascow, where she is guarded with five hundred horse, and a great many more flock to her from all parts: the French Ambassador goeth to and fro, pretendinga paci∣fication, but indeed he encourageth the Queen to fight, who was now 6500 strong, whereas the Regent was scarce 4000. A battel is fought, wherein the Queens horse had the better a while, till they were so galled by the Regents archers, that they were forced to flie to the Queen, who about a mile off be∣held the fight; she with her horse flie towards England. The Regent appoints a Parliament, which the Queens party do what they can to hinder, queen Eli∣zabeth also sends letters to him for that end, that he should not be too hasty in determining any thing against the Queens party, whom she would not suffer to receive wrong from her subjects. The Regent, notwithstanding those letters, calls a Parliament, in which it was questioned, Whether all they that assisted the Queen should not be con∣demned of treason, and their estates confiscated? At last it was resolved, that some should be punished for example sake. Shortly after the Regent raiseth an Army, and subdueth those parts that stood out for the queen: but queen Elizabeths letters put some stay to his proceedings; for she was informed by the banished Lords, that queen Mary was extremely wronged by her subjects, and the Majesty of Princes slighted, if this power should be tolerated in people to depose their Princes; therefore she desires Commissioners may be sent to  inform her truly of his proceedings, and to cleer himself of the crimes objected against him. This seemed harsh to the Regent, that things already decided should be again questioned; yet knowing that if queen Elizabeth should fall off from him, he should be exposed to inevitable danger, having Lorrain the queens uncle, who ruled the Court of France, against him, and divers of the Scotish Nobility, therefore he appoints certain Commissioners to go, but per∣ceiving them unwilling, he goeth himself with two Lords, one Bishop, one Abbot, two Lawyers, and George Buchanan, he takes also with him William Metland, fearing to leave so publike a man, and so well-affected to queen Mary behind him; his whole train was but an hundred horse. At York he is met by  the Duke of Norfolk, (who was thought to marry with queen Mary) the Earl of Sussex, and Sir Ralph Sadler; A few dayes after, queen Maries Commissioners came to complain against the Regents proceedings, who excuseth himself that he acted nothing but by consent of Parliament: queen Elizabeth sends for two of the Regents side, to be fully instructed in the particulars; Metland and Macgill are sent; and at last the Regent is desired to come to the Court, that the queen might know what he could say for himself, or against queen Mary. In this mean while rumours are spread abroad in Scotland, that the Regent went about to betray the kingdom and the young king to the English, where∣upon great commotions and distempers began to break out; the Regent to  prevent them was willing to be gone, and so was queen Elizabeth to gain the more time for queen Mary, therefore she adviseth him to leave one of his friends behind, that might answer to any crime that might be objected against him. But Hamilton now being returned from France, is set on by the banished queens side to stand for the Regencie, as being so neer in blood to the young King; but his suit is denied him, because by many instances it was proved, that there is less danger for a young Prince to be under the tuition of strangers then of a neer kinsman who aimeth at the Crown, as may be seen in king Richard 3. of England his cruelty to his brothers sons: Therefore Hamilton is detained in England, till the young Kings Commissioners were first gone, lest  new troubles might be raised. But because rumours were spread of divers plots to kill the Regent in his journy homeward, queen Elizabeth gives order that all the suspected wayes through which he was to travel should be strong∣ly guarded. The Regent being returned safely into Edinburgh, a great meeting ensued of the Kings Lords at Sterlin, who ratified all
that was concluded and agreed  upon with the English last; Hamilton also being returned is forced to submit to the Kings side, for he found that help came not to him as he expected, and that the Regent had an Army in readiness; but when he understood that queen Mary had more liberty in England then before, and that she was to marry with the Duke of Norfolk, he began to fall off again from the conspi∣ring Lords; wherefore he is sent with Maxwel to Edinburgh-Castle. Argile is questioned for comming to Glascow with fifteen hundred men, purposely to raise the Country for the Queen whilst the Regent was absent; but he upon his submission, and taking the oath of allegiance is pardoned. Huntley also is accused in raising forces for the Queen, and in oppressing of divers families, and he likewise is absolved, but withall is enjoyned to make restitution to those whom he had wronged. After this the Regent makes a journey into Aberden, Elgin and Innernesse, for setling of these places and the Northern Countries; thence returning in∣to Perth, he receives letters from the Queen of England which he imparts to the Nobility being summoned thither; the contents of these letters were, That either Queen Mary should be restored to her former dignities, or else that she may be colleague with her son in the government; or if neither of these could be obtained, that she may live privately at home, and be made capable of such honours as might not be derogatory to the young King; this last clause was assented to, but they would not yeeld that the Kings power should be any wayes impaired. Then were read Queen Maries letters, wherein she desires that if her marriage with Bothwel be unlawful, she might be di∣vorced: At this the Conspirators were offended, in that she stiled her self Queen, and wrote to them as subjects; therefore they thought her letters not fit to be answered, shewing that her best way to dissolve the marriage, were to send to the King of Denmark to do justice on Bothwel as the murtherer of her husband, and so he being ded, she might marry with whom she pleased. Then an Agent is sent to Queen Ezabeth, with the Regents answer to her letters, with which she was not satisfied, but desires further satisfaction; upon this Petcarne is sent to acquaint her, that for divers reasons they could not admit Queen Mary into any share of the government, fearing that she who was so unnatural to her husband, would not be too kinde to her son, having obtained her Crown and dignity from her. Mean while a plot is detected in England, that Queen Mary and Norfolk 1569. were suddenly to marry; and that they might obtain both Kingdomes without opposition, Queen Elizabeth and King Iames were to be murthered at one time; hereupon Norfolk is sent to the Tower, and Queen Mary is appointed to be sent home to the Regent by sea; but this resolution is altered: About the same time Metland and Balfour Captain of Edinburgh-Castle, are convented  before the Lords for holding correspondencie with Queen Mary, but both are pardoned, onely Metland is confined to a private house in Edinburgh, whom Kircady the Captain of that Castle got into his custody; by feigning the Re∣gents letters, as if he had written to Kircady to take Metland into his custody, at which the Lords were angry, the Regent sends for Kircady, who refuseth to come; hence it was conceived that he sided with the Queen, who was now said to be comming with Norfolk out of England; but it was otherwayes, for he is sent to the Tower, and she is confined: the Regent notwithstanding his repulse, goeth up next day into the Castle, and having conferred with Kircady, comes away thence well-pleased, and marcheth towards the borders  to suppresse the Rebels there, which he did to the great content of Queen Elizabeth, who also thanked him for apprehending Northumberland, who fled thither out of England, whom the Regent imprisoned in Loch-Levin. Queen Maries faction perceiving the Regents power to increase daily, by the correspondencie he held with Queen Elizabeth, and finding that no good could be done so long as he lived, they combine to
kill him; therefore one day  as he rode through the streets of Lithgo, he was shot by one Hamilton out of a private place through the body a little beneath the navil; finding himself hurt he lights from his horse, and is carried to his lodging, where he died shortly after; Hamilton escapes into France: upon the death of Murrey great disorders arose, Metland and other prisoners are let out of the Castle; great debating there was who should be Regent, and by what power he should be chosen. 1571. Car and Scot with some forces they had raised, invade the borders of England with fire and sword: Queen Elizabeth sends Randolph to complain, and to de∣sire the Lords to unite themselves to choose a Regent, and to settle the King∣dome, that justice may be done on those who had invaded her borders; but  when no redresse could be had, she sends an Army under the Earl of Sussex to assist the Kings side against the other faction who stood out for the Queen; these understanding that the Army was upon their march, write letters to the Queen of England to be conveyed by the Earl of Sussex, who is desired by queen Maries side; not to march further till he should receive the Queens an∣swer; but he suspecting that these were delatory letters to gain time, and his charge being to make haste, openeth them, wherein he findes nothing but brags and threatnings, therefore he marcheth on. When the queens faction heard that the English Army was on the borders, they remove presently from Edinburgh to Limnuchum, where the Earls of  Huntley, Aran and Argile call a Parliament; the Kings faction sends to the queen of England to have her assistance in naming of a Regent, shewing they should be ready to imbrace him whom she will nominate; in the interim the English Army fall with fire and sword upon the Cars and Scots Territories who had lately invaded England: Hume-Castle with much wealth in it, is surrendred to Sussex, upon hope that he had been of Norfolks faction. The Lord Scrupe on the other side enters Anandel, and spoils the lands of the Iohnstons, who had also invaded England. The Hamiltons upon the report of the English Army hasten to Glascow to pull down the Archbishops Castle, fearing lest Lenox returning from England should make it the seat of the war; they besiege  the Castle to no end, for it held out so long, that upon the comming of the English Army to Edinburgh they rise from the siege, and hasten away; Huntley goeth home, Hamilton and Argile into Argiles Country; the English two dayes after come to Glascow, and spoil all the lands belonging to the Hamiltons, or those who had a hand in the Regents death, or who had received any English fugitives; they set on fire the Hamiltons Palace, with the Town, and beat down a part of the Castle; so the English return to Barwick, and the Scots who aided them to their homes. In the interim Petcarne returns from the Queen of England, who wonders that after four moneths they should now acquaint her with their businesse; she  tells them that the Ambassadors of Spain and France had importuned her to hear the complaints of Queen Mary, which she had promised to do, if in the mean while queen Mary will give order that her side will forbear all acts of hostility, and suffer things to remain as they were in the Regents time; but she will have no hand in choosing them a new Regent, lest she should seem to wrong queen Mary, her cause being not yet heard; but withall she wisheth them to forbear a while the naming of a new Regent: At this the Kings side was troubled, fearing lest by this delay the Queens faction would gather strength, therefore they resolve to choose an Inter-Rex, or Vice-Roy for a while, till Queen Elizabeths businesse at home be setled, who was troubled  about the Popes Bull against her, in procuring of which (so it was given out) the queen of Scots had a hand: Then they name for their Viceroy Matthew Earl of Lenox the young Kings Grandfather; mean while Queen Elizabeth writes that she will not name any Regent for them, but she thinks none fitter for that place then Lenox, as being nearest and dearest to the young King; so he is presently of a Viceroy made Regent.
He having taken his oath, gives order for raising of an Army to hinder the Parliament appointed by the Queens faction, and withall summons a Parlia∣ment in the Kings name to be held in Edinburgh: then he sends to the Gover∣nour of Edinburgh-Castle for some Brasse-guns and other warlike necessaries; at first he promised, but afterward denied, shewing he was for peace, not war; notwithstanding the Regent with five thousand goeth to Limnuch, where hearing of some forces of Brechin placed there by Huntley, who was raising an Army in the north, to hinder his design sends a party to Brechin, at the news of whose approach Ogleby and Balfour fled, leaving a garrison, who maintained the Church-Tower and the Countesse of Mars Castle a while against the Re∣gents forces, but at length yielded, and thirty of them were hanged: Huntley finding that supplies came not as he expected, removes farther north; the Regent returns him to Edinburgh to the Parliament, where nothing was acted against the murtherers of the Regent, because Q. Maries cause was not yet heard. In the interim the Queens side sollicite the Pope, Spain, and France, to send forces into England for restoring of Q. Mary. Montgomery Earle of Eg∣linton with some others submit to the Regent, who had lately hurt himself by a fall from his horse. An attempt is made upon Dunbritton-Castle, which with much difficulty at last they took by scaling-ladders; Fleming the Captain e∣scaped into Argile; but Hamilton the Archbishop of S. Andrews, with some o∣ther prime men, and the French Agent who lay there as a Spy, are appre∣hended. The Regent hearing that the Castle was taken, in great joy hasteneth 1572. thither, where he restores to Flemings wife her plate and houshold-stuffe; and wondring at the courage of the souldiers who could venture to scale such an inaccessible Rock, commends them highly. The French Agent is accused for robbing some Merchants, wherefore he is sent to S. Andrews to answer to their suit, but he escaped from thence. There was also an English-man taken and sent home, who afterward was found to have been sent by the Norfolkians purposely to poyson the young King. The Archbishop being found guilty both of the Kings death and Regents, was hanged at Sterlin; his chief accuser was a Priest, to whom one Iohn Hamilton a principal actor in the Kings death had confessed the whole murther secretly. Morton being returned from his English embassie, gave an account thereof before the Lords at Sterlin; How they had exhibited in writing to Q. Elizabeth the reasons that moved them to depose Q. Mary, alleadging divers precedents out of ancient and modern histories, of the like deposition of Princes by their people; but yet the Queen was not fully satisfied of the legality of this fact, therefore she desires there may be an expedient found out for composing the differences betwixt her and her subjects; it was answered by the Commission∣ers, that they had no commission to treat about any expedient, nor could they consent to the diminishing of their Kings power, nor if they did consent, would the Scots Nobility allow it; upon this the Queen checkt them for being so stiffe in their resolutions, in not harkening to an accommodation, and withall she desires them to confer again with her Commissioners, with whom they had conference the other day; to this they condiscended, but this con∣ference took no effect, wherefore the Queen wisheth that in the next Scotish Parliament the matter may be discussed; but she would not permit the Scots to depart home, untill the Bishop of Rosse who was one of Queen Maries A∣gents, had received answer from his Queen of these passages; at last her answer came, wherein she complaines of the hard measure offered to her by her subjects; therefore Queen Elizabeth wisheth them to shew their duty to their Prince, upon her true repentance, and so she dismisseth them. The Commissioners having finished their relation, a Parliament is appoint∣ed to be held at Edinburgh; but because the Queens party were masters of the Town, they resolve to sit in the suburbs; in the interim it
is proclaimed at  Leith, that no provisions or arms either by sea or land be brought to Edinburgh upon pain of treason; the Herald was accompanied with about an hundred horse and foot, on whom some Citizens sallied out as they were returning home neer the walls, but were beat in again. Whilst the Parliament sate with∣out the Town, they within call a Parliament of their own; the Castle in the interim plaid with their Ordnance upon the Kings Parliament, but no hurt was done. When both the Assemblies were dismissed, two hundred and twenty musketiers, and a hundred horse, with two field-peeces, are sent out of Edin∣burgh against Dalketh, where the Earl Mortons house was, who hearing of this presently arms two hundred foot and sixty horse; a skirmish followed, in which the Queens men were put to run, which the City-garrison perceiving sends out prsently fresh forces, who put Mortons men to flie, some were slain and taken on both sides, some also of the Queens party were killed by a barrel of gunpowder accidentally having taken fire. Some bickering also there was between the two factions about a company of Scots souldiers lately arrived out of Denmark; these intended all to serve the King, but six and twenty of them were intercepted at Leith by the Queens party, and carried to Edinburgh-Castle. When Drury the English Agent, who had been mediating for peace, to no purpose, was upon going, away, a skirmish fell out between the two factions,  in which the Queens party was worsted by Mortons forces, who killed fifty of the enemy, and took a hundred and fifty prisoners; almost there were daily skirmishes: the Regent kept Leith to intercept all provisions by sea from the Edinburgers; land-provisions could not be cut off, being so many wayes to bring it: A French vessel laden with arms, in which also good store of mony is found, was taken; the mony paid the souldiers, and the arms were carried to Sterlin; shortly after another French ship was taken with letters from the French, promising speedy aid to the Queens party. The Regent being gone to Sterlin, the Edinburgers with all their forces march out into the field, to draw the Kings party out of Leith; who fallying out furiously, drove their enemies  back to Edinburgh, of whom they killed and took divers. After this, the Queens party with two hundred horse and three hundred foot march out of Edinbrgh towards Sterlin, by the way they presse all the horses they found, then btimes in the morning they enter the Town without resistance, all being secure and asleep, they beset the Lords lodgings with armed men, Mortons house they set on fire, and himself having escaped the fire they took prisoner, the Regent is also taken, the Earls of Glencarn and Eglinton are secured: Areskin Captain of the Castle sends some companies of mus∣ketiers to seise upon his own house, not then quite finished, which looked full upon the market-place possessed by the enemy, who being fore galled by the musketiers fled confusedly to the gates, in the narrow streets (making more haste then good speed) many of them are trampled upon; the Regents life was saved a while by David Spence, who to keep off the blows received them himself, and died the same day of his wounds, two of those that killed him were put to death, the other prisoners in the flight escaped, and the Regent himself also died of his wounds that day. Three Regents are named till the next Parliament, to wit, Argile, Iames Douglasse Earle of Morton, and Areskin-Earle of Mar; He by all the suffrages is preferred to the rest, who resolves to besiege Edinburgh, but it was so strengthened that he could do no good that way; after this for divers moneths there were many excursions and skirmishes  and divers slain on both sides. About this time the North was much troubled by the falling out of two great families, the ordons and the Forbeses; these were for the young King, but the Gordons for the Queen: the quarrel grew to that height, that neer Aberden a great battel was fought, in which the Gordons had the upper hand; many other skirmishes were between the two
great factions, till Edinburgh  was strictly besieged by the Regent, who pulled down all the Mills neer, and intercepted all the provision that came thither, and made garrisons of all the Noblemens houses round about: Blacknesse is betrayed to Hamilton, by which means all navigation between Leith and Sterlin is hindred. Mean time the King of Spain sends from the Low-Countries seven great peeces of Ordnance with powder and arms to Huntley Lieutenant of the North, for queen Maries use, who sends the Lord Seaton to the Duke of Alba for his aid, and that he would forbid the Scotish rebels to traffick there; he answers, That he would aid her with mony, but he could not hinder the Scots from trading, because it was contrary to the liberty of the Low-Countries. The Bishop of Rosse Agent for the Queen of Scots, is committed into custody of the Bishop of London, because he had secretly kindled the Rebellion in the North: but being now delivered, deals with the French king, that he would use means with queen Elizabeth for delivering of queen Mury, which queen Elizabeth would not assent to, as being dangerous to her self and kingdome, seeing queen Mary aspired by all evil courses (saith she) unto the kingdome of England; yet she urgeth a confirmation of the Treaty of Edinburgh, which in part was assented to, so far as concerned Q. Elizabeths title, but the Scots could not be induced to break their old league with France, except England would allow them the same priviledges and benefits they have in France. The Bishop  of Ross is searched for letters sent to him from the D. of Alba about Q. Mary's deliverance, and is sent away into the Isle of Ely; some mony also which Q. Mary sent to her friends in Scotland is intercepted. Rosse, being found to have often conference with Q. Elizabeths enemies, is committed to the Tower, after it had been argued by the Lawyers, that an Ambassador loseth his priviledge who raiseth rebellion. The Regent Mar, having ruled 13 moneths, died. To him in the Regencie succeeded Iames Douglasse Earl of Morton, who e∣nacted 1573. certain lawes against Papists and Hereticks: the custody of the King is committed to Alexander Areskin, because the Earl of Mar was under age, to whom by peculiar right doth belong the custody of the king in his minority;  and it was ordered that none should be admitted into the kings presence but such as were unarmed, that Papists and they of the Queens side should be ex∣cluded, that an Earl might come in with two men, a Baron with one, and other men alone. Hamilton Duke of Chastelroy, and Huntley, are drawn by queen Eli∣zabeths means to submit to the king and his Regent, and to acknowledge the religion established; she sends also Sir William Drury with forces into Scotland, to joyn with the Scots in reducing of Edinburgh-Castle, which was at last sur∣rendred the 33. day of the siege, Kircady the governour is hanged. The Bishop of Rosse is banished out of England, who notwithstanding leaves not to solli∣cite foraign Princes in queen Maries behalf, who all gave good words, but did  nothing. King Henry 3. of France, and his mother, labour what they can to get young king Iames into France, so did queen Mary, hoping thereby the Catho∣likes would be more mildly dealt with here. Q. Mary is blamed also for con∣triving a marriage between Charles uncle to the Scots king, and Elizabeth Can∣dish daughter to the Countesse of Shrewsbury. The Duke of Chastelroy and the Earl of Arran, who were Q. Maries faithful friends, died this year. Don Iohn of Austria intends to marry with the queen of Scots, therefore deals with the Pope about the expulsion of Q. Elizabeth, and sollicites the king of Spain to in∣vade England. Morton the Regent is removed from his regencie, and the go∣vernment is delivered to the king being now twelve years old, and to twelve Noblemen, of whom three every three moneths should be present with the king to advise him, of these Morton was one; but he loth to leave his greatnes, drew all the power to himself, and kept in his hand the king within the castle of Sterlin, wherewith the other Lords were angry, who made the Earl of Athol their Captain, and raised an Army, whereupon Morton yielded and went home secretly, and Athol died incontinently, not without suspition of poyson.
Esmeus Stuart, son of Iohn brother to Matthew Earl of Lenox the Kings grand∣father, and called Aubigney of a Town in Berry, which was bestowed upon Iohn Stuart by king Charles 7. for defeating the English at Baugy, is now come into 1579. Scotland to see his Cousin, who made him a Privy-Councellor, Lord Chamber∣lain of Scotland, Captain of Dunbritton, Earl of Lenox, and after Duke, which procured some envy on the King as a favourer of the Guises and Roman reli∣gion; therefore the Ministers and some envious Lords raised one Iames Stuart of the family of Ochiltree, Captain of the Guard and Earl of Arran, to affront 1580. him; but the King in short time reconciled them: Then they accuse him to queen Elizabeth, as one sent by the Guises against the Protestants, to free the Queen, and to dissolve the amity between England and Scotland; but he cleer∣ed all objections, and shewed himself a Protestant: It was also feared, that by Dunbrition he would either let in the French, or transport the King into France; and that he perswaded the King to resign to his Mother the Crown, and take it again by a lawfull resignation: Hereupon Robert Bowes is sent to challenge Lenox before the King and his Councel; but before his cause was heard or known, he would have him removed from the Councel, which was denied as a thing not heard of; withall they desire him to shew his Instructi∣ons, which he denied, and so being unheard was called home. Upon this, Alexander Hume is sent to queen Elizabeth, who admitted him  not, but sends him to Burleigh, who complained that the Queens Ambassador was slighted, and the Kings French cousin, a Papist, and who perhaps aimed at the Crown, was preferred to the Queen of England: so Hume is sent back, with a caveat to the King to beware of the French plots and faction. In the interim Morton is accused by Arran of treason, and imprisoned, though a great friend 1581. for England; therefore Sir Thomas Randolph is sent into Scotland to conserve amity with England, to defend Morton from wrong, and to remove Lenox; He told both the King and his Councel, what queen Elizabeth had done in freeing Scotland from the French, in defending their King and Religion, with∣out taking a foot of Scotish ground; that now Lenox hath diverted the Kings  mind from her to the French, slighteth the Ministers, and puts out the Kings best officers. The King told him, that he acknowledgeth the Queens good will, but that Lenox was wronged; that in justice he must bring to trial a man accused of treason. Then Randolph strives to stir up Argile and some other Lords, to effect by arms what they could not do otherwayes, shewing that English forces were ready on the borders to joyn with them; but this took not effect with these Lords. Angus and Mar devised plots for Morton against Lenox; but the King banisheth Angus beyond the river of Spey, and the Castle of Sterlin is taken from Mar. Randolph fearing danger to himself, got away secretly by sea to Barwick; the English forces are called back from the borders;  and Morton, as privy to the murther of the kings father, is beheaded; Angus with others who stood in his defence, fled into England. 1582. William Ruthen, lately made Earl of Gowry, with Mar, Lindsey and others, in the absence of Lenox and Arran, invite the king into the Castle of Ruthen, where they detain him violently, and put away his best servants, they imprison Arran, and call back Angus, and send away Lenox into France; they force the King to approve this his surprise, by his letters to queen Flizabeth; the French King hearing of this, sends two Ambassadors to set the King free, and to con∣firm the French faction: queen Mary in the mean while in her letters to queen Elizabeth bewaileth the hard condition and miseries of her son now detained as a prisoner by Rebels, who had been the cause of all her miseries, and withall blameth queen Elizabeth for countenancing and supporting such, shewing her needlesse jealousies and fears, and how she had perswaded her to resigne her kingdome, and had denied her assistance when she had escaped out of Loch∣levin, when she sent back the Diamond which she had received from queen Elizabeth as a pledge of her love, and how
she suffered her (when she escaped  to England for shelter as her last assured anchor) to be intercepted and guarded with keepers, and to be shut up in strong places till now; she clears her self also of any combination with Norfolk prejudicial to queen Elizabeth, upon whose perswasion she had suffered divers of her friends to be put to death in Scotland; therefore she desires that she may have some more liberty, however some Catholick Priest to direct her in Religion, a courtesie not de∣nied to foreign Ambassadors; as for the suggestions of Beal about her trans∣ferring her right of Scotland to her son, withoutqueen Elizabeths promise, she desires that he may not be credited, and so concludes, wishing her to com∣miserate 1583. a distressed queen, and her nearest cousin. These letters much trouble Queen Elizabeth, who sends Beal a Clerk of the  Councel to expostulate with her for her complaining letters; the Councel of England was content she should be delivered, conditionally, That she practice nothing against Queen Elizabeth; That she would disallow as unjust what was done by king Francis her husband; That she claim no right to England during the life of Queen Elizabeth; That she procure the king and States of Scotland to confirm these, and give hostages withall; but the Scots of the English faction rejected these proposals. About this time the Earl of Lenox died, the Ambassadors depart unsatisfied, and the king escapeth from the government of the three Lords to the Castle of S. Andrews, and openly declares that this his surprisal was traiterous, yet the busie-headed Ministers in their Synod pro∣nounced the same to be just, darting out Excommunications against the dis∣approvers thereof. Gowry with some others conspire to take the King again, pretending his good, the security of Religion, and amity with England: but Gowry is appre∣hended 1584. and imprisoned; his other conspirators suddenly surprise Sterling, and as suddenly quitted it out of fear and want of supplies from England. Marr, Glames and Angus fled unto queen Elizabeth for her help and mediation with the King; in the interim Gowry is arraigned before his Peers at Sterling, for im∣prisoning the King and conspiring against him, for intending to seise upon Perth and Sterling, for resisting the Kings authority at Dundee, who being  found guilty was beheaded: queen Elizabeth makes shew of a treaty with queen Mary, if she would mediate with her son for the Scots fugitive Lords, and detect the plots of the Guises: for the first queen Mary was content to mediate, if these Lords would submit and turn loyal; for the second, she re∣fused till she were fully assured of her liberty; for she will not lose certain friends for uncertain hopes, therefore she desires the same usage from her which she had from her sister queen Mary when she was her prisoner, or the King of Navarre from the French king; but this Treaty was put off, and came to nothing, upon discovery of some letters carried by Crithton the Jesuite, im∣porting the invasion of England by the Pope, Spaniards and Guises: then she  sends Navus her Secretary with proffers of entertaining a strict league of amity with queen Elizabeth, of renouncing all claim to England during her life, of acting nothing against her, or the rebellious Scots, and their Religion, nor in her sons marriage without the privity of queen Elizabeth. But the Presbyterian Ministers, and their upholders, crossed all means of pacification; so the Pulpit being advanced above the Throne, all went as the Presbytery would have it, till this year they were curbed by some whole∣some Laws advancing the Kings power over them, and restraining Presbyte∣rial assemblies, and abrogating equality of Ministers by restoring the Bishops,  and condemning slanderous books against the king and his mother; mean while Queen Mary is taken from the custody of Shrewsbury after fifteen years, and is committed to Paulet and Drury, purposely to make her fall upon despe∣rate attempts; strange whispers went abroad about the deposition of queen Elizabeth, and the marriage of queen Mary with some Noble English Catho∣lick, but who this man should be could not be found out. About this time
Henry Percie E. of Northumberland being a prisoner in the Tower, and suspected to have been a plotter against Queen Elizabeth, murthered himself; upon the discovery of Babbingtons treason, Queen Maries closet is broken open whilst 1585. she was hunting abroad, and all her cabinets, desks and papers are sent to the Court; all her money also was seized on, divers letters of strangers were found, and about sixty kinds of cyphers; divers letters also of English Lords offering their service to her, which the Queen dissembled; Queen Maries two 1586. Secretaries were examined, and confessed that she knew of Babbingtons plot, wherefore Commissioners are sent to Fodringhay-Castle to examine Queen Mary, and to pronounce sentence of death, if found guilty: when they came they delivered her Queen Elizabeths letters, which she read with great and Princely magnanimity, shewing she was a Queen, and not subject to their Laws, nor was she guilty of what she was accused; therefore refuseth to ap∣pear or answer as a criminal, or to admit that law lately made against her, yet upon perswasions she appears, divers accusations were brought in against her, of which (though she stoutly defended herself) yet she was found guilty. Shortly after the Parliament petitioneth that she might be put to death, which Q. Elizabeth seemingly refused to consent to, as being a dangerous president. Yet shortly after Buckhurst and Beal are sent to Queen Mary to acquaint her with the sentence given against her, and that therefore she should repent and  prepare her self; upon this she answered, That she was exceedingly glad for being accounted an instrument of re-establishing religion in this Island; so she desires a Catholick priest, then she writes a letter to Queen Elizabeth, de∣siring her body might be sent into France there to be laid by her mother, and not into Scotland where violence hath been offered to the ashes of her An∣cestors, that so she may have rest after death, who could never enjoy any in her life. Secondly, she desires to die publikely that she might witnesse her faith in Christ, and her obedience to the Church. Thirdly, that her servants might peaceably depart, and enjoy the legacies she had bestowed on them. King Iames being much afflicted about the sentence of death against his  mother, sent divers Ambassadors to Queen Elizabeth, shewing how much he was bound both in honour and nature to intercede for a Queen, and his mother, how dishonourable and dangerous it might be to Queen Elizabeth to shed the blood of a Queen so near to her: but the Ministers of Scotland, and the rest of her enemies were so earnest and prevalent with queen Elizabeth, that the Kings letters could not prevail, nor the French kings Ambassadors which he also sent to this purpose; besides the Queen was affrighted daily with rumors of the Spanish fleet, of the Scots invasion, of the Guises prepa∣rations, of domestick rebellions, of plots to murther her, all to hasten the Scots queens death, therefore she delivers to Davison her Secretary letters  signed with her hand, that a mandate should be made under the Great-seal for her execution, and to be in readinesse if need should be. This mandate is pre∣sently conveyed to the Queens Counsellors by him, and dispatched away to Shrewsbury, Kent, Derby and Cumberland, which four Earls came to her, willing her to prepare, for she was to die the next day; she with a setled minde an∣swered, That death was welcome to her, and that her soul was not worthy of eternal joy, whose body cannot endure the Executioners blow; she desired the speech of her Confessor which was denied her, yet she wrote to him that he would pray for her; that night she supped, drunk to her servants incouraging them, she read over her last will, then went to bed, slept a while, and spent the  rest of that night in prayer. The next day she came in a Majestick manner to the Scaffold, carrying the Crucifix before her, where having professed her constancie to the Roman reli∣gion, and taking leave of her friends and servants, laid down her neck on the block, repeating these words, Into thy hands, O Lord, I commend my spirit; and so at two blows her head was cut off, her body was buried
in Peterburgh-Church,  and her magnificent funeral kept at Paris at the charges of the Guises, she lived forty six years, and was a captive eighteen: when Q. Elizabeth heard of her death she was ready to swound for grief, she commands her Counsellors, to come no more into her presence, and Davison to be brought into the Star-chamber; then she writes a letter to King Iames, shewing how without her knowledge his mother was put to death, and how grievous it is to her; withall she assures him, none shall be more affectionated to him, nor so careful of him as her self; mean while Davison is sharply reproved in the Star-chamber for his forwardnesse, and fined ten thousand pounds, and imprisonment at the Queens pleasure. The King was so displeased at the death of his mother, that he would not  suffer the English Ambassador to come into Scotland, and would hardly hear him by another man, or receive his letters; he called home his own Ambassa∣dor out of England, and threatneth revenge; the Estates of Scotland proffer to spend their lives and estates in this quarrel; some perswade him to require a Navy of the King of Denmark, to whose daughter he began to be a Suitor; some would have him joyn with Spain and France, and the Pope, and that he should not trust Protestants who had killed his mother, lest they also kill the children; some would rather have him stand as neuter, but others advised him to keep peace with England, and be constant to his Religion. Queen Elizabeth perceiving the French tampering with King Iames to withdraw him  from his religion and amity with England, sends to him, to let him see how dangerous it will prove to him and his Kingdome to fall out with England at this time, how uncertain the aids of France and Spain will be, how he may by this lose his claim to the Crown of England, and how she will be a mother to him; withall she sends him the sentence against Davison, and the Judges of Englands opinion, shewing that the sentence against his mother was no wayes prejudicial to his right of succession. 1587. From this time till the comming of King Iames into England, fell out no matters of great concernment in Scotland, except the driving of some Spanish 1588.  ships (after the Armado was defeated) upon the Islands of Orkney; the voyage of King Iames to bring home his new married Queen Anne from Denmark; 1589. the attempt that Bothwel made upon the King and Queen in their chambers, from whence he was repulsed and forced to flye, some of whose Pages and 1591. followers were apprehended and hanged, for which treasonable attempt of his he is proclaimed Traitor, and because he was harboured by the Earl of 1592. Murrey, contrary to the proclamation, Huntley by command seiseth on Murrey in his own house and kills him; Bothwel in the interim escapes into England, 1593. where he lurked a while, and from thence returning is apprehended and con∣sined, he endeavours to raise a rebellion, but to no purpose. This year Prince Henry was born; divers contestations the King had with the Presbyte∣rian 1594. Ministers about the Bishops and Church-government, in which the King was extreamly vexed, persecuted and preached against by them, whose power was at that time no lesse formidable then the Popes heretofore. About this time was fought that cruel battel of Avinian between Huntley and Argile, in which seven hundred of Argiles side were slain, and the rest put to flight; these stirs were raised and somented by some rigid Presbyterian Ministers, as Robert Bruce Super-intendent of Edinburgh, Balquankel and others, because the King kept correspondency with Catholick Princes, and was not cruel enough against the Papists in Scotland; therefore they encourage Bothwel against the  King, though he had been proclaimed Traitor, and furnished him with money which they had gathered for redeeming of some Protestant Scots from the Turks; Bothwel with three hundred horse surpriseth Leith, the King desires the assistance of the Edinburgers against him, but they would not stir, being forbid by their Ministers to help the King, so that he was forced to come up to the Church of S. Giles, and there publikly before
the people held up his  hand and protested he would be an utter enemy to the Papists; whereupon the Citizens take Arms, whereby Bothwels hopes were frustrated, who cursed the Ministers for deluding him thus. Upon this the King was forced by the importunity of the Ministers, to make Argile (who was their great Protector) Lieutenant of the North, a man unfit for that employment, as being of too haughty and cruel a disposition, and besides weak in horse, though powerful enough in foot-forces; the King also was perswaded to bestow on him the Country of Lochaber which belon∣ged to Huntley: Argile having received his Commission, raiseth an Army of twelve thousand, with which he intends to prosecute Huntley, Aerrol and  Angus, three Catholick Earls, with fire and sword; they hearing of this prepa∣ration, raise also a thousand horse with a foot-army, I mean Huntley and Aerrol, for Angus had an Army of his own to defend his Country, and could not come in time to joyn with the other two, because of the Rivers between. Argile placed two thousand musketiers in his Van, against which Huntlies great Ordnance did so play that they forced them to give back, and joyn with the main body where Argile was himself, which Aerrol perceiving, wheels about with his horse, and falls upon them in the Rear, and withall receiveth two wounds with forked arrows, one in the arm, another in the foot; to help him, Huntley breaks in furiously with all his horse upon the main body of Argiles Army, and puts them with Argile himself to flight; the fight con∣tinued two hours; of Huntlies side few were killed, but many wounded, and above two hundred horse slain; of Argiles side some say seven hundred, others five hundred. The next five years fell out no memorable accident, but Gowries 1600. Treason, and not long after the birth of Prince Charles. 1601. CHAP. XXXV. The History of England and Scotland together, from the comming in of King  James to be sole Monarch of the whole Island, from the year 1602. till 1625. QUeen Elizabeth being dead about ten a clock in the morning, King Iames the very same day (Secretary Cecil reading his Title and Queen 1602. Elizabeths Will) was proclaimed by sound of Trumpet first at White∣hall, then in Cheap-side, King of England, Scotland, France and Ireland. Sir Robert Cary, the Lord Hunsdons younger son, posted away unsent, to King Iames with the news of the Queens death, who afterward was made a Baron: A few dayes after, the Lords of the Councel send Sir Charles Percy and Mr.  Thomas Sommerset, and after them Sir Thomas Lake Clerk of the Signet, to ac∣quaint the King of the peoples affections towards him, as likewise with the State of of the Kingdome. Egerton Lord Chancellor, Buckhurst Lord Trea∣surer, Nottingham Lord Admiral, and Cecil chief Secretary are confirmed in their places: Thomas Howard the brother, and Henry Howard the son of Nor∣folk who had suffered for the Kings mother, are advanced by him, though they were Catholicks, to let Pope Clement 8. see he was no such enemy to Pa∣pists as some would have had him, and that his two Bulls sent out against his succession to the Crown were needlesse. King Iames having setled Scotland, on the fifth of April begins his journey  for England, and comes to Theobalds the third of May, where he was met by the 1603. Lords of the late Queens Privy-councel, and entertained with an Oration by the Lord Keeper: Here divers Lords of Scotland are made Privy-counsellors of England. The seventh of May he rode towards London, where by the way near Totnam-High-crosse, the Maior, Aldermen, and five hundred choice Ci∣tizens all mounted with chains of gold, met him and attended him to the
Charter-house, where came forth Proclamations the same day against Mono∣polies and Protections, and divers other abuses. All the way the King had travelled, prisoners for small offences were set free, and he plentifully distribu∣ted his favours, chiefly the Order of Knighthood. Divers Lords and Coun∣tesses are sent to conduct the Queen, with Prince Henry now nine years old, and the Lady Elizabeth; the King meets them at Easton in Northamptonshire: Charles Duke of Albany came not, being weak and sickly, till the next year: The king also makes divers Barons and Earls: Divers Abassadors arrive to congratulate his happy comming to the Crown, namely from the Palsgrave, the Hollander, the Arch-duke, the Spaniard, the Venetian, the Florentine, and the French; for entertaining of whom a Master of the Ceremonies is ordained: There were also made this year fourteen Serjeants at Law. Valentine Thomas for conspiring against Queen Elizabeth, was drawn, hanged and quartered. The Lord Montjoy returns out of Ireland, bringing with him Tir-Oen whom the king pardoned, who sends to his brother of Denmark the Earl of Rutland with the Garter, and to be god-father to his son Christianus. The Lord Spencer also is sent with the Garter to the Duke of Wirtinberg. This year produced a plot against the King and Prince Henry, by the Lord Cobham, Sir Walter Rawleigh, and divers others, upon some discontents, they knew not what; they are apprehended in Iuly, and arraigned in November at Winchester, because of the sicknesse then at London, wherefore the Terme also was kept there. The Lord Grey is accused for raising two thousand men to defend the Low-Countries, but indeed to seise upon the king and Prince: Cobham and Rawleigh met in S. Martins, and consulted about raising sedition, al∣tering Religion, & setting up Lady Arabella; it was proved that Watson the Priest was designed to be Lord Chancellor, and others for other offices: Rawleigh was to treat with Count Aremberg for money, and Cobham with the Spaniard and Arch-duke for assisting Arabella; these pleaded, the king not being yet crowned this could be no Treason, and that it was onely discourse, and not matter of fact; but they were refuted and condemned, the Priests Watson and Clerk were executed, and Brook beheaded; Cobham, Grey and Markham, at the point of  their Execution were reprieved by the Kings warrant, and carried back to the Tower. After this the King kept the feast of S. George at Windsor, where the Prince with some others are installed; the Earl of Southampton is restored; divers other honours are conferred, and on S. Iames day the King and Queen are crowned and anointed at Westminster by Archbishop Whitegift; command is given for observation of Gowries conspiracy. The King calls in all letters of Mart against the Spaniard; and concludes a peace with him, which was con∣firmed by mutual oaths solemnly taken: the Spanish Ambassador held the Kings hands between his, and in like manner the English Ambassador at Valle∣dolid held the King of Spains hands, when they took their oaths: Nottingham  Lord Admiral was Ambassador for England, and Valesco Constable of Castile 1604. for Spain: by Nottingham the king sent these presents to the Spaniard, six horses with saddles and saddle-cloaths embroidered, whereof three for the King and three for the Queen, two crosse-bows with sheaffes of arrows, four fowling-peeces inlaid with plates of gold, and a couple of lyme-hounds. The Earl of Hartford is sent Ambassador to Albert and Isabella to take their oaths, who bestowed on the Arch-dukes servants three thousand pounds, so the Arch-duke presented him with a Jewel of nine hundred pounds value, and a suit of Arras worth three hundred pounds, and bare his charges all the time of  his stay at Bruxels. After this, the kings second son Charles Duke of Albany is created Duke of York, being now four years old. Richard Haydock a Physitian, pretending to preach at night in his sleep, acknowledgeth his forgery to the king who had detected it. One Douglasse a Scots-man, for counterfeiting the kings Privy∣seal to divers Princes in Germany, is sent over by the Palsgrave, and
in Smith∣field  hanged and quartered. A second Parliament is called at Westminster; four dayes before the sitting, the King, Queen and Prince rode solemnly through London, where divers Pageants were erected, Presents given, and speeches made. In the time of this Parliament was discovered the Gun∣powder-plot, 1605. contrived by Catesby, Percie and others, who hired a cellar under the Parliament-house, laying in it twenty barrels of powder which they had under billets and faggots; their intent was to blow up the King and Prince, Nobles and Commons, to surprise the Duke of York, and to proclaim the Lady Elizabeth Queen; but the plot was detected by a letter sent to the Lord Monteagle, which his foot-man received from an unknown man, the  letter was to desire him to forbear being at Parliament, because of a terrible blow that was to be given; the letter was delivered to the Earl of Salisbury by Monteagle, who could make no sense of it; but the King when he read it, apprehended presently, that by the word (blow) was intimated a blowing up with Gunpowder, therefore command is given to search all the rooms about the Parliament-house, in the cellar under the faggots were found six and thirty barrels of powder; Fawks upon suspition is apprehended, in whose pocket is found a peece of touch-wood, a tinder-box, and a watch, to try the short and long burning of the touch-wood: the plot being discovered, some fled to Worcestershire, where Catesby & Percie were slain by one shot of a musket,  both the Wrights Iohn and Christopher are likewise slain, the rest were publikly executed, except Tresham who died of the Strangury in the Tower, whither Northumberland upon suspition is sent; great joy there was for this delive∣rance, so that the Spanish and Arch-dukes Ambassadors made bone-fires, and threw money amongst the people. About this time the King receives as a present from the Spaniard six Jennets of Andalusia, with embroidered saddles, and saddle-cloth of Tissue, one of these Jennets was snow-white, whose main reached to the ground: the Queen of Spain also sent to our Queen Anne rich presents of embroidery, amber∣greece, a rich cap and girdle in a bason of gold to congratulate the kings happy deliverance, in memory whereof the fifth of November is appointed to be kept holy, and the Lord Monteagle is rewarded with two hundred pounds a year for ever, and five hundred pounds besides for his life. Shortly after a rumor was spread that the king was slain at Oking, which caused great fears in London, till within two hours after news came that he was safe, to the great comfort of all; so that the Spanish Ambassador gave Sir Lewis Lewknor a chain of gold for bringing him the news. Henry Garnet Provincial of the English Jesuits, suffe∣red death for concealing the Gunpowder-treason: Northumberland is fined to pay to the King thirty thousand pounds, to forfeit all his offices, and to be kept prisoner during the Kings pleasure for misprisions of Treason. At Hampton-Court an Assembly of Divines is called by the King to confer about the Liturgy and Church-government; the first sitting was in the privy∣chamber, where in the presence of his Privy-councel, he shewed the causes why he called these Divines, not that he thought there was any thing in the Church that required alteration, all things being so well setled already, but like a wise Physitian to make search into the supposed diseases thereof, and to remove the occasion of complaints, that the mouths of complainants may be stopped, and sober mindes satisfied: He acknowledgeth Confirmation after Baptisme, by Episcopal benediction and imposition of hands, after the childe hath professed his own faith, to be of great use and antiquity in the  Church, and so the Bishops made it appear to his Majesty, that confirmation was no essential part of Baptisme: for Absolution they shew it is used in the reformed Churches of Auspurg, Saxony and Bohemia, and that Christ gave power to his Ministers to pronounce it: for private Baptisme, they say, That it it is not to be administred by women and Laicks, but by lawful Ministers onely: and as for Excommunication, they
say, That the abuses being re∣moved,  it ought to retain its vigor in the Church: and so for that day the As∣sembly of the Prelates was dismissed. The Munday after, the King calls into his privy-chamber the complaining Doctors, telling them, That he meant not to innovate the Church-govern∣ment so sound and so long established, but to settle uniformity and unity, and to remove abuses if there be any, therefore desires them to declare their grie∣vances: hereupon Dr. Reynolds the foreman reduced all the matters in debate to these four heads: 1. For preservation of true doctrine. 2. For placing of good Pastors. 3. For sincere Church-government. 4. For explanation of some clauses in the Service-book. All these points were exactly handled and cleared by the Prelates, and so moderated by the King with that judgement and learn∣ing,  that all who were present were ravished with admiration. The Wednes∣day following being the third dayes Conference, the King declares what for∣merly had past, and shuts up all with a godly exhortation, perswading all to unity, and diligence in their charge, shewing the duties both of superiors and inferiors, wishing them to build Gods Temple without the sound of discord, and to shew their obedience and humility by a peaceable conformity, seeing the points in controversie were matters of meer weaknesse. After this the King gives order for a new translation of the Bible according to the originals, and then sends some learned and judicious Divines into Scotland to confer with the Divines there about an uniform government in both Churches:  Then by Act of Parliament he provides for the Churches constant mainte∣nance, that none of her revenues or lands be alienated. The king, to shew how willing he was to unite the two kingdomes into one, causeth one name to be given to both, and himself to be proclaimed king of Great-Britain; he causeth another Proclamation to come forth for banishing of Jesuites and Priests, and a third for confirming the book of Common-prayer, as it was in the late Queens time. In the fourth year of the kings reign, the king of Denmark arrives in the 1606. Thames with eight ships, and anchored before Gravesend, thither the King with the Prince and Lords went in Barges to meet him, and conducted him to London, where he stayed till the 12. of August, having landed the 17. of Iuly before; after whose departure arrived at London, Francis Prince of Vandemont the Duke of Lorrains third son, accompanied with seven Earls, ten Barons, forty Gentlemen, and sixscore common persons, who were for fourteen dayes together entertained by the king at Hampton-Court. The next year in May, some malecontents in the Shires of Northampton, Leceister and Warwick in great companies began to throw down Inclosures, whose Ring-leader was one Reynolds, or Captain Pouch, so called from his green-leather-pouch hanging by his side, where he said he had sufficient to defend them against all opposers, but when he was apprehended, there was nothing found there but a peece of  green-cheese; some Lords, with Cook the chief Justice, suppressed them by force of Arms, and punished some of them by death, others by fines. In Iune following the King dined with Wats the Lord Maior, who after dinner pre∣sented him with a purse full of gold, and then the King was made free of the Company of Cloath-workers, to whom he promised a brace of Bucks yearly for ever, to be spent at the election of their Master. In Iuly following, the king dined at Merchant-Taylors-hall, where he was presented with a purse of gold, and a Roll shewed him wherein were registred seven Kings, one Queen, seventeen Princes and Dukes, two Dutchesses, one  Archbishop, one and thirty Earls, sixty six Barons, seven Abbots, seven Priors, with many Knights free of that Company; the king being free of another Company, refused to be of theirs, but gave way that the Prince should be free, and that he would see the Garland put on his head, whereupon a purse of gold is presented to the Prince, and he with divers Lords are made free. About this time ungrateful Tir-Oen, with
some other Irish Lords went away to sollicite  foreign Princes against the King, and to offer Ireland to the Pope. This year Virginia is planted. George Iervis a Priest, and Thomas Garnet a Jesuite are executed; a pardon was offered to Garnet, if he would take the 1608. Oath of Allegiance, which he refused. Divers English Pyrates turn Turks. The New-Exchange is erected, where a long old Stable stood before, by Salisbury the Treasurer, and is named by the King (who with the Queen and Prince came to see it) Britains-Burse. Foraigners are prohibited to fish upon the 1609. Kings coasts without leave. Now Allom is made in England, which heretofore was brought from other places; This year also Silk-worms were brought in∣to England. The King having received aid for Knighting Prince Henry, and he being 1610. now come to the age of seventeen years, is made Prince of Wales. Garter King at Arms bore the Letters-Patents, Sussex the Purple-Velvet Robes, Huntington the Train, Cumberland the Sword, Rutland the Ring, Darby the Rod, and Shewsbury the Cap and Coronet; Nottingham and Northampton supported the Prince, being in his Surcoat only, and bare-headed: Thus he was con∣ducted to the King, and attended on by five and twenty Knights of the Bath; Salisbury read the Letters-patents, the Prince kneeling all the while before the King, and at the words accustomed the King put on him the Robe, Sword, Cap and Coronet, the Rod and Ring, and then kissed him on the cheeks; so then he was allowed to keep Court by himself. The King to keep peace at home, in his own person heard the differences between the Ecclesiastick and temporal Judges, argued touching Protections; he heard also the complaints of the Victuallers and other Officers of his Navy. Upon the news of king Henry 4. of France his death, king Iames by proclama∣tion commands all Priests and Jesuites to avoid the land, and all Recusants to return home to their dwellings. The East-India Merchants are made a Cor∣poration for ever, who built a ship of 1200 Tun, which at Bantham was lost: the King also builds a ship of 1400 Tun, which he gave to the Prince, who called it by his dignity, The Prince. About this time Mr. Car, who had been one of the Kings twelve Pages, whom he dismissed upon taking so many Footmen, was afterward made one of the Bed-chamber, upon breaking of his leg, as he lighted from his horse in the kings presence, who ever after cast an affection towards him; he made him knight, then his Secretary, then Viscount Rochester, and a Privy-councellor, afterward he made him Earl of Somerset, and at last Lord Chamberlain. These great Honours made some to envy, others to admire and flatter him; among the rest the Countesse of Essex the Earl of Suffolks daughter, who so much fell in love with him, that she slighted her own husband, and procured Mrs. Turner, one Gresham, and Dr. Forman, by inchantments to disable him, and to procure  Cars love; places of meeting are appointed at Hammersmith, where much loose behaviour was used between them, so that Sir Thomas Overbury, Cars favorite, was much displeased with it; and Prince Henry hearing of his loose kind of life with her, slighted him, which some think hastened the Princes death. The Lady Francis Howard complaining of her husbands frigidity, and that she was still a Maid, procures a Divorce, which was granted upon a search made on her by twelve Matrons: then a marriage is thought on by Car and Howard, to which Overbury was altogether averse; upon this Rochester and the Countesse meet, and conclude the death of Overbury, who was a main obstacle to their proceedings; for the facilitating whereof, Wade is removed from the Lieutenantship of the Tower, and Elvis is preferred; then the Countesse con∣fers with Mrs. Turner, complaining of Overburies insolencie for defaming her name; hereupon they resolve to poyson him, by one Weston an Apothecary sometimes servant to Dr. Turner. And because Overbury was to be imployed as an Ambassador into the Low-Countries to the Archduke, Rochester disswades him from that imployment, promising to take him off with credit; but
in  stead of so doing, he incenseth the king against him, shewing that Overbury was become so insolent, that he scorned that employment to the Archduke as too mean for him; therefore the king having received a deniall from Overbury, sends him to the Tower; Northampton and Rochester his two great enemies, command the Lieutenant to keep him close prisoner, and Weston is preferred to wait on him in the Tower; Gresham in the interim dies, and one Franklin is entertained in that businesse, a man fit to make poysons. Shortly after, Elvis the Lieutenant was acquainted with the poysoning of Overbury by Weston, as he was carrying a part of his supper in one hand, and a glasse of blue water in the other: The next day Elvis is sent for by North∣hampton, by whom he was encouraged to persist, and a thousand pounds pro∣mised  him for a reward; he is also desired to sift out Overburies minde, how he is affected to the match between Rochester and the Countesse; in the interim more poysons are sent by the Countesse, which by Weston are tempered with his broth and meat; some poysoned Tarts and Jellies also are sent by the Viscount to Sir Thomas Monson, whose servant delivered them to Weston, which brought the said Sir Thomas to be suspected as having a hand in this act; by this means Overbury grew very sick, but by a cooling bath he received some ease: hereupon the Lieutenant is commanded by the Councel (as he gave out) that no man might have liberty to speak with him. Now the intended marriage comes to light, much questioning and de∣bate there is about it; the bishops are divided, Canterbury and others against it, Winchester and Ely for it, at last a nullity is obtained, and order is sent to Essex to repay the portions of five thousand pound: when Overbury heard of the marriage, he grieved exceedingly both for the Earl of Sommerset, as for him∣self, suspecting it would cause his death; therefore he writes to the Earl to be released, who returns him some Court holy-water, and a white-powder to case his pain, which it did shortly after, for being given to him in a glister, proved poyson, which the next day with excessive pains in the guts killed him; after his death, it was spread abroad he died of the pox by excesse of lasciviousnesse. This year gold is enhaunsed; one Legate an Arian is burned; and the Lant∣grave 1611. of Hesse commeth to visit King Iames. The next year the Lord Zanchir is hanged for causing one Turner to be murthered. The body of Queen Mary of Scotland is removed from Peterborow to Westminster, where a stately tomb of 1612. marble is erected over it. The Palsgrave Elector commeth into England, who with Grave-Maurice are invested with the Garter. The year following was 1613. fatal to this Island by the death of Prince Henry, and the marriage of his sister the Lady Elizabeth to the Palsgrave. The nullity being obtained, the match is made, and honoured by the Kings 1614.  presence, and a Mask; a few dayes after, the new married couple were feasted with the Nobility of the Kingdome, at Merchant-Taylors hall by the Lord Maior and Aldermen. Rumors are spread abroad of a Spanish fleet, as if in∣tended for England, and this suspition increased by a Proclamation against Spanish money: the Scots in the Western Islands flie out into rebellion, so do the Wilde-Irish in Ireland, but were quickly suppressed. In the Islands of Orkney there was great commotions raised by the Earl of Orkney then a priso∣ner in Edinburgh-Castle, who wrote letters to his Bastard-son, and other of his friends there to take possession of his houses, whereof he accounted the Castle of Kirkway one; whereupon the Councl at Edinburgh send thither some ships  of war, and land-forces out of Cathnesse, who besiege the Castle both by sea and land, which at last yeeldeth to mercy; the Earls son with the besieged are hanged up close by the Castle, which is demolished, the Ordnance carried away, and not long after the Earl himself was beheaded at Edinburgh. The Earl of Northampton is publikly spoken against for countenancing and advancing the Roman Religion; a Bill is exhibited in the
Star-chamber by  him against such as defamed him; but Canterbury maintains their cause, shew∣ing there were never in his time so many Priests in England as now: My Lord hereat being much troubled, went to Greenwich, made his will, then returned to his house at London, where he died. The Cloath-workers obtain at last that no more white-cloaths be carried over the seas undied and undressed, the Dutch proclaim that none shall buy any such cloaths so dressed and died: hereupon wools are prohibited to be transported out of the Kingdome; yet at last it is ordered by the Councel, that a certain number of white-cloaths shall be transported. Sommerset having lost Northampton his great friend, and fearing the detecti∣on  of Overburies death, procures a general pardon of all treasons, misprisions, murthers, fellonies, outrages whatsoever, which the King signed, but Chan∣cellor Egerton refuseth to let it passe the Seal, and acquaints the King of the danger might arise thereby: whereupon the King suspecting all was not well with Somerset, withdraws his favour from him, and begins to cast his affection upon a young Gentleman lately come from France, Mr. George Villiers, on whom he bestows a thousand pounds, then Knights him, invests him with the Garter, makes him Master of the horse, and afterward Earl, Marquesse, and Duke of Buckingham. Sommerset being troubled in conscience about Overburies death, sendeth to France to have the Apothecary dispatched who gave the Glister; he causeth  all places to be searched where he thought any letters were which concerned that mischief; and by reason of his pride, covetousnesse, and insolent carriage, he is every day lesse in the Kings favour, and the peoples affections: At last upon petition of Overburies man to my Lord Cook, and upon the information of Sir Ralph Winwood to the King Weston, is examined, and after much adoe at last confesses all, who with Turner, Franklin and Elvis are condemned and hanged; Sommerset is committed to the Dean of Westminster, he stood still upon his innocencie, and denied all, but his Countesse confessed; whereupon his money, plate and jewels worth 200000 li. and his lands to 19000 li. per annum, are seised upon for the Kings use, who bestowed divers of them upon  the Prince. About this time Sir Walter Raleigh, after ten years imprisonment in the Tower, was set at liberty: he hated Sommerset exceedingly, because he had begged and got his lands; the Countesse of Shrewsbury also, who was privy to the escape of the Lady Arabella, was released out of the Tower. In the year 1614. the English sends a Plantation to the Barmudes, as the Lon∣doners had done the year before into Ireland. The King of Denmark this year came privately into England again. Hugh Middleton brought the water into London, and Suttons Hospital is founded. The next year after, the Lady Arabella who married to Mr. William Seymour, now Marquesse of Hartford, 1615. dieth, which also was the fatal year of Sir Thomas Overbury. The tryal of Sommerset and his Lady is put off, because she was with childe; but after she was delivered of a daughter, the Lord Chancellor is authorised to be High-Steward of England for the time being, to whom were joyned eight Judges for his assistants, a Seat-Royal is placed in the upper end of Westminster-hall, the two prisoners are brought from the Tower; the Countesse pleaded guilty, but Sommerset pleaded not guilty; yet being found guilty by his Judges, is condemned, and sent back to the Tower, they were afterward both pardo∣ned and released out of the Tower. This same year the Archbishop of Spa∣lato 1616. comes into England, and the Cautionary Towns are restored to the  States. About two years before this, the Order of Knight-Baronets was insti∣tuted by King Iames, who were to maintain thirty foot-souldiers in Ireland for three years, after the rate of eight pence a day, and to pay the wages of one whole year upon the passing of their Patent, then they must be Gentlemen of three descents, and should be worth a thousand pounds per annum, the
number to be installed was not to exceed two hundred. An Ambassador came from the Russian Emperor to King Iames, desiring his amity, and to me∣diate for a peace between him and the King of Swethland, and presents him with rich Furs: and not onely the Russian, but the Persian also, admiring the wisdome and happinesse of King Iames, some time before this, sent Sir Robert Sherley to desire his amity, and withall freely offers commerce to the Kings subjects through all the Persian dominions: This Sir Robert was made an Earl of the Empire by Rodulphus Caesar, then having served the Persian ten years, was made General of his Artillery, and married him to the Lady Teresia, whose sister was one of the Queens of Persia; she was brought to bed here of a son, whom the Queen and Prince Henry Christened. About this time Moor∣fields, before a stinking place, were made out into pleasant walks: Prince Charles is created Prince of Wales, which action was accompanied with much joy, and the installing of five and twenty Knights of the Bath. This year the King after fourteen years absence returns into Scotland for 1617. setling both the Church and State there, whose presence was so welcome, that every place and City whither he went did strive to outstrip one another in magnificent entertainment: having setled all things, and confirmed the five Articles of Perth, after six moneths abode there, he returns into England; Sir Walter Rawleigh being now at liberty perswades the King to afford him some 1618.  ships for Guyana, where he thought was a Mine of gold, which would inrich him and the whole kingdome without any prejudice to the Spaniard, but when he came thither no treasure could be found; wherefore that he might not return empty-handed, he falls upon S. Thome, a Town of the Spaniards, which he sacked, pillaged and burned: Gundomore the Spanish Leiger com∣plains: King Iames to avoid a breach between Spain and England, prefers the death of one man, already condemned, before the breach of publike peace, therefore he is newly arraigned and condemned to die, his head was cut off on a Scaffold in the Pallace-yard. Queen Anne, after she had been married twenty years, died at Hampton-Court,  whose death cast the king into a dangerous sicknesse, of which he re∣covered. 1619. In a Parliament at Westminster (in which Chancellor Bacon for bri∣bery was put from his place, and sent to the Tower, into whose place Dr. 1621. Williams Dean of Westminster succeeded) Montpesson and Michel are for abuses censured: Sir Richard Weston is sent Ambassador to the Emperor to sollicite the restoring of the Palsgrave to his own Country: Gundomore assures the king there was no readier way to recover the Pallatinate, then by making a match between Prince Charles and the Infanta of Spain, which might be effected, if the Prince were sent thither; whereupon the king sends him with Buckingham, Porter and Cottington by land; in the way at Paris, being disguised, he saw the  Court, and Princesse Mary, whom afterward he married; Gundomore in the interim obtains of some Ladies large summes of money for places with the Infanta when she came: The Prince being arrived in Spain, was received with as much love and magnificence as could be expected, so as the charge of his 1623. entertainment stood the King of Spain in nine and forty thousand Ducats, yet he was so restrained from the Lady, that the eight moneths time he stayed in Spain he saw her very seldome, and that at a distance, and never spake with her but twice, and that before company, and was limited also in his speeches. This match was hindred by the falling out of Buckingham and Count  Olvares the King of Spains great favourite: much time also was protracted upon pretence of difficulties to obtain the Popes dispensation; wherefore King Iames wearied with delayes sends for the Prince home, who having taken his leave of the King of Spain, returns by sea, and lands at Portsmouth, to the great joy of the people: the Articles of the marriage were so strict and large for exercise of the Catholick Religion, and none at all for restoring of
the Palatinate, that King Iames broke off all treaty of the marriage, and signi∣fied so much to the Spaniard and other Princes; wherefore a consultation is had for recovering it by Arms: to this end a great contribution by way of benevolence was collected for raising men. Then another match was thought on for the Prince; for this cause the Earls of Carlisle and Holland are sent into France to treat of a marriage with the younger daughter of Henry 4. which was accomplished shortly after King Iames his death. About this time the Archbishop of Spalato was burned at Rome for apostacie; he came into this Kingome petending Religion, as he shewed in his writings by maintaining 1624. Protestanisme, and was therefore made Dean of Windsor, and Master of the Savoy; but being fickle-headed, after he had stayed here five years, he retracted all he had written or said before, and therefore is commanded by the King to depart the Kingdome within three dayes, and so he returns to Rome, where he inveighed as bitterly against the Protestants, as he did here against the Papists. This year was fatal by the fall of that great Cedar King Iames, the wisest, fortunatest, and most peaceable Prince that ever was in this lan; under whose 1625. two and twenty years government, this kingdome attained to the height of peace, plenty and happinesse; in whose halcionian dayes, more works of piety were done then in any other Princes reign of the like continuance; such were the reparations of Pauls begun then, the endowments of S. Iohns Colledge. in Oxford by Dr. Land the Archbishop, the Alms-house at Croyden by Archbishop Abbot, and that in Sussex by Robert Earl of Dorset, that of Sutton in the Charter∣house, Wilby Colledge in Oxford by Mr Nicholas Wilby, Dulwich Alms-house by Edward Allen the Player, the History-Lecture at Oxford by Mr. Cambden, three thousand and six hundred pounds given to good uses by Mr. Patyn Grocer of London, Camden-Hospital in Glocestershire founded by Sir Baptist Hicks, five thousand pounds given by Mr. Thomas Teasdale for maintenance of seven Fellows and five Schollars in Ballyol Colledge, three fair Hospitals founded by Henry Earl of Northampton, one at Rysing in Norfolk, a second at Clun in Shropshire, the third at Greenwich in Kent, 8000 li, given by William Iones of London for a Free-school and Alms-houses in Wales, and a 100 li. for ever yearly to a preacher in London. Not to speak of Chelsey-Colledge, divers Churches and Chappels by private men, and other sums of money left by charitable men; all which were the fruits of his peaceable government: and among the rest, we may not omit the Plantations of Ireland, Virginia, Barmudas, and New-England; in Virginia, the first Town that ever was built there bare his name; for though this was discovered in the Queens time, yet it was not planted till the kings: the next was the plantation of the Barmudas, and the last of New-England, the patent whereof was granted by king Iames to Bristol, Exeter, and Plimouth. In his time also divers Schools, Churches and Hospitals were erected in Scot∣land, and a Plantation by the Scots was thought on in the north part of Canada, which in king Charles his time was set on foot. This king Iames for his wisdome was admired of foreign Princes, for learning by the Univer∣sities; for his wise, just, and peaceable government, by his subjects. Protesta∣nisme had never a greater Champion, as may be seen by his books, by his care in causing Conferences to be held in Scotland about uniformity of Discipline, and unity of Doctrine; about expelling Vorstius out of Leyden, and sending Divines to the Synod of Dort, and his learned moderating of the Conference at Hampton-Court; so that he was Plato's Prince, a Philosophical King, or a Kingly Philosopher. He died the 27. of March, the 59. year of his age, having  reigned over all Great-Britain 22. years compleat. In his time fell out divers strange accidents; the great Plague, whering died in London above 38000. in one year, the great Frost, great inundations and fires, chiefly that of Dorchester, the falling of the room at Black-Friars, a Whale within eight miles of London, the Blazing-star, the killing of a man by Archbishop Abbot.
CHAP. XXXVI. A Continuation of the History of Great-Britain, under King Charles, from the yeare 1625. till the yeare 1641. PRince Charles being about the age of 25 yeares, is proclaimed King of Great-Britain, &c. Who shortly after his Coronation was married to 1625. Henrieta Maria, younger daughter of King Henry 4. of France. The Match was made upon these conditions: That the Popes dispensation should be pro∣cured within the space of three moneths before; That the free exercise of the Catholike Religion be permitted to the Queen and her servants, and her Children; that therefore she should be allowed her Chappel, and Burial-place peculiar to herself and family, with 28 Priests and a Bishop chosen by the French king, who should be exempted from the Secular power; And that King Charles should sweare never to withdraw from, or perswade her to im∣brace any other Religion. Her Portion was 800000 Crowns; her Dowry 18000 lib. sterling; besides so much Lands as should maintain her and her Court, answerable to her Greatnesse. Not long after the marriage was consummated, all amity with Spain is re∣jected, and Commerce prohibited: a Fleet of 150 Sail, with 10000 Foot and some Horse, are sent against Spain; they landed at Cadiz, but were beaten back into their ships with losse, by Ferdinand Gironius; the ships by storms in their return were much shattered, many of the passengers died with sicknesse and cold, so that few returned home. This unlucky Expedition hindred the League that was made between England, Denmark, Swethland, Venice and Holland, against the House of Austria. The next yeare, King Lewis of France falls out with King Charles of Great-Britain, 1626. because he sent back the French Priests into France, upon some distaste  taken against them for injoining an unseemly Penance on the Queen; and because he entertained Monsieur Subize, and armed him against the French King: and however King Charles was content to allow the Queen twelve Priests and one Bishop, twelve Women, one Chamberlain, one Secretary, one Physitian, and three other Catholike servants; yet he could not be dis∣swaded from defending Subize, and the Protestant cause; which occasioned a warre between them; therefore the English ships and goods are arrested in France, and the half of the Queens dower was retained: Upon this, an English Fleet is sent to the Isle of Rhee, under the Duke of Buckingham, who took it; 1627. but not long after it was lost again, and the English driven to their ships, not  without the losse of many a brave man. Yet K. Charles being nothing dismayed, prepares another Fleet against the next year, for relief of Rochel now besieged by the French King; but whilst the Duke was ready to imbarque at Portsmouth where the Fleet lay, he was suddenly stabbed by one Iohn Felton, which caused 1628. great discontent in the King, and a tumult in the Dukes lodgings; the French being accused as actors in this murther; but Felton confessing that he had kil∣led the Duke, the tumult was appeased, and he apprehended, who confessed he could not be quiet in mind till he had acted that tragedy, being perswaded that the Duke was no good Patriot, having exasperated the King against the former Parliament which was assembled for giving aid to the King in defence  of the Protestant cause, which was then in great danger both in France and Germany, the King of Denmark being brought very low by the Emperor. Notwithstanding the Dukes death, the Fleet was dispatched to the reliefe of Eochl, but could do no good, because it came too late; for the Town was begirt with impregnable Barracadoes and Circumvallations both by sea and land, so that re infecta it returned home. The next year a Parliament is called;
Peace is concluded with France; A new Plantation is begun in America, called New-England. Not long after, on the 29. of May, Prince Charles was borne: the next day, the King at Pauls-Crosse gave thanks to God for the Queens safe 1629. delivery, and the birth of his Son. This year a Peace is concluded with Spain. In the year following, the King sends to the Emperor for restitution of the 1631. Palatine into his inheritance, but nothing was effected. In the year 1633. the King about May began his journey into Scotland, where he was Crowned the 18. of Iune, with great solemnity. Not long after, as he was crossing the Ferry between Leith and Brunt-Island, there arose so sudden a storm, that he was in danger to be cast away; some of his servants were then drowned, and much of his Plate and houshold-stuffe was lost. He erected about the same time a  Bishops See in Edinburgh, and setled Mr. William Forbes of Aberden (an eminent man for learning) Bishop there; but he died shortly after, being vexed by the people of that place, who could not endure to be subject to a Bishop. The King having called a Parliament there, in which some things in favour of the Church were enacted, which pleased not divers of the Great ones there; whereupon the King returns abruptly into England, which was ill resented by the Scots Lords. The next year following, King Charles for maintenance of his Navy, raised 1634. the Tax of Ship-mony, by which means the Sea-men were well paid, and for  two years together the Kingdome was well guarded by the Royal Fleet. But this Tax was so unequally laid by the Sheriffs and their Deputies, upon divers of the meaner sort, that it caused great discontent: (For I know a Minister, whose Benefice was scarce 100. l. per annum, forced to pay 15. l. for his Tax the first year.) This Ship-mony was at last opposed and voted down in Parliament, In the year 1636. the King sends again to the Emperor in behalf of the Pals∣grave, in which Embassie much mony was spent to little purpose. In the year after, the Popes Nuntio's are received and entertained at the Queens Court. In Scotland fell out the great Tumult at Edinburgh, Iuly 23. upon the reading of the New Service-book in S. Giles Church, the Women beginning the fray by flinging their stools and Bibles at the Deans head, as he was reading; who hardly escaped, with the Bishop, out of the Church with their lives: But the tumult was appeased by the Privy-Councellors then present, and the Bishop conveyed away by the Lord Weems. So things remained quiet till the next Spring, that new troubles arose. A Generall Assembly, against the Kings command, is held at Glascow, in which the Bishops are deposed, excommuni∣cated, and abjured; the Articles of Perth, Service-book, and Canons are re∣jected by the Presbyterian Assembly, who also impose an Oath and Covenant upon the people, the chief promoters whereof were three Ministers, Hender∣son, Dickson, and Cant; who comming to Aberden, received some stop by the  learned Divines there, who would not condiscend that the Covenant should be propounded or recommended in their Pulpits to the People under their charge, till they were satisfied in these demands. 1. By what warrant or power they imposed a Covenant on them, seeing they were not authorised by the King nor his Councel, nor any established Judicatory or National Synod. 2. Whether they ought to subscribe a Covenant of mutual defence by arms, seeing such Covenants are forbid by Parliament, an. 1585. 3. Whether they ought to feare any danger of Innovation in Religion, seeing the King hath protested, declared and sworn to the contrary, and hath removed all oc∣casions of fear, as the Service-book, Canons, and High-commission. 4. What  reason is there for them to abjure Episcopacie and the Articles of Perth, and to have an interpretation of the Negative Confession imposed on them against their judgments. 5. Whether the abjuring of the late introduced Rites, be not an assent that the former Rites are unchangeable; whereas all Rites according to times and occasions may be changed. 6. Whether the abjuring of Perth-Articles be not a contradicting of the judgment of most modern
Divines, who  hold them in their own nature lawfull; as also a condemning of the ancient Church, which practised them. 7. Whether they can abjure these Rites as Popish, which according to the light of their conscience and sincerity of their hearts, they have practised as lawfull so many years; And whether they ought not to have some time given them to consider of so weighty a businesse. 8. Whether the Kings person ought not to be defended, though he preserve not the true Religion. 9. Whether this can be consistent; To swear to main∣tain the Kings authority, and yet swear disobedience to the Articles established by his authority. 10. Whether the abjuration of Perth-Articles be not pre∣judicial to the liberty of Voting in a National Assembly. 11. Whether the  subscription to the Profession of Faith, registred an. 1567. in Parliament, be not sufficient to shew the sincerity of their Profession. 12. Whether the late practise of the Covenanters in contemning Authority, and Gods service in his own house, on his own day, as to lay violent hands on the Prelates and Pastors in time of Divine service, whilst they practise what the King and his Councel commanded: I say, whether these disorders are tolerable, or is it fit that the Anticovenanters should joyn with them. 13. How this Covenant can be subscribed without scandal; first, of dissenting from other Reformed Chur∣ches; secondly, of dissenting from Antiquity; thirdly, of perjury, having sworn obedience to the Articles of Perth, and to the Ordinary at their admissi∣on to the Ministery. 14. Whether these Covenanting Ministers can with rea∣son desire the use of our Pulpits, to withdraw (say they) our Flocks from their obedience and allegiance, and that Doctrine which we in our conscience think to be true? To these Quaere's the Covenanting Ministers put in their Answers, but such as were not satisfying to the Divines of Aberden, as may be seen in their Re∣plies and Duplies. The Bishops also protested and declared against the As∣sembly at Glascow, as being altogether unlawfull, because it met without the Kings warrant; because it consisted of more Lay-men then Ministers; because most of these Ministers were scandalous either in their lives or doctrine, or both; because they were enemies and persecutors of the Bishops, to whom  they owed Canonical obedience, and that it was unreasonable they should be both Judges and parties; and because they are such Ministers as have not sworn to the Articles of Religion, nor taken the oath of Allegiance, and usurp more authority to themselves then can stand with the freedome of an Assem∣bly; and as justly might the Bishops except against this Assembly, which hath already precondemned Episcopacie, as Athanasius, Hosius of Corduba, and Maximus Patriarch of Constantinople, did except against some partial and pre∣judicating Councels, or Luther against the Councel of Trent, because he was precondemned by Pope Leo. But these Reasons of the Bishops were slighted,  and the Assembly notwithstanding proceeded, though the King sends the Marquis Hamilton to dissolve it: For the Presbyterial side prevails more and more; who made an Act against the Bishops, and expelled them the kingdom; whereat the King was so angry, that he caused the Scots ships here to be seised, and their Trading with England to be prohibited. Mean while, the Queen-mother of France, King Henry the Fourths wid∣dow, came to London, Octob. 31. whom the King received courteously, and entertained royally. In November Proclamation is made against the Assembly in Scotland, by the King: but it was so slighted, that an Army is raised by the Presbyterian Scots; against whom the Bishops contribute and raise among  the Clergie great sums of mony, for maintaining of an Army against the Pres∣byterians. The next year, about the 27. of March, the King begins his journy 1639. for Scotland, whom his Army followed under the conduct of the Earl of Arun∣del, accompanied with most of the English Nobility; the two Armies pitched their Tents in view of each other, but there was no resolution or desire in either side to fight; therefore a Peace was concluded the same year in Iune:
but when the King returned to London, the Articles of the Peace were pub∣likely burned, which again incensed the Scots, so that the next year they raised another Army; upon which the King summons a Parliament in April, for 1640. raising of mony and new forces against the Scots; but finding his people a∣verse either to contribute men or mony, he dissolves the Parliament in May, which both discontented the English, and encouraged the Scots, on the 17. of August following, to enter England, and possesse themselves of Newcastle. Hereupon the King raiseth new forces to resist the Scots; but the new-raised Souldiers grew mutinous, killed divers of their Officers, and would neither march nor fight: Yet the Clergie desisted not to animate both the King and people against the Scots, and in their Convocation gave a great summe to  maintain the war. The Lords are commanded to attend the King in this Northern expedition. About the midst of October the former year, the Spanish Fleet, close by the English shore, for want of powder and ammunition (which they alleadged the King had promised them) were defeated by the Hollanders: There were in this Fleet 8000 Spaniards, which should have been planted among the Wallons, and so many of them to be transported into Spain. About the same time also, a Bill is exhibited against the Londoners, for some misdemeanors committed by their Under-officers about London-Derry; wherefore in the Star-chamber the Londoners are fined, and their Plantation forfeited to the King, whereupon the Citizens would not contribute or advance any sums of mony towards this expedition against the Scots. When the King saw he could raise no mony, and that the common-souldiers would not engage; upon the earnest intreaties of the Lords, he summons a Parliament at Westminster, the 3. of November. But before we conclude this History, I will speak a little more fully of these fatal begun troubles in Scotland. When the King understood what Forces were raising there, he sends to Marquis Douglasse, to the Earle of Nidsdale, to Traquair the Treasurer, to Roxburgh and other Lords of his side, to be ready 1639. with their Forces: but the Covenanters seise upon all the arms and ammuni∣on in Scotland, and send 10000 foot, with 4000 horse, and 30 peeces of canon, against Aberden, which held out for the King, and whither he meant to send great forces. Of the Nobility that stood out for the King, were about twenty Lords and Earls, of the Covenanters about eight and twenty. When the King was come to Barwick, he understood that the Scots Army was divided into two bodies; one under Hume, of 8000. not far from Barwick; the other of 5000. under Iohnston neer Carlisle. To these the King sends his Heralds with a Proclamation, commanding them not to come neer the borders of England, for then he will construe it as an invasion: They on the other side send him a Petition, desiring their complaints may be heard, and grievances redressed. Upon this, Arundel with other Lords are named by the King to confer with the Scots Commissioners, and to know their grievances: They desire that the King would by Parliament ratifie the Articles of Glascow. 2. That all Church-affairs in Scotland may be determined by their Generall Assemblies, and that all Civil matters may be decided by Parliament, which they desire may be held every second or third year. 3. That the King would withdraw both his Ships and Land-forces, and restore to the Scots their Ships again. 4. That all the Incendiaries and seditious persons who were fled into England, may be sent home to be tryed and punished. 5. That the King would confirm  their Lawes, Religion, and Priviledges. The King was not well pleased with these particulars; therefore the Lord Lowden desires him, that he would but confirm their Religion and Liberties according to the Ecclesiastical and Civil lawes of Scotland, and that should con∣tent them: Upon this, the King declares, That he will confirm the Canons of the Assembly of Glascow, concerning
the abolition of the Liturgie, High-Commission,  Book of Canons, with the five Articles of Perth; That the Mini∣sters shall be bound to take no other Oath at their admission, but what is pre∣scribed in Parliament, and that the Bishops shall stand to the censure of the General Assembly of Glascow; and that all things shall be determined by the Assembly and Parliament which shall be held in Edinburgh the next August, in which an Act of Oblivion shall passe, and at which he will be present himself; and withall he promiseth to restore their ships and goods, and to recall his fleet, conditionally they will disarm and disband their Armies, and dissolve their tables and meetings, and that they will restore his Forts and Castles, with their Ammunition, as likewise the Crown, Scepter and Sword, with his other Royal ornaments; and besides, that they will suffer his good subjects to enjoy their  lands and liberties, which have been detained from them since the last Assembly. The peace being concluded, and the Armies disbanded, the King is received into Edingburgh with great solemnity, and his Castles are restored, on condi∣tion that they shall not be victualled for above four and twenty hours at a time. But shortly after the King declared, that he would have the Bishops sit in the General Assembly, which was denied; and the Bishops were excomuni∣cated, and withal two hundred thousand pounds is demanded to be raised up∣on the Bishops lands and estates, for satisfaction of the damages sustained by  the detention of the ships in England: the Parliament then sitting, rather fa∣voured the Assembly then hindred it, or discountenanced their proceedings, wherefore the King would have adjourned the Parliament till Iune the next year, which could not be assented to; but four Deputies are sent to the King to compose all differences. In the interim, new forces are raised both in England and Ireland, whilst the Scots Commissioners are kindly entertained at Court; 1640. but the Scots being jealous (because their Commissioners were so long de∣tained in suspence) that the King meant to keep them as prisoners, when his Army was ready to march, they seized upon two English Lords, whom they meant to detain till their Commissioners were returned. The Presbyterian Scots understanding that hoth the Armies of England and Ireland were ready to march, enter presently into a Covenant which they called National, and tax the tenth part of their estates toward maintenance of the war; sixteen thousand men are raised under the conduct of Argile, to guard the Sea-coast, and hinder the Irish forces from landing: The like num∣ber is to be in readinesse against the King begins his march. They would not suffer Generall Ruven, governour then of Edinburgh-Castle, to repair a part of the wall that was fallen down; nor would they suffer the Garrison-souldiers to go out and in, but at their devotion; therefore they place a guard of five hundred men before the Castle gate, and raised a Fort in the Town to keep the  Castle in awe, and raised a Rampart to keep off the bullets that might be shot against the City. Mean while the English Fleet puts to Sea; and the Land-forces of England consisting of forty thousand, are divided into three bodies, under Hamilton, Goring, and Northumberland. The Scots main body consisted of thirty thou∣sand under General Lesly in Lothien, the rest of their Army was employed to guard the borders and coasts on all sides, to wit, six thousand under the Lord Leviston near Kelso; Lothien and Iohnson had the command of eight thousand on the Western marches; Rothes and Lindsey commanded fifteen thousand in Fife; Montrosse and the Earl Marshal encamped near Aberden with twelve  thousand, besides they had a garrison of two thousand within the City. Argile guards the coast on the Irish-seas with sixteen thousand. In the interim the Lord Lowden one of the four Scots Commissioners, is sent to the Tower, for having about him a copy of the Scots Declaration which had been burned. This incensed the Scots so much the more, complaining that the imprisoning of their Commissioner was
against the Law of Nations; the King sends Com∣missioners  to examine him in the Tower, to whom he would not answer, being a subject of Scotland, where he ought to be examined and tried by his Peers; and also told them, that what he was accused of was acted before the Pacifica∣tion 1639. when an Act of oblivion passed. Hereupon he is enlarged and im∣ployed by the King in a new Commission into Scotland, to settle the troubles there. Whilst these things are acting, Edinburgh raiseth two Batteries against the Castle, the great Ordnance play upon each other without any great hurt; at length the Governour is summoned to deliver up the Castle within fifteen dayes; which time being expired, and the Castle not likely to be surrendred, the great Artillery from the batteries plaid so furiously on it, that a breach was  made in the wall; there were also two Mines sprung which did great hurt, the Governours son lost his arm by a canon-bullet; at last they come to a parley, the Governour desires to acquaint the King with the state of the Castle before he deliver it up, which was granted by the City, and so followed a cessation from hostility. The Scots in the interim (whose intention at first was onely to stand upon their own defence) to keep their souldiers from idlenesse, enter England with thirty thousand; fifteen thousand march into Cumberland, and the other fifteen thousand. into Northumberland, with a Declaration that they come in as friends, not as enemies, for no other end but to have a ratification of the last years Treaty; they promise also to take nothing but what they shall pay for. The King being at York with six thousand horse, and eighteen thousand foot, understood that the Scots were marching towards Newcastle, therefore sends fifteen hundred horse, with a battalion of Infantry to dispute the pas∣sage over the Tine; a skirmish followed, in which four hundred of the English were slain, and two hundred Scots, whose Army being far greater then the other, caused them to retreat. Then the Scots for two hours lay siege to New∣castle, which upon the first summons opened their gates. Then the Scots make themselves masters of Hartpool, and of two Castles on the Tine. Upon this the King sends to them to know their demands, and withall disswades them from advancing any further with their Army; the Scots return a petition to the King, wherein they desire a free Parliament for ending of all differences, and setling of a solid peace; the English Lords being assembled at York, desire like∣wise of the King that he would call a Parliament, which at last was assented to, and five and twenty thousand pounds Sterling was assigned to the Scots towards the defraying of their charges; in the mean time the Castle of Edin∣burgh is delivered up, and some English horse, with five hundred of their foot, (which were sent from Barwick to Dunce, to carry away nine peeces of Ordnance left there by the Scots) are defeated and slain by the Lord Had∣dington. Hitherto we have seen King Charles in his glory: but now, [Nox atra caput tristi circumvolat umbra] The bright day of his Reign is overcast with a dark Virgil. and dismal cloud. The morning of his day shined out clear, but it was shut up in a dismal evening: Quem dies vidit veniens superbum Hunc dies vidit fugiens jacentem. Seneca. Whom Phaebus rising sow with Glory croun'd, Him Phaebus setting sees flat on the ground. In the tragedy of his life, we may see the catastrophe of humane felicity. Kings are crowned with thorns as well as with gold; and with Peter they walke upon the waters; their heads like Nebuchadnezzars Image are of gold, but their feet are of clay; they live like gods, but dye like men:
Quisquamne regno gandet? O fallax bonum, Quanum malorum, quam fronte blanda tegis? U alta ventos semper excipiunt juga, Rupemque saxis vasta dirimentem freta, Seneca. Quamvis quieti verberant fluctus maris: Imperia sic excelsa fortunae objacent. ho'l dote on Kingdomes? O mans vanitie! What mischiefs under smiling faces lie? As storms rage most on Hils, and as the Rocks Which part the Sea, are subject to its knocks: So highest Principalities and Crowns Are liable to angry Fortunes frowns. And here I will conclude, being arrived into the wish'd for Harbour: & nunc immensum spatiis confecimus aequor: I have sailed over a great Sea, and it's time to cast anchor. I will not venture upon the stormy rocks, quick-sands, contrary tides, and whirlpools of these last ten years, lest I make shipwrack, and so be forced to hang up my wet cloaths in Neptunes temple: Ne me tabula sacer votiva paries indicet uvida suspendisse potenti vestimenta maris Deo. In the mean while, let us beseech Almighty God, who hath set bounds to the Sea,  and to its proud waves, who holdeth the winds in his fist, whose word is ful∣filled by fire and hail, snow, vapour and stormy wind, that he will be pleased to appease this storm which hath lasted so many years among us, and to asswage this tempestuous wind, worse then Euroclydon, which vexed St. Paul and his passengers; that he would bring again the Sun and Stars so long hid from us, and that he would conduct the weather-beaten ship of this Church and State into the harbour of Tranquility; that at last enjoying some serenity and Halcion dayes, we may sit securely under our Vines and Fig-trees, and sing the songs of Sion in our own Land. Amen. FINIS.
A BRIEF CHRONOLOGY OF THE Principal Passages Faln out in the WORLD: FROM THE MACEDONIAN KINGDOM, TILL The last TEN YEARS: Divided into 180 DECADS, containing 1800 YEARS; BY ALEXANDER ROSSE. LONDON, Printed for Iohn Saywell, and are to bee sold at his Shop, at the sign of the Greyhound in little-Britain, without Adlersgate, M. DC. LII.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFULL Sr JUSTINIAN EISOM, KNIGHT and BARONET. SIR; AS Aeneas after seven Years tossing and tumbling up∣on the impetuous Billows of the angry and enraged Sea (Per Syrtes & inhospita saxa) was at last so happy as to cast Anchor in his long-wish'd for Harbour, (Sedes ubi Fata quietas osten∣dunt;) So I having some Years crossed the Ocean of History, (where likewise I have been crossed by Storms and contrary Winds and Tides) at last have sheltered my Weather-beaten Historicall-Ship, under the Lee-shore of a knowing and honourable Patron. I have adventured also to secure this Chronologicall Cock-Boat under the Cliffe of your Protection, being throughly acquainted with your Worth, Ingenuity, and Learning. That Latin-Piece you set me upon, wherein I shew how farr short the Latin Poets are of Virgill, is not as yet come to perfection;
in the interim I was desirous, as an  earnest of that, to present you with this Piece; not doubting but ere long I shall be able to give a full account of my Pains in the other; So with a thank∣full recognition of your Favours towards me, I take leave, and will ever be found (SIR) Your humble servant, ALEXANDER ROSSE.
A brief CHRONOLOGIE Of the Principall Passages since the end of the MACEDONIAN KINGDOME till these present Times, according to the years of CHRIST, before or after his Birth: Divided into Decads. IOnathas brother to Iudas is made General of the Jewes. Yea. bef. Chr. Demetrius encroacheth on his Neighbours, is overcome and slain by A∣lexander the supposed son of Epiphanes. 158 The Dalmatian War, and then the Spanish under Claudus, Lucullus, and Scipio. Simon succeedeth Ionathas, he takes Gaza, raseth Sion, &c. is slain with his two sons Matta∣thias 148 and Iudas; Iohn escapeth. Ptolomy Physcon or Evergetes marrieth Cleopatra the mother, kills her son, and then mar∣rieth her daughter. The third Punic War, and Carthage destroyed. Iohn Hyrcanus succeeds his father, besiegeth Ptolomy, makes peace with Antiochus Pius, de∣molisheth the Temple on Mount Garizim, reneweth the League with the Romans, be∣siegeth 138 and takes Samaria. The Servil war in Sicily. Numantia destroyed. Demetrius freed from the Parthian captivity, to him succeeds his son Antiochus Gryphus. 128 Fabius recovereth Lusitania, and cuts off the right hands of all the Rebels. Pompey is beaten by the Numantines. Antiochus Cyzicenus brother to Grypus, makes war against him. 118 Ptolomy Lathurus or Lamyrus reigns four years with his Mother, by whom he is expelled. The Romans make war against the Thracians, and Dalmatians, and Mithridates King of Pontus and Iugurtha. Aristobulus the first King of Iudaea since Zedechias. 108 Ptolomy Lathurus kills his Mother, and assumes again the Government. The Romans make war against the Cymbrians. Alexander Iamnaeus son of Hircanus, brother to Aristobulus, obtains divers Victories against 98 his enemies. Ptolomy Alexander, Cleopatra's other son, is forced by her to marry Selene, taken from Pto∣lomy Lathurus by Cleopatra. At Rome, Metellus is banished and revoked. Marius raiseth sedition at home, and stirs up Mithridates abroad. Rutilius condemned for extortion in Asia. Livius Drusus slain for raising sedition. The Marsi and others in Italy make war against the Romans.
Hanna the Prophetesse becometh a widow; the Pharisees overcome Alexander; he cruci∣fieth the authors of the Rebellion, and kills their wives and children; he falls sick of a 88 Quartan Ague, which held him three years till his death. Tigranes King of Armenia is invited by the Syrians, over whom he reigneth 18. years in peace. Aretas King of Arabia obtaineth Damascus, by killing Antiochus Dionysius the fifth brother of Seleucus. Latharus returns to his Kingdome of Aegypt. Pompey, father, to Pompey the Great, defeateth the Piceni, with others. Scylla overcommeth the Samnites. Sulpitius slain by Scylla, Cato by the Marsi, Octavius and Merula by Cinna. Scylla hath diver Victories. Rome besieged by Marius, Carbo, Cinna and Sertorius. Pompey kil∣led with thunder, Cinna stoned, Marius slain. Alexandra Sabonne, wife of Iamnaeus, great with the Pharisees. Ptolomy Anletes, so called from his delight in Musical Instruments, King of Aegypt, he was 78 father to Cleopatra the wife of M. Antony, he dieth about this time. Antiochus Cizicerus urks in Cilicia till Tigranes was defeated by Lucullus, who again re∣stores him to his Kingdome of Syria. At Rome, Scylla tyrannizeth, then dieth. Lepidus defeated. Sertorius rebels in Spain, who beats Pompey and Metellus, Mithridates overcome by Lucullus, the Dardani by Scribonius, Cassius by Spartacus, who is at last defeated and slain by Crassus: Nicomedes of Bithynia makes Rome his heir; It's made a Province. Aristobulus possesseth two and twenty Castles, overcomes Hircanus, and deposeth him. An∣tipater, Herods father, attempts the restoring of Hircanus. Aretas the Arabian besiegeth 68 Aristobulus in Ierusalem, the siege raised by Pompey, who takes Ierusalem; he heareth at Damascus the difference between the two brothers, and giveth the Priesthood to Hirca∣nus, but not the Kingdome, and carrieth Aristobulus with his two sons to Rome, Alexan∣der the younger escapeth. Syria with Cilicia is made a Province by Pompey; Tigranes submits to him, who deposeth Antiochus for not keeping his Kingdome when he had it. At Rome the Capitol is rebuilt. Metellus ends the three years war in Crete, called therefore Creticus. Pompey ends the Pyratical war, and hath divers victories. Catelines Conspi∣racy defeated. Clodius defloureth Pompeia. Pompey triumpheth. Helvetians attempt Gaule. Alexander the Jew submits to Gabinus, then rebels, and is defeated. Crassus robs the Tem∣ple 58 of Ierusalem. In Syria, Gabinius is President; he brings seventeen millions to Rome, is banished, and Crassus sent in his place, who was slain by the Parthians, and melted gold put in his mouth. The Parthians expelled out of Syria by Cassius. In Aegypt, Ptolomy is deposed by his Subjects, is restored by Pompey; his daughter whom the Aegyptians made their Queen, strangleth her husband, and marrieth one Archelaus; both are killed by Gabinius, when Ptolomy was restored; To him succeeds Ptolomy Dio∣nysius, with his sister and wife Cleopatra. At Rome, Crassus, Pompey, and Caesar make a league; Caesar subdues the Galliceans, hath Il∣lyria and Gaule assigned him for five years, makes war with the Gauls nine years, defea∣teth Ariovistus, makes an attempt upon Brittain, envied by Pompey, he had many victo∣ries, he retains his Army for his own defence. Cicero banished and restored. Aristobulus released by Caesar, and slain by the Pompeians, his son Alexander beheaded by Scipio at Antioch. Antipater made Governour of Iudaea, who makes Phaselus his eldest son 48 Governor of Ierusalem, and Herod of Galilee, who was in danger for executing Ezechias the thief, but acquitted by Hyrcanus. The Jews made Citizens of Rome. Antipater poy∣soned by Malichus, and is killed by Herod, whom Cassius makes Governour of Cael-Sy∣ria. Antigonus son of Aristobulus invades Galilee, whom Herod expelleth, who with Pha∣selus are made Tetrarchs of Iudaea by Antony. Atigonus takes
Ierusalem by meanes of  Pacorus the Pathian, and lends Hircanus and Phaselus bound to Galilee. Phaselus dasheth out his own brains. Herod escaped into Aegypt. In Aegypt, Ptolomy banisheth Cleopatra, who takes Caesar for her Protector. Ptolomies Tutors kill Pompey. Ptolomy defeated by Caesar, and is drowned. Alexandria and the Library burnt by Caesar, who setleth Cleopatra; she poysoneth her brother, and kills her sister Arsinoe; she dissolves a Pearl in Vinegar; Antony doats on her. At Rome, the civil war between Caesar and Pompey lasted four years; Pompey defeated in Pharsalia, and flyeth into Aegypt; Caesar hath divers Victories, and is made Dictator; Pompey's son stirred up by Cato and others to renew the war; Scipio slain; Cato kills himself; Caesar subdues Africk, makes Numidia a Province, defeats Pompey's son in Spain, and kills him, reformes the Kalendar, and is slain with 23 wounds. Herod made King of Iudaea, gets many Victories, takes Ioppe, recovers Galilee, overthrows Antigonus, marries Mariamne the Neece of Hircanus, takes Ierusalem, and beheads Antigo∣nus, 38 so ends the Asmonaean Race; Aristobulus drowned by Herod; he overcomes the Arabians, and puts Hircanus to death, and is at Rhodes confirmed King. Syria is regained by Ventidius from Pacorus the Parthian. At Rome, Octavius and Antony are reconciled; Sext. Pompeius seizeth on the Corn going for Rome, with whom Octavius hath war; at last Pompey flyeth into Parthia, and is kil∣led. Lepidus resigns his Triumvirate. Antony hath bad successe in Parthia; The Dalma∣tian and Panonian war; Africk, Iudaea, and Spain subdued; Mauritania made a Pro∣vince; divers other places subdued; Octavius and Antony at variance about Cleopatra; the battel at Actium; Antony is defeated, and kils himself. In Iudaea, Mariamne executed, with Alexandra, and others of Antigonus his Faction by He∣rod; His buildings at Ierusalem, at Samaria, which he called Sebaste, and Caesaria, called 28 Stratons Tower. In Aegypt, Cleopatra kills her self; Aegypt is made a Province. At Rome, the Temple of Ianus is shut; Octavius triumpheth, and is called Augustus. Gallus President of Aegypt is banished, and kills himself; Spain subdued; the Pantheon built; Tyber breaks in upon Rome. In Iudaea, Herod builds a Temple of white Marble to Augustus, reedifieth the Temple of Ie∣rusalem, 18 and builds the Tower Antonia, he brings back his two sons from Rome. Agrippa entertained by Herod at Ierusalem; he accuseth his two sons Aristob. and Alexander by Mariamne. At Rome, Augustus confines the Senate to a lesse number; Agrippa recovereth the Roman Ensigns taken by Mithridates, and regains the Colours which were lost by Crassus and Antony. Augustus adopteth Agrippa's sons by his daughter. Agrippa overcommeth the Spanish slaves, and the Bosphori, but refuseth a Triumph. Tiberius subdueth the Panonii, and is made Colleague to Augustus. Drusus overcommeth the Frisians. In Iudaea, Herod is reconciled to Augustus, he accuseth his sons, and they are executed. An∣tipater conspireth against his father, and is put to death; A Tax is imposed on the Jews 8 by Cyrenius. Iohn the Baptist is born, and six moneths after our Saviour Jesus Christ: Herod commands the children of Bethleem to be murthered, he dieth shortly after; Arche∣laus succeeds: Antipater Tetrarch of Galilee, and Philip of Trachonitis: At the Passeover 3000. Jws slain. At Rome, Claudius the son of Drusus is born, Drusus is killed with a fall from his horse: Tiberius triumpheth, and hath the Tribunes power for five years, to keep under Caius and Lucius, Augustus his Nephews: A general Tax over the Roman world; the Temple of Ianus shut the third time. Varus President of Syria pillageth the countrey. Caius Caesar parteth Herods lands among his children. Lollius being accused of Treason, slew himself. Augustus forbids any man to
call him Lord.  Christ is born in Bethleem. Archelaus confirmed by Augustus. Christ flyeth into Aegypt. Arche∣laus marrieth incestuously with his brother Alexanders widow; is accused to the Senate 1 for his cruelty, for which he is banished to Vienna; And Iudaea annexed to the Province of Syria. At Rome, Augustus adopteth Tiberius. Armenia is left by the Parthian to the Romans. Ario∣barzanes governour of Armenia. Cinna conspireth against Augustus, is pardoned and made Consul. Agrippa Nephew to Augustus banished for his insolencies; and Iulia, Au∣gustus his daughter for adultery. Germanicus makes war in Dalmatia. Ovid banished. Vespasian born. Magicians and Astrologers expelled Rome, the Panonians sue for peace. In Iudaea, the Samaritans prophane the Temple; Christ disputeth there: Iudas Gaulonites 10 raiseth a sedition. Caesarea Philippi built by Philip the Tetrarch, in honour of Augustus. The Jews are expelled Rome and Italy, and employed against the Samaritns. In Syria Varus is governour; he being defeated by Arminius, kils himself in Germany. The Romans under Tiberius break league with the Goths, who therefore waste Maesia. Augustus dieth at Nola; Tiberius succeeds, who puts Agrippa to death, and famisheth Iulia. Tyber overfloweth. Germanicus hath divers victories, and triumpheth over the Catti, &c. not long after he is poysoned by Piso, who being accused of this murther kils himself. Zeno king of Armenia makes peace with Parthia. In Iudaea, Pilate is president, who upon the Jews threats, removes his standards with the sta∣tue of Tiberius, out of the Temple into Caesarea: He takes also the Corban or Treasure 20 out of the Temple, and with it pays for the publique water-works. Herod Antipas builds Tyberias, divorceth his wife Areta, and marrieth Herodias his brother Philips wife, and then beheadeth the Baptist; for which he is defeated by the Arabians: Christ is Bap∣tized. At Rome, the Players are expelled the City: Pompey's Theatre repaired by Tyberius, and the statue of Sejanus erected in it. Livia poysoneth her husband Drusus, and lyeth with Sejanus, who destroys the friends of Germanicus. Taefarinas killed by Dolobella. Sejanus put to death, his son strangled, his daughter defloured, then murthred. Ti∣beris goeth into Campania, then to Capreae, upon the burning of Mount Caelius. Agrip∣pina bears Nero to Domitius. At Fidenae the Amphitheater kils with its fall 50000. people. Tiberius his hatred against the family of Germanicus. In this ten years space the French, Thracians, and Fristans rebell. In Iudaea Christ suffereth, after him St. Stephen; and St. Iames is Bishop of Ierusalem: the Disciples are persecuted; St. Paul, the Eunuch, and Samaria converted. Paul preacheth 30 in Arabia, Iames in Spain. Peter healeth Aenaeas, and raiseth Tabitha. Cornelius converted; Paul and Barnabas expelled Antioch by the Jews. Pilate writes to Tiberius about Christs Miracles. Herod Agrippa imprisoned at Rome for wishing Tiberius dead; he is released by Caligula, and made King of Iudaea, and gives him a golden Chain which he hanged up in the Temple. Philip dyeth, his Tetrarchy annexed to Syria. Herod banished by Caligula to Lions, whom Herodias follows, his Tetrarchy is given to Agrippa. Caiphas the High-Priest kills himself. At Rome, Nero son of Germanicus is starved by Tiberius, so was Agrippina wife to Germani∣cus. Tiberius rageth and tyrannizeth over the people and Nobility; he hath wa, then makes peace with Artabanus King of Parthia. Caligula succeeds, he spends a hundred millions in three years, abuseth his three sisters, wished the Romans had but one neck, makes himself a God, executeth many innocent people in sport, pillageth France and Spain, employes his Army to gather Cockle-shells on the Brittish shore: he had two books called the Sword and Dagger, in which he writes the names of those he meant to murther. Nero the Emperour, and Titus Vespasian are born.
In Iudaea, Petronius is commanded by Caligula to set up his statue in the Temple. Agrippa having obtained Ierusalem and Samaria of Claudius without tribute, was struck with 40 vermin and died. Iudaea again is made a Province. Theudas for an insurrection is be∣headed. Paul and Barnabas stay two years at Iconium. St. Matthew writes his Gospel. The name Christians begins at Antioch; St. Iames is beheaded; St. Peter delivered out of prison miraculously; St. Mark is Bishop of Alexandria; Paul stoned at Lystra; the Apostles Synod at Ierusalem; Barnabas and Mark saile to Cyprus; Paul and Sylas passe through Syria; Timothy is circumcised; Many Jews smothered between the Temple-Gates upon a sedition. At Rome, Caligula is slain. Claudius succeeds; his wife Messalina insatiable in lust: He makes war with the Britains, from which he cals his son Britanicus: He depriveth the Rhodians of their priviledges, for killing some Romans. Vespatian goeth into Britain; he renews the secular Playes. Messalina and her Paramour Silius are both slain. Claudius marrieth Agrippina his brother Germanicus daughter, who by her per∣swasions adopts her son Nero, and recals Seneca, whom he makes his Tutor. Vespatian takes the Isle of Wight; and Claudius, Orkney: the Britains and Picts yeeld to the Ro∣mans. Asinius Pollio is banished; and Valerius the Consul kils himself. In Iudaea, Cumanus the Governour maintaineth a faction between the Jws and Samari∣tans, 50 which was the destruction of many; wherefore he is banished, and Foelix set in his place; who marrieth Drusilla, Agrippa's sister, and puts Ionathan the High-priest to death, and tyrannizeth over the Jews. To Foelix succeeds Portius Festus. Lydia, and Den∣nis the Areopagite. Iustus and Crispus are converted. Paul writes his two Epistles to the Thessalonians, his first Epistle to Timothy, his two Epistles to the Corinthians, to Titus, to the Romans, and his other epistles. St. Luke writes his Gospel. Philip is crucified at Hierapolis. Paul fighteth with beasts at Ephesus, raiseth Eutichus, is imprisoned at Caesarea; appeals to Caesar: his ship-wrack and imprisonment. At Rome is a great famine. Nero marrieth Octavia, daughter to Claudius, who by Agrip∣pina his wife is poysoned. Caractacus General of the Britains brought to Rome. Nero succeeds to Claudius, a good Emperour for the first five years: he poysoneth Britani∣cus, fearing that Agrippina would make him Emperour: He builds an Amphitheatre in Campo martis. Ianus Temple shut the fifth time. Artaxata the chief City of Arme∣nia taken by Corbalo. Poppaea Sabina becomes Nero's Concubine: he commits incest with his mother, then murthers her; he institutes the Quinquennal games, called Neronia: a thunder-bolt struck the Cup out of his hand: he committed many works of darknes in the night. In Iudaea, the Jews and Agrippa differ, about a Prospect which he erected on his house. 60 Annanias High-Priest, and son of Annas, is deposed for stoning of St. Iames. Iesus A∣nanus foretels Ierusalems destruction. Agrippa beautifieth Caesarea Philippi, and cals it Nero∣niades. The building of the Temple is finished: strange Prodigies and Apparitions were seen at Ierusalem. Florus for his cruelty is slain by the Jews, and six thousand Ro∣mans. Agrippa stoned out of the City. Vespasian is sent thither, who takes divers places. Titus is left to end the war. Three factions in Ierusalem, with a horrible famine, in which a woman eat her childe; at last it is taken by Titus. In Rome, Nero kils his wife Octavia, and marrieth his Whore Poppaea: by Suetonius he over∣comes the Brittans, and expels Vologesus the Parthian king out of Armenia: in a wo∣mans habit he marrieth Pythagoras; he sets Rome on fire, and sings Homers Iliades. Upon the discovering of a plot, he kils Seneca, Lucan, and many more: he kicks Poppoea great with childe, and kils her. He crowns Tiridates king of Armenia, at Rome. He goeth into Greece with his Fidlers, marrieth Sporus an Eunuch; attempts to cut the Isthmus in Peloponnesus: is proclaimed an enemy to the State, and murthers himself. Galba suc∣ceeds, who is slain by Otho; he kils himself being defeated by Vitellius, who also after nine moneths is killed. The Church begins to b persecuted generally under Nero. St Mark having written his Gospel from St. Lukes mouth, is slain at Alexandria: St. Luke writes the Acts; St. Paul returns into Italy, and writes his second Epistle to Timothy. Ioseph of Aramathaea converts the Britains: the Christians are secretly warned out of Ierusalem. St. Iohns
Gospel written at Ephesus; Peter and Paul suffer at Rome. Menander the Heretick, father of the Gnosticks, makes himself the Saviour of man. The Nazarens observe the Law with the Gospel. In Iudaea, Titus commands the two Drachmes usually offered to the Temple, to be payed 70 to the Capitol; the ornaments and wealth of the Temple brought to Rome, and laid up in the Temple of Peace. Many miseries befall the Jews. The Temple of Onias at He∣liopolis is shut up by Vespasians command. At Rome, Vespasian is Emperour, who with Titus triumphs over the Jews. The Batavi∣ans are brought to obedience: He expels the Philosophers out of Rome for some abu∣ses: He dedicates the Temple of Peace; and the Temple of Ianus shut the sixth time. Ichaia, Greece, and divers other places made Provinces; The Sarmatians invade Maesia; He sets the Image of the Sun upon Nero's statue, instead of Nero's head: The Alani waste Media and Armenia; Two Senators plot Vespasians death; he dieth of a Flux; Titus suc∣ceeded for two years; he built an Amphitheater, at the dedication of which 5000. beasts slain. In the Church Linus succeeds St. Peter; the Nazarens held there was but one soule in substance of man, beast, and plant. At Rome, the Capitol is fired from heaven, which is consumed with many fair buildings. 80 Titus dyeth, the delight of mankind; whom Domitian succeeds, the Fly-catcher, and an excellent Archer; he repudiates his wife, and marrieth his brothers widow Iulia; he makes Lawes against Adultery, and Gelding; he kills his cousin Flavius Sabinus, and causeth more Corn to be sowed, and lesse Vines planted; The Capitol is rebuilt. A∣gricola having subdued the Brittains, passeth over to Ireland, then is made Governour of Syria. Philosophers and Mathematicians expelled Rome. Nerva banished, and recalled. Playes appointed every fourth year to Iupiter. Capitolinus his tyranny over the Sena∣tors; he assumes divine titles. Agricola subdueth Fife in Scotland. In the Church, to Linus, who was martyred, succeeded Cletus, or Anacletus. St. Andrew crucified in Achaio. The Nicholaitan Hereticks held promiscuous Marriages, and the creation of all earthly things by Angels: The Ebionites called also Sampsei and Elcesaitae denyed Christs Divinity, and rejected St. Pauls Epistles, and all the Gospels except St. Matthews: Corinthus denyes Maries Virginity, makes Iesus and Christ two different per∣sons, held Circumcision, and are the first Millenaries; St. Iohn would not stay with him in the Bath. At Rome, Domitian triumpheth over the Dacians and Germans; he unjustly buried alive 90 Cornelia, the chief Vestal virgin. The Romans lose divers Armies. Decebalus the Gothish King, deludeth the Romans by putting Armour on the stumps of Trees; he murth∣reth divers, and puts all the Line of David to death; he intended to kill his wife, with many others, who conspire and murther him. Cocceius Nerva succeeded, who ruled well, and repealed all Domitians Acts; he died after one year and four moneths; Tra∣janus whom he adopted, succeeded for 19. years, a just Emperour, whose Tutor was Plutarch. The Church is persecuted the second time by Domitian. Iohn having escaped the scal∣ding Oyle, is banished into Pathmos, where he writes his Revelation. St. Dennis is beheaded at Paris; Timothy stoned at Ephesus. Protasius and Garvasius suffer at Millan; Flav. Clemens the Consul slain for Christianity; his wife Domicilla is banished into Pontus; Clemens Pope ten years. At Rome, Trajan refuseth Consulship; The Dacian wars lasted five years; He defeats Dece∣balus, 100 and renews the Sword-playing; he builds a Bridge over Danubius, and over∣throws Decebalus, who for grief kills himself at Zarmis or Alba Iulia; his treasure is found hid in the River; the Bridge is broken down, and Colonies planted in
Tran∣silvania;  he erects a Library and Columne at Rome, he hath divers Victories in the East; Nero's golden house burnt; he builds a Fleet in the Red Sea; he is stiled Optimus. In the Church, a third persecution is raised by Trajan. Iohn dieth at Ephesus, whose successor was Onesimus. Simeon Bishop of Ierusalem is crucified. Ignatius Bishop of Antioch is sent bound to Rome, where he is torn by the Lions. Onesimus, St. Pauls Disciple, is stoned. Clemens bound to an anchor, and cast into the sea. Anacletus succeeded for 10 years. At Rome, the Pantheon is burnt by lightning. Trajan in the East beats the Kings of Ar∣menia 110 and Parthia. Armenia, Mesopotamia, and Assyria made Provinces. Trajan's Column finished: He takes Nisibis, Edesse, and burns Seleucia: He is endangered by the Earth∣quake at Antioch: He makes the Haven at Ancona navigable: He dieth at Seleucia; his bones are buried under his Column. Adrian succeeded for 20 yeares; he kills Palma and other brave men; he subdueth the Sauromatae; he gives Armenia and Mesopotomia to Cosroes. The Britains, Scots, and Picts rebell. In the Church, the persecution ceaseth, upon Pliny's letters in behalf of the Christians to Trajan. Papias S. Iohns disciple Bishop of Hierapolis, maintaineth the Millinaries Sect. Quadratus Bishop of Athens, who lived in the time of Christ, died about the time of Hadrian. Anacletus martyred. At Rome, Adrian forbid men and women to use one Bath: he builds Adrianopolis in Thrace, 120 sends Antoninus Proconsul into Asia, and visits all the Roman provinces: He plants Colonies in Cyrene and Lybia; He honours Platina, Trajans widow, with a Temple, for by her he got the Empire: He makes a wall in Britain, to keep out the Scots: He di∣sputes at Athens with the Philosophers: He setleth the Provinces in Africk, and erect∣eth a Library at Athens, and a monument to his dead Horse. In the Church, Evaristus a Greek is Pope 9 years, and then is martyred. In Asia, the Christians are persecuted by Antoninus. Alexander the first is Pope 10 years; he brought in Holy-water. Divers Apologies written in the Christians behalf, which made A∣drian stay the persecution, and was minded to build them a Church, but was hindred by their enemies. At Rome, Adrian makes his own Tombe, called Moles Adriani: He builds a City to his 130 favourite Antonius, who was drowned in Egypt; he rebuilds Ierusalem, and calls it Aelia. The Jews rebell, because he built a Temple to Iupiter there where Solomons Tem∣ple stood; Iulius Severus is sent against them. Adrian dieth, to whom succeeded Antoninus Pius 22 years, who adopted M. Annius Verus, and calls him Aurelius. The Northern Britains rebell, and are subdued by Lollius. In Iudaea, the Jewes are forbid to dwell in Ierusalem. They rebell, and are defeated with their Captain Cochebas, by Severus, who destroyes their Castles and Towns, and wastes all their Country; their Captives are sent into Spain, where they continued 1500 years, till Ferdinand and Emanuel expelled them. In the Church, Pope Alexander is martyred. Sixtus the first succeeds Pope 10 years; be instituted Altars. Iustin, of a Samaritan becomes a Christian: Aquila Ponticus, of a Christian became a Jew; he translated the Bible into Greek, and was cast out of the Church for studying Astrologie. Saturninus the Heretique held Christs body phan∣tastical, that Marriage was the doctrine of Devils, that the Jewes and Christians had two different gods, &c. Basilides the Heretique held, that Christ suffered not, but Simon of Cyrene; that Faith was natural, and divers other wild opinions. At Rome, Antoninus repaireth the decayed Bridge, and forbids the reading of Sybilla's books: 140 He reforms divers abuses; subdues the Moors, Daci, and Alani: He is bountiful to Rhodes and other places shaken with earthquakes. In the Church, Sixtus is martyred. Telesphorus
succeeded 11 years: He appointed Lent-Fast,  and the Hymn [Gloria in excelsis] Mark, the first uncircumcised Bishop of Ierusa∣lem; the debate about the observation of Easter began: Carpocras the Heretick makes Christ a meer man, holds transanimation, denyes the Resurrection, and affirms that Satan made the world; his disciples were called Gnosticks. Cerdon, another Here∣tick, held two Gods, denyed Christs humanity, and the Resurrection, and the Law: Heraclion held the same opinions, and after him Valentinian. Marcus, father of the Marcionites, held the same, and had a peculiar form of Baptism. At Rome, Antoninus causeth persecution to cease, upon the inundation of Tibris, fires, and 150 Earthquakes; he makes men as well as women subject to the Law of Adultery. In the Church, Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna converts many at Rome from Heresies, and then is martyred: Iustin writes his first Apologie: Churches are consecrated, and Witnesses ordained in Baptism by Pope Higinus, who succeeded Telesphorus the Mar∣tyr; he sate four years, and the first that stiled himself Pope: Pius succeeds 9 years; he appointed Nuns, and that Easter should be kept on Sunday; and Fonts in Churches. At Rome, M. Aurelius Antoninus Philosophus reigned 19 years; his brother Luc. Aur. Verus is made Colleague, who marcheth against the Parthian, but dallies at Antioch, but his 160 Army fight successefully, and takes Seleucia, with 40000. Captives: The Catti are expel∣led out of Rhetia: Antoninus makes good Lawes; his son Commodus made Caesar; Per∣tinax defeats the Germans, who had invaded Italy: The Marconian war is begun. Lucius returning home, dyeth by the way of an Apoplexie: The Britains rebell, and are sup∣pressed by Agricola, who repaireth Adrians wall broken down by the Scots and Picts, who had invaded Westmorland. In the Church is raised a fourth Persecution, in which Iustin having written his second Apologie, is beheaded at Rome. Polycarpus differs from Anicetus (who was now Pope 8 years) about the time of Easter; but it was agreed, that each Countrey should use their own custome. Marcion a Bishops son, of a Christian became a Cerdonian: Po∣lycarpus is martyred at Smyrna: Photinus Bishop of Lions suffers with many others: Hegesippus of a Jew becomes a Christian, and writes the Church-story: Melito Bishop of Sardis is also martyred. Pope Anicete ordaines shaving of Priests, and consecrating of Bishops. The Gnosticks about this time lived; they held two Gods, two souls in each faithfull man, Jesus and Christ to be different, that Christ remained 18 months on earth after his Resurrection, and that the world was made by Angels: Tatian held that Adam was damned, Marriage was fornication, Flesh and Wine not be eat and drunk; he held many Gods, and denyed Christ to be of David; of him came the Eucratites: Marcion denyed Christs Divinity, transanimation he held, and rebaptisation as often as marcion fell; he rejected Marriage, the Old Testament, and eating of flesh, he also held all warrs unlawful. At Rome, the Emperour pawnes his Plate and Jewels, to ease the people of Taxes, which 170 afterward he redeemed. Cassius in Armenia calls himself Emperour, and is slain by his Souldiers: The Romans defeat the Marconians, by the Christians prayers: Commodus is made his fathers Colleague, they defeat the Scythians: Antoninus dieth in Panonia: Commodus reigned 12 years, he kept 300 Concubines, and 300 boyes; he killed his sister Lucilia, and ravished the rest: before he subdued the Germans, he triumphed over them. In Britain, Lucius is the first Christian King; he erected three Arch-bishops, and built St. Peters in Cornhill Lond. which was the Cathedrall till Pauls In the Church Pope Anicetus is martyred; his successor Soler sate four years; he or∣dained the Fathers consent, and Priests Benediction in Marriage; to him succee∣ded 180 Eleutherius 15 years; he sends Damianus into Britain to baptize King Lucius and his people. The Ophit Hereticks worshipped the Serpent, holding Christ to be that Serpent which deceived Eve; they denyed the
Resurrection, and Christs humanity.  The Caini held divers of the former opinions; so did the Scethitae, but that these made Seth the Saviour of the world, the others Cain, Ejau, and Iudas. The Adamites were naked in their Assemblies, had women in common in the dark, and denyed Prayer. Montans affirmed himself to be the Holy Ghost, denyed the Trinity, allowed Incest, and baked the bread of the Sacrament with mans blood; his chief disciple was Noetus; Lucian and Apello were Marcions. At Rome, Commodus gives himself to pleasure, and leaves the Government to Perennius, who 180 murthered many Senators, at last he and his son are put to death for treason, and Cle∣ander put in his room, who makes sale of all places and offices. The Daci are subdued by Albinus and Niger: 2000 die daily at Rome of the Plague; the Caitol and Library are burned by Lightning. The Britains after the death of Lucius have civil Wars, and re∣bell, but are subdued again by Marcellus: Pertinax being sent hither, was almost killed by the Souldiers, and is sent away again. The Scots and Picts again break Adrians Wall. In the Church Theodosian makes the third Translation of the Bible; he was a Marcio∣nite, then a Jew. Pantaenus, whose scholler was Clem. Alexandrinus, sets up the first Chri∣stian Schoole at Alexandria: Apollonius the Senator is martyred: The Jews Thalmud is now made: The Pepuzian Hereticks, so called from Pepuza a Phrygian Town, were Montanists; they held Pepuza to be the heavenly Ierusalem mentioned in Scripture: The Apostolici held all things in common, condemned Marriage, thinking the Apo∣stles did so; made Apocryphal Books their Gospel, and refused to admit those into the Church who fell after Baptism: Artolyritae made up their Sacrament of bread and cheese. Originiani and Turpes, so called from their filthy lives, forbidding Marriage, and extolling Fornication. At Rome, Commodus removes the head from the Colossus, and puts his own head on it; 190 He acteth Hercules in a Play, and is at last strangled by Martia his Concubine, and Laetus. The Temples of Vesta, Peace, and others are burned. Pertinax reigned not full three moneths, being slain by the Souldiers, and Did. Iulianus not much above two moneths, being also killed by them; then Niger in Syria, Albinus in Britain, Severus in Panonia, (who reigned 17 years) are made Emperours: Severus defeats Niger, and besiegeth By∣zantium three years; he hath many Victories in the East, and makes Caracalla his son, Caesar; he takes Bizantium, kills Albinus, and sends his head to Rome, where he put 29 Senators to death; he makes Geta his other son, Caesar, and makes Caracalla his Col∣league. The Britains help Albinus against Severus, whom he defeats: Virius Lupus sent to Britain. In the Church, Tertullian being vexed by the Roman Clergy, turns Montanist. Severus the Heretick followed Marcions opinions. Theodosius denied Christs Divinity, and took upon him to alter the Gospel. Quarto-decimani kept Easter on the 14. day of the Moon, and then fasted, they were Antilapsarians. Alogi rejected the Gospel and Apocalypse, saying they were written by Cerinthus; they denied Christ to be the Word, or God. Victor Pope 9 years. At Rome, Severus undertakes an Expedition into the East, and makes League with the King 200 of Armenia; he wasteth Arabia, and mastereth King Abgarus, and hath divers other Victories; he repaireth the Pantheon: Plautianus the Favourite is killed by Caracalla's treacheRy, whose daughter Plautilla his own wife, with her sister, he banisheth: Cara∣calla striving with his brother, breaks his own thigh. Severus with his sons go into Britain, where at York he resides, and makes a wall 132 miles long, then dieth: About this time Scotland receiveth the Faith. Many of the Caledonians massacred for rebelling against the Romans.
In the Church the 5. Persecutionis raised by Severus. Leonidas, Origens father, suffered at Alexandria, so did Philip Governour of Aegypt. Irenaeus Bishop of Lyons, with others, are martyred. Narcissus Bishop of Ierusalem flyeth into the wildernesse: Speratus martyred at Carthage. Symmachus translates the Bible. Zeplirinus is Pope 18 years; he ordained the Eucharist to be received once a year. Hermiani and Seleuciani held the Chaos eternal with God, Angels Creators of mens souls, that Christ left his flesh in the Sun, they denied Baptism and the Resurrection. Praxeas, father of the Patris∣passiani, held that God the Father onely suffered. Melchisedeciani made Melchisedec greater then Christ, whose Divinity they denied. At Rome, Caracalla reigned six years; Geta ruled one year with him, whom he killed in 210 his Mothers armes, and multitudes of his party; he married with Iulia his mother-in-law; he overcomes the Germans, he marcheth into Asia; he murthers the Alexandrian youth, for calling him Oedipus, and his wife Iocasta; burns Aristotles books; treache∣rously murthers the Parthians; is slain by Avitus, Caracalla's Bastard, who succeeds, and is called Heliogabalus, a most luxurious and cruel Prince. The Britains rebel. In the Church, Calixtus is Pope six years; he instituted the four Embers or Fasts before Ordination, and Church-yards: The fifth Edition of the Bible, called Vulgata, found at Iericho. A Councel in Africa about Repabtisation. The Elcesai Hereticks held two Christs, denyed Maries Virginity, deified the Water, rejected Scripture; Angelici ado∣red Angels. Heliogabalus brings his God, the Sun, to Rome, and builds a Temple for him. Bassianus his 220 cousin made Caesar; Heliogabalus is slain with his Mother, and his body dragged and flung into the Tibris; Alexander Severus succeeded thirteen years, a good Prince, he had Christs Picture in his Closet; Ulpian his chief Lawyer and Counsellor is slain by the Souldiers. Armenia invaded by the Persians. In the Church a persecution is raised by Ulpian. Calixtus martyred. Pope Urban suc∣ceeded seven years. Christians begin to build Churches. The sixth Edition of the Bible. Alexander the Emperour goeth against Artaxerxes the Persian, and returns to Antioch with losse; he was severe against corrupt Judges, Harlots, Theeves, and false Notaries; he 230 erects an Hospital for children, triumpheth over the Persians; France invaded by the Germans: He is slain with his Mother Mammaea. Maximinus a tall Goth succeeded two years, a great Trencher-man; he had been a Mulettor; Gordian is set up against him, who hanged himself upon the death of his son: The Senate choose two Emperours, Plbinus and Pupienus, whom the Souldiers slew: Maximinus is slain before Aquileia, and his carkass flung to the dogs; Gordianus succeeded five years. In the Church, Urban being martyred, Pontianus succeeded Pope four years, who being banished, dyed miserably in Sardinia: Anterus succeeded one moneth, who being mar∣tyred, had Fabian for his successor 14 years. Cecilia the Virgin and others are martyred. Origen instructeth Mammaea in the faith, and finisheth his Octopla. The sixth Persecu∣tion is raised, and ends with Maximinus his death. At Rome, Gordian openeth the Temple of Ianus, and defeats the Persian; he is slain by Phi∣lip the Arabian, who succeeded 5 years; he makes peace with the Persian. In the secu∣cular 240 Playes, Pompey's Theater and many houses burnt, Philopopolis in Thrace is built by him. In th Church, Pope Fabian admits Philip the Emperour upon his repentance: Laurence  Deacon is broyled on a Grid yron. A Councel is held in Arabia against the He∣reticks which held the souls Mortality, of which opinion was Beryllus Bishop of Bostra, whom Origen reclaimed.
At Rome, Philip leaves his son, and goeth against Decius, whom the Souldiers in Illyria chose Emperour: Philip with his son are slain: Decius succeeded one year, who being 250 slain by the Goths, Gallus succeeds two years, who became a tributary Prince to the Goths, the Empire is wasted by the Goths and Persians. Gallus and his son are slain by Aemilianus, and e by Valerian, who reigneth 7 years; The Goths waste the Eastern parts; so doth Sapores the Persian, who made Valerian his foot-stool, and flaid him alive. In the Church, Fab. Pope is martyred. Novatianus makes a Schisme: Cornelius a Roman Priest is banished, whipped, and beheaded. Lucius is Pope two years; he is martyred; Stephen Archdeacon is Pope three years; he ordained sacred Garments for those that served at the Altar; he also is martyred, whom Sixtus followed: Divers Sy∣nods were held about this time about the cause of Novatus, and the Lapsed: Paul the Eremite lived in the wildernesse till Constantine; from him the Monks sprang up. The seventh Persecution is raised: Cyprian and many others are martyred: The Va∣lesii held that they onely were saved, who made themselves Eunuchs: Novatus, father of the Cathari, who would admit none Lapsed: Sabellius denyed the Trinity and Unity of God, and held that the matter was coeternal with God. At Rome, Galien reigns alone, who mitigates the Christian persecution: Many Com∣manders 260 usurp the Empire, which is wasted by the Barbarians, and the Com∣manders destroy each other: Galien is slain; Aurelius succeeds ten years, who is de∣feated and slaine at Millan by his Souldiers: Marcus Aurelianus succeedeth six yeares. In the Church, to Sixtus succeeded Pope Dionysius nine years, who divides Rome into Parishes, and the Countrey into Diocesses. Hierachitae denied Marriage and the Resurrection, debarred children from Heaven, and held Melchisedech to be the Holy Ghost. Originists made the Holy Ghost a creature, held that the souls were created before the body, and that the Devils after 1000 years should be released from pu∣nishment. Samosatenus Bishop of Antioch denied Christs Divinity, therefore would not baptize in Christs Name. At Rome, Aurelian useth the Diadem, overcommeth the Goths; is beaten by, and beats 270 the Marconians; He erecteth a Temple to the Sun; defeats the Goths in Thrace; in∣compasseth Rome with a Wall of fifty miles about; He triumpheth over Zenobia and Tetricus; she dyeth at Rome. Silk brought out of India: The Boii are suppressed; he is slainy the treachery of his Secretary Mnesteus, who for this is flung to wild beasts: Tacitus succeeds 6 moneths, and is slain by the Souldiers; his brother Florianus is slain; Aurel. Prolus succeeds 6 years; He hath divers Victories. Constantine is born in Britain to Constantius and Helena. In the Church, Falix sate Pope three years; He instituted Consecration of Altars, and Registred Martyrs names. Eutiehianus succeeded 10 years, who buried with his own hands 342. Martyrs. A Synod is held at Antioch against Samosatenus. The ninth Persecution is raised by Aurelian, whose hand became stiffe as he was subscribing the Edict; but he dyed before it took effect. Manes, father of the Manichees, held all the Heresies of the former Heretiques: He was flai'd alive by the Per∣sian King. At Rome much mischiefe is done by the Sword-players, who broke prison. Probus 280 overcommeth the Goths, gives peace to the Persian, and defeats Proculus and Bonosus, usurpers; He is slain by his Souldiers. Aurelius Carus succeeds one year; obtaines divers Victories, and is slain by Thunder: Dioclesian succeeds 20. yeares: He sub∣dues the Sarmatae, and Persians, and Goths in Panonia, and Rebels in France and Ger∣many, and Iulian the Usurper; He had six yeares warrs with Achillaeus
the other Usurper.  In the Church, Caius sate Pope 13 years: He instituted the 8 Ecclesiastical degrees. Cyril Bishop of Antioch, for hindring Numerian from entring into the Church, is slain by him. Proclianite hereticks, of one Proclus, held that Christ was not come in the flesh. At Rome, Dioclesian assumes divine honours. Constantius Chlorus is made governour of Bri∣tain; 290 Galerius is made Caesar: these have divers victories. Dioclesian takes Alexandria, and Archillaeus in it, whom he flung to wild beasts. Galerius defeated by Narses the Per∣sian, and then defeats him. Constantius kills the French and Almains. In the Church, Caius is martyred. Marcellinus succeeded Pope 8 years; he sacrificed to Idols. Anthony the Eremite then flourished. Arnobius converted to the faith, and writes against Porphyrie. Amphibalus, and ten more, suffered martyrdome in Britain. Susanna Neece to Pope Caius, martyred, for not marrying with Maximian a Heathen. At Rome, Dioclesian and Maximian triumph over the Persians and Goths: Diocles. will be called Iovius, and Maximian, Herculeus. They give over the government. Galerius and 300 Constantius made Emperors, this of the West, the other of the East. Constantius dieth; to him succeeded his son Constantine 30 years, who married Fausta Maximian's daughter: He makes a Bridge over the Rhine, and hath divers victories. Fausta discovers Maximi∣ans plot against Constantine. In the Church, Pope Marcelline having at the Synod at Sinvessa in Campania publikely in a hair-cloth confessed his fault, is at last martyred, and his body after 36 dayes was interred by his successor Marcellus, who sate 5 years, and was stifled to death by the stench of a filthy stable where he was inclosed; that stable afterward was turned to a Church, and called by his name. To him succeeded Eusebius 2 years. Many Christians are burnt in a house at Nicomedia, by Valerius. The tenth Persecution is raised, in which incredible numbers suffered in Egypt S. Alban and others martyred in Britain. Constantine expelleth those of his Court, who for rewards would sacri∣fice to Idols. At this time the Donatists had divers Conventicles at Carthage. The traditors or betrayers of the Bible, are condemned in a Synod at Cyrta in Africa. Bishop Meletius an Antilapsarian; he had many followers, who held divers Jewish ceremonies. Fifteen Cardinals were instituted by the Pope, to bury and baptise. Donatus the Priest of Carthage, held the true Church no where but with him and his followers; He rebaptized, and held the Persons of the Trinity superior to each other. Galerius having made Licinius Emperor in Illyria, kills himself, being troubled with a loathsome disease in his privities. Constantine defeats three times Maxentius, who is 310 drowned in Tyber. Constantine triumpheth, and marrieth his sister to Lieinius. Maxi∣minus is defeated by the Persian, then by Licinius, at last strangles himself. Constantine, by himself and his two sons, gets many victories; He overcomes Licinius, who turns Apostate. The Britains rebell, and defeat Traherus. In the Church, Pope Eusebius is martyred. His successor Melchiades sate three yeares, who abolished Fasting upon Sundayes and Holy-dayes; he dyed a Martyr. In his time fell out the Schisme between Donatus, and Cecilian Bishop of Carthage. Sylvester succeeded Pope 21 years; he instituted the feast of S. Peter ad Vincula; he appointed the Albe and Corporal for the Altar. Divers Councels held at this time against the Donatists, Antilapsarians, Jewes and Arians. S. Catherine is martyred at Alexandria. Constantine becomes Christian, upon the sight of a Crosse in the aire. Arius brocheth his blasphemy, and is condemned in a Synod at Alexandria; Constantine confutes him by his letters. Constantine appeaseth the tumultuous souldiers in Gaide; defeats the Sauromates and Lici∣nius 320 two times, at last puts him to death for plotting against him: He kils his own son Crispus, upon Fausta's false accusation: He repairs Ierusalem, and executes
the younger  Lucinius: Fausta, for her falshood, is put to death in a hot Bath. He repairs divers Towns; and transfers his seat to Byzantium, which he new names Constantinople. In the Church, Constantine ordained burning of Wax-candles by day. Sylvester is dis∣contented, because Soothsayers were tolerated; therefore retires to Mount Soracte. Constantine ordains the LORDS Day; builds S. Peters Church, S. Pauls, and the Lateran His mother Helena finds the Crosse. The first General Councel of Nice, held against Arius; where the Nicene Creed was made, [Sicut in principio] added to [Gloria Patri.] S. Basil gathereth together the dispersed Monks, and makes lawes for them. Arius is recalled by Constantine, upon his sisters intreaty. Athanasius is persecuted. Constanti∣nople made a Patriarchate. Constantine subdues the Goths, and gives them Panonia to inhabite; he makes his son Con∣stans 130 Caesar. Sapores (who was made King in his mothers wombe) wastes Mesopotamia. Constantine is baptized, and dieth at Nicomedia, leaving the Empire to his three sonnes: Constantine the eldest had the West, and reigned 3 years; Constantius had the East, and reigned 24 years; Constans had Italy &c. and reigned 12 years, he slew and defeated his brother Constantine. In the Church, to Sylvester succeeded Marcus 8 moneths: He ordained the Nicene Creed to be sung after the Gospel. Iulius succeeded Pope 15 years. Conventicles are held at Tyre, Ierusalem, and Byzantium, against Athanasius, and in favour of Arius. Athanasius is accused of fornication and murther, by Eusebius. He refuseth to admit Arius into his Church, wherefore he is banished by the Emperor. Arius dyeth by the falling out of his guts. Athanasius restored by Constantine the younger, and is ac∣cused to Pope Iulius by the Arians. The Theopaschites held, that Christs divinity suffered. Constantius raiseth Sapores (who had destroyed many Christians) from the siege of Nisibis. 140 He persecutes the Orthodox Bishops; shuts up the Heathen Temples; condemneth Sodomites; dedicates the Golden-Temple of Antioch; defeats the Persians, but with great losse. Constans subdueth the Gauls; and is odious for his evil life. In the Church, Pope Iulius holds a Synod at Rome, where Athanasius and Marcellus are restored, to the grief of the Arians. At Rome, Athanasius writes his Cred; he is deposed in a Conventicle at Antioch. Great tumults in Constantinople, and slaughter about the deposing of Paul the Orthodox Bishop, and consecration of Macedonius the Arian. The Arians new form of Faith is rejected by the Western Bishops. The Councel of Nice is confirmed by that of Sardis now assembled. Paul and Athanasius restored to their seats. Marcellus denieth Christs Divinity. The Macedonians reject the Holy Ghost. Photinus held Christs Kingdome but temporary. Euphrates denieth Christs Divinity. Constantius makes Gallus his cousin, Caesar; who kills the rebellious Jewes, and takes 150 divers Towns from them: He defeats Magnentius three times, who had murthered Constans, usurped the government, tyrannised in Rome, martyred his own mother, wounded Desiderius his brother whom he had made Caesar, and at last kills himself; Decentius his other brother, and Caesar, hanged himself. Constantius being sole Emperor, puts Gallus to death for his cruelty, and makes his brother Iulian Caesar, who beat the Almans, and got divers victories. Silvanus the Usurper is slain. The Germans, Sar∣matae, and Persians do much mischief; but are subdued. Sapores takes Amida. Iulian studyeth Magick; and is saluted Emperor by the Army, but refuseth it. In the Church, Licerius sate Pope 15 years: He is persecuted for not condemning A∣thanasius; Felix is placed in his room, and again displaced, Liberius being recalled. Divers Synods and Conventicles were held about this time. The Acatian hereticks held, that Christ was like his Father in will, not in substance. Aetius was an Arian, and held besides that God was comprehensible. About this time the feast of the Annunciation began to be observed. Paul Bishop of Constantinople is strangled by the Arians, and divers Bishops banished
by them, among the rest Athanasius. Osius Bishop  of Corduba, out of feare subscribes to the Arian new Confession of faith, which is rejected by the Councel of Ariminum. S. Andrew's bones translated to Constantinople. Iulian is saluted Emperor, and defeats the French and Almans; he reigned one yeare. 360 Constantius returning from the Persian war, dieth. Apollo's Temple is burnt. Iulian marcheth against the Persian, and threatneth the ruine of Christianity; but is wound∣ed and dieth. Iovianus succeeds 7 moneths; he makes his Army professe themselves Christians; he makes peace with the Persian, and is stifled in his bed with coal-smoke. In the West succeeded Valentinian 11 years; in the East Valence 14 years. The Picts and Scots kill the Roman Commanders, and seise on the greatest part of Britain. Valenti∣nian restores the Standard and Crucifix, despised by Iulian. He had both good and bad successe against the Germans: he makes his son Gratian his Colleague 16 years; Ambrose is made Governour of Lombardy. Valence overcomes Procopius the Usurper, and kills him; then wastes the Goths territories, and defeats their King Theodosius; having setled Britain, calls it Valentia. Romachus the Tyrant of Scotland is beheaded by his Nobles, and his head fixed on a pole. In the Church, a third schisme arose about the Popes election. Ursicinus and Damasus are both chosen, hot without great slaughter: but Valentinian banished Ursieinus, and chose Damasus, who sate 17 years; He added Gloria Patri to the end of the Psalms, and Allelujah. About 11 Councels were assembled within this Decad of years. The heretick Eunomius held, that the Holy-Ghost was created by the Son, and that Christ assumed mans body without a soule. Iovianus made all sins equal, denied Mary's Virginity, contemned Fasting, and held that men sinned not after Baptisme. Colly∣ridiani offered sacrifices to the Virgin Mary. Lucifer said, that Satan made mans body; and held self-murther lawful; he rejected some part of the Old-Testament. The Christians are persecuted by Iulian, who advanceth Gentilisme, and condemneth Athanasius to death. He is hindred by stranger prodigies from rebuilding the Temple of Ierusalem; he writes books against Christ. Valentinian restores the Christian pro∣fessors. Valence is baptized by Eudoxius the Arian Bishop. Prodigious Haile falls at Constantinople. Marriage is forbid in Lent, by the Councel of Laodicea. The Order of S. Lazarus in Savoy founded. Severus subdueth the Saxons, and Valentinian treacherously kills them; therefore becomes odious. Firmus the Usurper in Africa kills himself. The Romans are beat by the Quadi; 370 the Sarmatae defeated by Theodosius; peace granted to the Almans. Valentinian died sud∣denly, when he understood what base beggerly people the Sarmatae were, with whom he had so sten fought. Gratian kills the Germans. Valence in the East, executeth the Philosophers, and imprisoneth them whose names began with Theod. He kills Para King of Armenia treacherously; he suffers the Goths to plant in Thrace; they waste Thrace and Thessaly; Valence going against them, is burnt in a cottage. Theodosius suc∣ceeds 16 years, who subdued the Goths. Great wars between the Scots and Picts. In the Church, a great tumult was raised in Alexandria about Athanasius, who hid him∣self in his fathers monument Evagrius the Orthodox Bishop is banished by Valence, and 80 Priests drowned. Athanasius dieth; his successor Peter flyeth to Rome. The Stracens are converted. Ambrose made Bishop of Milain. The Goths turn Arians. The feast of Epiphanie observed. The banished Bishops restored by Gratian. Audeani or Anthropomorphites, gave to God a mans body; held Darknesse, Fire and Water eternal. Apollinaris gave Christ a heavenly body; he denied the Trinity, held tra∣duction of souls, that the Ceremonial law should be in use after the resurrection, and denied Christ a humane will. The Messalians denied the Trinity, made God visible; contemned Christs sufferings, Sacraments and Alms; allowed perjury, to advance Religion; and ascribed salvation to Prayer alone. Gratian in the West, defeats the Goths of Macedonia and Ioanonia. Maximus the Usurper in Britain, makes his son Victor Emperor; he kills Gratian treacherously at Lyons; then 380 seiseth upon Spain, France, Britain and Afric. Maximus invades Italy. Valentinian flieth to Theodosius. Maximus and his son Victor both are slain; their Generall cast himself into the sea. In the East, Theodosius falls sick, and is baptized. The Goths submit to
the  Romans. Antioch rebels against Theodosius, whom Flavian the Bishop asswageth: he makes his son Arcadius Emperour at 8 years of age: he defeats the Scythians, restores Valentinian, and defeats Maximus; his governour is killed at Thessalonica, which cost 7000. men their lives, for which he after was sorry. In the Church, Siricius is Pope 13 years: he was an enemy to the married Clergy; he added Anthems to the Liturgie. Priscilian the Heretick, denied the Trinity, makes the soul to be of the Divine essence; he condemned Marriage and Flesh-eating, allowed Perjury and lying in Religion. Euchyts held Baptisme needlesse. Helvidius author of the Antidicomarionites, held that Ioseph had children by Mary, after Christs birth. The second general Council at Constantinople against Macedonius; besides nine other Synods within this Decad. The Nicene Creed (read after the Gospel) is confirmed by the Council of Constant. Ambrose is persecuted by Valentinian and Iustina the Em∣presse. Psalms began to be sung by turns; and Anthems brought into the Church by Ambrose. Maximus subdueth Armortica, and names it Little-Britain. Ursula and 1100. Virgins going from London in Britain, lost their lives to save their Virginity. The Or∣der of Augustine Friars began now. Theodosius, upon the slaughter of Thessolonica, makes a law, that 30 dayes should come be∣tween 390 the sentence and execution; and is excluded the Church, till he had made pub∣lique Penance; he makes his son Honorius Caesar, and defeats Eugenius neer Aquileia, he dieth at Milan. Arcadius reigns 13 years, his Tutor Ruffinus rebels and is killed. Eutrcpius succeeds, who proclaims Stilico a traitor, and banisheth good men. Alaricus invades Greece, he flyeth to the sanctuary upon a capital crime, but is not saved by it; for he made a law against sanctuaries. In the West, Arbogastes strangleth Valentinian, and sets up Engenius a Schoolmaster to be Emperour two years. Theodosius having triumphed over him, makes his son Honorius Emperour in the West 28 years, whose assistant was Stilico; who fals our with Eutropius. Sword-players are put down by Honorius, who marrieth Stilico's daughter: Gildo is strangled: the Empire begins to decline. In the Church, Anastasius is Pope four years; he ordained that the Gospel should be heard standing: 13 Synods were held within this Decad; St. Hierom instituted Ca nonical houres for Prayer. The Baptists head is brought out of Cilicia to Constanti∣nople. Hierom expelled his Church for condemning Origen; he translates the Bibl out of the Hebrew. The Marcomans and Huns converted. Stilico burns the Sybils books at Rome. The third Council of Carthage, ordains that the Eucharist should be recei∣ved fasting. In the West, Alaricus invades Italy, besiegeth Honorius, and is twice defeated by Stilico; who 400 also defeats and kils Rhadagisus the Goth; Stilico conspires with Alaricus against Arca∣dius, but he is slain by Honorius, upon suspition that he aimed at the Eastern Empire The Vandals waste Germany: one Constantine is chosen Emperour in Britain. The Scot∣beat down the wall of Severus & pillage Britain. Alaricus besiegeth Rome, and sets up At∣talus against Honorius, who unites himself to Constantine the usurper. In the East, Theo∣dosius the younger is born, and baptized by Chrysostome; he is made Emperour, but under the government of Isdigerdes King of Persia 42 years. In the Church, Innocent 1. is Pope 15 years; he made Saturday a fasting-day, excom∣municates Arcadius and the Eastern Bishops for persecuting Chrysostome. About this time began the rights of Patronages in the Council of Mela. Chrysostome for taxing Eudoxia is banished twice; he died in exile. Ten Councils held within this Decad. Vigilantius an enemy to Churches and Virginity. Triformiani held the Divinity imper∣fect in each of the three Persons. Melangismonitae held that the Son was in the Father, as a lesser vessel in a greater. Pelacius held Adam mortal by nature before his fall; that his sin was meerly personal, that there is no Original sin, that our natural concu∣piscence is good; that men have free will to good without grace; that the Infants of faithful men are saved without baptisme, but shall not enter into Gods kingdom. Rome is taken by Alaricus, and Attalus degraded; the Roman Commanders kill each o∣ther. Maximus is defeated in Spain: Heraclian the Usurper in Africk is defeated and
410  slain. Attalus is set up by Athaulphus the Goth, and then taken; Honorius cuts off his right hand, and banisheth him to Lipara. Constantius marrieth Placidia, whom he rescued from the Goths, the sister of Honorius, of them came Valentinian, who succeded Honorius. The Burgundians take Trevers, and obtain a seat neer the Rhene. Alaricus lost all the spoiles of Italy in a storme. The Vandals sack Majorca and Minorca, seat themselves in Betica, and call it Vandalasia, whence they are expelld by Vallia and the Goths. In the Church, Zosimus was Pope two years, who prohibited Priests to drink in Ta∣verns; to him succeeded Boniface the first, 5 years; with him Eulalius is chosen by some, which makes the third Schism, but Eulalius is expelled by the Emperour: In this Decad were ten Councels, the chief was that of Carthage which condemned Pelagianism. The Jews kill many Christians at Alexandria. The Donatists, to be accounted Martyrs, kill themselves. The Jews crucifie a child in Palestina. Pelagius at Diaspolis in Palestine recants his Heresies. In the West, Honorius makes Constantius his Colleague. Constantius dieth. Placidia his widow, and Valentinian her son being suspected by Honorius, flie to Theodosius, who entertains 420 them. Maximus and Iovinus Usurpers in Spain, are sent in bonds to Rome, and there executed. Honorius dieth: his Secretary Iohn invdes the Empire. Valentinian created Caesar by Theodosius. Iohn is taken and beheaded. Valentinian 3. reigned 29 years. Boni∣face governour of Afric rebels, and calls the Vandals into Afric out of Spain, whom Pla∣cidia could not remove thence. Venice is founded by the Romans, flying from Attila and the Huns. Martian, afterward Emperor, sleeping is covered with an Eagle. Genserious makes a league with him. In the East, Theodosius warreth against the Persians, who are forced to sue for peace, and to give off persecuting the Christians. Theodosius recovers Panonia from the Huns. In the Church, Celestinus is Pope 8 years. The wanton Hereticks, called Paterniani and Venustiani, held that mans lower parts were made by Satan. Nestorius Bishop of Constantium, gave to Christ two personalities, but one will; He would not have Mary to be called the Mother of God. He was condemned in the Councel of Ephesus, which was the 3. Oecumenical; his tongue was eat up with worms. Within this Decad were held 6 Councels. Pope Celestine sends Palladius into Scotland, to sup∣presse Pelagianisme there; and Germanus for this end is sent into Britain. The Em∣perors ordain, that Christs picture be not placed neer the ground. In the Western Empire, Hippo is taken by the Vandals, and Africk subdued by them; a 430 peace is made with them, and Numidia given for them to dwll in; but Gensericus against the League takes Carthage, and seizeth upon all Africk. In the East, Constantinople burn∣eth for three dayes; a great Famine followed. Peace is granted to the Persian. Theodo∣sius gives a great sum to the people to buy Corn; He finisheth the Code. The Scots break down Severus his Turff wall; Aetius rebuilds it of brick; this also the Scots and Picts overthrow. Clodio called Crinitus reigned in France. In the Church, Sixtus the third sate Pope 9 years; He was accused of Fornication by Bassus, but is cleared afterward; this Sixtus imbalmed and buried with his own hands the body of Bassus. Four Councels held within this Decad. The Burgundians are converted. Patrick is sent into Scotland, where he sate Bishop 60 years. The Jews of Crete are drowned in following their false Moses through the Sea. The Or∣thodox Bishops are persecuted by Gensericus the Arian. Eudocia, Theodosius his wife, builds St. Stevens Church at Ierusalem. In the Western Empire, Sicily is invaded by Gensericus; He becomes tributary for a part of 440 Africk. In the East, the Hunns waste Thrace, Maesia, and Greece. Theodosius helpeth Va∣lentinian against the Vandals. The Emperour is fain to buy peace of Attila. A great Earthquake at Constantinople. Saturnine slain by the Empress. Attila threatneth war for want of his tribute; He is defeated by Authenius. Theodosius dieth with a fall from his horse in hunting. The Anglo-Saxons called into
Britain by Vortiger the Usurper. The Scots and Picts vex the Britains. In France, Clodio beats the Romans; Merovee succeeds him, whose posterity continued till Pipin. In the Church, Leo sate Pope 20 years; He was excommunicated by Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria, for rejecting the Councel of Ephesus. Nine Councels held within this Decad. Eutiches, Abbot of Constantinople, gave Christ but one Nature, divine onely, which he made passible; He is absolved in the Councel of Ephesus St. Patrick con∣verts Ireland. Rogations or Letanies instituted by Pope Leo. The Manichees at Rome recant and burn their Books. The seven Sleepers awake after two hundred yeares sleep. In Italy the Famine was so great, that Parents exchanged their children for food. Attila 450 invades France, and is overthrown; He takes Aquileia. Pope Leo perswades him to leave Italy; he is forced by the Alani into Scythia. Valentinian kills Aetius with his own hands; Aetius his Souldiers kill him in revenge: Maximus is killed by Eudocia. Avitus usurpeth the Empire 9 moneths. Gensericus is expelled Italy. Mauritania lost and won by Majoranus. In the East, Martian is Emperour 6 years; he dreamed that Attila's Bow was broken, the same night he died; Martian died two years after; Leo succeeded 17 years; Majoranus is by him made Emperour of the West. In Britain, Vortiger is deposed and re∣stored; 300 of the Nobles slain by the Saxons, and Vortiger taken prisoner. The French and Gauls unite themselves by Marriages. Childericus reignes. Attila strangled by his own blood in the night. Theodoricus the second reigns in Spain. Attila's sons lost what he had got. In the Church, Pope Leo refutes the Acephali. Diascorus the Eutychian with his Disci∣ples, were called Monophisitae and Theopaschitae, for saying Christ had but one divine Nature passible; these with Eutyches are condemned in the fourth General Coun∣cel of Chalcedon; five Councels were held in this Decad. Contestation between Rome and Constantinople about supremacy. The Orthodox are persecuted by the Vandals in Africa. Austria, Bavaria, and Panonia converted. Avitus, of an Emperour becomes Bi∣shop of Placentia. The Eutychians cruelty against Proterius Bishop of Alexandria, whom they slew, and chewed his entrails. Bells used first at Nola in Campania. Monks cal∣led Studeae at Constantinople. In the West, Majoranus beats the Goths in Gaule, and is beaten by the Vandals in Spain; He is slain by Severus his General, who reigned 3 years. Ricimer expels the Alani out of Italy, 460 and poysoneth Severus. Authenius, Martians son-in-law, is made Emperour by Leo, five years. In the East, the Goths waste Illyria. Gensericus spoileth the Sea-coasts of the Em∣pire. Canstantinople burneth 4 dayes. Leo sets out a Fleet against Gensericus, to whom it is betrayed. Leo hated by the people, for betrothing his daughter to Aspar's son an Arian. In Britain, Hengist reigns over Kent: Vortiger driven into the woods. Theodori∣cus the Goth drives the Romans out of Spain, after 700 years possession; He persecuted the Catholikes, and wrote the Gothick Laws: The Ostrogoths defeat the Huns in Hungary, cut off their Kings head, which they sent to Constantinople: The Sueves in Gal∣licia take Lisbon. The Vandals expelled Sicily by Marcellinus, who was treacherously slain. In the Church, Hilary sate Pope 6 years; He excluded unlearned men from the Clergy, and prohibited Popes from naming their successor: To him succeeded Simplicius 16 years. 4 Councels held within this Decad. Paulin Bishop of Nola, was the first that introduced Historical Pictures and Crucifixes into Churches; He pawned himself to redeem a widows son that was captive. The Painters hand withered at Constantino∣ple, for offering to paint Christ like Iupiter. Litania minor, or three dayes Rogation in Ascension-week, instituted by Mamarcus and Sidonius Apollinaris, against Wolves and Beares. In the West, Ricimer rebels against the Emperour; is reconciled; rebels again, and 470 kils Anthemius. Divers petty Emperours at Rome expell each other; the last is Au∣gustulus, whom Odoacer one of the Heruli banished, and took Rome. Thus endeth the Western-Empire. Odoacer and the Heruli reigned in Italy till Iustinians dayes. In the East, Leo, to please the people, causeth all Aspars Family to be slaine: Leo dyeth; To him succeeds Leo the second, and after him Zeno 17 years; He is depo∣sed by Basiliscus, and afterward recovereth, and deposeth
Basiliscus. Marcion, Ricimers  son, defeateth Zeno. The Lombards transport themselves into Panonia. Childerick of France takes divers places from the Empire. Vortiger is burnt in his Castle in Wales. Stone-hedge erected on Salisbury-Plains, in memory of the Saxon treachery there. In the Church, Aratius Bishop of Constantinople claimes the second place after the Pope, which is confirmed by Leo the Emperour. Peter Fullo the Eutychian is made Bishop of Antioch, and condemneth the Councel of Chalcedon. The Hebrew Vowels were invented about this time. Basiliscus condemneth the Councel of Chalcedon, but upon Zeno's raising of forces, he recants. The Library of Constantinople burnt, in which was Homer in Golden Letters. In the West, Iulius Nepos is slain. In the Est, Theodorick the Goth threatneth Constantinople, 480 and dieth of a fall from his horse. Idus and Leontius, Usurpers, are taken, and their heads sent to Constantinople. Zeno gives himself to tyranny and riot. Clovis the great, the first Christian King of France. In Britain, Hengist is slain; the South-Saxons pos∣sessed Surrey and Sussex. Hunnerick the Vandal persecutes the Catholikes, and is killed by wormes. In the Church, Faelix is Pope 9 years; He instituted the Feast of S. Michael: Six Coun∣cels were held within this Decad. Eutychus his heresie spreadeth far in the East. Zeno the Greek Emperour is buried in a fit of the Epilepsie; Aiadna would not suffer the 490 Tombe-stone to be removed, though he revived, so he died miserably: Anastasius Di∣corus succeeds 27 years. Longinus, Zeno's brother, usurpeth in Isauria, and occasions a war. The Emperours statues dragged about the streets of Constantinople: Longinus is ta∣ken and tortured to death. The Bulgarians waste Thrace; for money they give off and return. Clovis the King of France hath divers Victories; so hath Aurelius in Britain, who was poysoned by a Monk. Theodorick the Ostragoth wastes Italy, takes Ravenna, kills Odoacar treacherously at a Feast, so he becomes sole King of Italy 33 years; He hath divers Victories. The Heruli and Lombards live togther, and then quarrel; the Heruli defeated. The Vandals make peace with the Romans, and recall the banished Ca∣tholiqus. The Goths burn the Roman Governour in France within a brazen Bull. In the Church, Galasius is Pope 5 years; He excluded the lame and blind from the Priesthood: Anastasius the second succeeded two years; He was an Acatian, and died the death of Arius: Symmachus succeeds 15 years; His Antipope was Laurence, and so there followed a fith Schisme. Four Councels held this Decad. Acephali, so called from having neither Bishop nor Priest; they were called also Theodosiani, from Theodosius Bishop of Alexandria; they rejected the Councel of Chalcedon, and were Euychians. The Canonical Scripture distinguished from Apocrypha. The Babylo∣nian Thalmud, which is the Jews Civil and Canon Law, is finished. In the Est, Cabades the Persian takes Amida, which is redeemed again. The Bulgarians 500 take Syrmium in Panonia. The Emperour hires the Goths to depart his Dominions. Anastasius repaireth Daras in Mesopotamia, and aideth Clovis with men and ships. Uther-Pendragon, in Britain, father of Prince Arthur, makes a League with the Scots. Cherdick foundeth the Kingdome of the West-Saxons, which contained Berkeshire, Hampshire, Wilts, Sommerset, Dorset, Devonshire and Cornwall. Alaricus and his Arian Goths slain by Clovis the French King. Theodorick the Ostragoth relieves Rome with Corn, expels the Magicians thence, and erecteth Water-works at Ravenna: By Vitiges he takes Syrmium from the Bugarians. In the Church, Symmachus is confirmed Pope by Theodorick; He banished the Manichees, doth many good works; 8 Councels held within this Decad, whereof 5 were kept at Rome, 3 of them about the cause of Symmachus. Anastasius murthered 3000 Catho∣liques; He is excommunicated by the Pope. The Feast of Peter and Paul instituted. The Christians persecuted in Arabia and Palestine. The Emperour hates Images, there∣fore causeth divers Monsters to be painted. As an Arian was going to baptize, the water dried up suddenly in the Fon.
In the East, Vitalianus the Scythian helps the Catholicks; subdueth Thrace, Scythia and Maesia; forceth Anastasius to revoke the banished, and is bribed with money and honours to depart. The Huns also are bribed to leave the wasting of Armenia and Capadocia. Ana∣stasius is slain by thunder. Iustin succeeds 9 years, who got the Empire by bribing; he defeats his Usurpers, and kils Vitalianus: he makes peace with the Persian. Clovis of France dieth, and leaves his kingdome to his 4 sons. Arthur in Britain takes London, and beats the Saxons. In the Church, Hormisda sate Pope 10 years. In this Decad were held 8 Councels. Ana∣stasius persecutes the Catholicks against his own Instrument made to the contrary, which he burned: he added to the Trisagion [Who was crucificed for us] this caused a sedition: he sleighted the Popes Ambassadours. 350 Orthodox Monks slain by Severus the Eutychian Bishop of Antioch; who being condemned to lose his tongue, flyeth into Aegypt. Bennet founded his Order on mount Cassin. The Selavi of Scythia takes Istria: the Lombards for the service against the Goths obtain Au∣stria 520 of Iustin; he dieth: his sisters son Iustinian succeedeth 38 years; he sends Belisarius and Procopius against the Persians, and aideth the king of Colchos against them: he setteth out his Code: by Mundus he defeats the Getes and Bulgarians in Britain; York yeeldeth to Arthur, who forceth the Saxons to Peace: the East-Saxon kingdom sounded by Erchenwyn; it contained Essex, Middlesex, and part of Hartford-shire: the Scots and Picts aid king Arthur. Sigismund king of Burgundy is slain and cast into a Well. Gondamare is chosen, and expelled by Clodomire and Thyerre. Athalaricus king of the Ostrogoths, son of Amalesunthia a, learned woman in all languages. The Lombards possesse Panonia. Hil∣derick is imprisoned and slain by the Vandals. In the Church, Iohn sate Pope 3 years, he is imprisoned and famished: his successor Fae∣lix fouth, sate 4 years; he instituted Extream Unction, and did good works. Seven Councels held within this Decad. To the Order of Bennet the Italian Monk belong the Caelestians, Carthusians, Cisteaux, and Monks of Clugny. Zaras king of Colchos baptized at Constant. Pope Iohn is forced to intercede with Iustin for the Arians. Ge∣thes king of the Heculi baptised at Constant. Iustinian ordered swearing by the Go∣spels. Tzani of Armenia subdued by Iustinian, and converted. Belisarius is defeated in Persia, he overcomes Probus and the other Rebels. Sardinia is ren∣dred to Iustinian. Belisarius recovers Carthage from Gilimer, after it had been possessed 530 95 years by the Vandals. Gilimer brought captive to Constantine, and kindly used by Iu∣stinian, who divides Africk into 7 Provinces. Belisarius takes Syracuse and other towns in Sicily. Mundus and his son slain. Belisarius hath divers Victories and Conquests in A∣sia, being aided by Narses the Eunuch. Vitiges the Ostrogoth led in triumph to Constan∣tinople by Belisarius. Cosroes the Persian makes a long league with the Romans, but is soon broken. Cardick the West-Saxon takes the Isle of Wight; Henrick his son overthrows the Britains: the French kings divide Burgundy amongst them, so that kingdome endeth: The French invade Spain, and makes the Goths abjure Arianisme. Amalari the Visigoth is killed by his wives brothers. Vitiges king of the Ostrogoths, is imployed against the Per∣sians. Gilimer the Vandal puts out his brothers eyes. The Vandals being driven out of Africk, seek out new Plantations in Poland, Hungaria, Greece and Germany. In the Church, Boniface sate Pope 2 years; his Antipope was Dioscorus, which made the sixth Schisme. Iohn 2 sate 3 years: Agapetus 3 years: Silverius 3 years; his Anti∣pope is Vigilius, and so is the 7 Schisme. This Vigilius sate 16 years, who banished and famished Silverius. 9 Councels held this Decad. Dionysius a Roman Abbot be∣gins to reckon the years from Christs Birth, which before were reckoned from the Ae∣ra of Dioclesian. Iustinian publisheth his Institutions and Pandects. Zanabarzus king of Iberia baptised at Constantinople. The spoils of Ierusalem taken by Titus, and tran∣sported by Gensericus to Africk, are restored by Iustinian to Ierusalem. He converteth the Stews into a Covent of Penitents: he becomes an Eutychian, and is converted by Pope Agapetus. Bavaria is converted. Iustinians [Constit. novell.] published.
In the East, Belisarius beateth the Persian; Iustinian repaireth Antioch, and buildeth a Church there: Belisarius called out of Persia into Italy, where he raiseth Totila from the siege of Hadruntium in the West. Totila taketh Rome, which is by Belisarius retaken; with other 540 towns in Italy. Belisarius recalled into Persia: a plot discovered against the Emperour; Cosroes upon the comming of Belisarius returns home from vexing the Empire: he is re∣moved by bribes from Edessa. In Britain Arthur, and Mordred differ, and are slain; Mor∣dreds two sons killed by Constantine the Usurper. Northumberland a kingdome, founded by Ella and Ida; it contained besides Northumberland. York-shire, Lancashire, Durham, Cum∣berland, and Westmorland. At Rome, Basilius was the last Consul. The French returning from Spain with much booty, bring with them the garment of Vincentius the Martyr, and build a Church for him at S. Germans. In the Church, Vigildus sits as lawful Pope; he sends divers ships to Rome with corn, which Totila incercepteth. 3 Councels held within this Decad. An Indian king sends to Iustinian for some to Baptise him and his people. The Feast of Purification ordained at Coustantinople. Rome and all Italy subdued by Totila, who also wastes Sicily: Artabanes expels the Goths, and recovers it. Narses kils Totila and recovers Italy; the Persian defeats the Romans, 550 and is defeated by them: Iustinian kils his Commanders for slaying the King of the La∣zii. After Totila and Thaeias his successor were killed, there were no more Gotish kings in Italy: but Narses governed it under the title of Duke, till being angred by Iustinians wife, he called in the Longobards: the Goths had held Italy 70 years, the Lombards kept it 204 years, that part which is between the Alpes and Appenin In France Clothayre subdueth the Saxons and Thuringi; he pursueth Cramnus into Britain, and burns him. In the Church, the 5 General Councel is held at Constant. for suppressing of Heresies, there were four more National Synods within this Decad: Vigilius opposeth the Councel of Constant. and is banished; at last submits and dyeth. Pelagius succeeds 4 years: The Western Bishops at Aquileia reject this fifth General Councel, which made a Schisme between the Eastern and Western Churches, almost 100 yars. To the Bishop of Constant. is assigned the next place to the Pope. Iulius Halicarnassaeus taught that Christs body was impassible after his Conception: the Armenians are again con∣verted to the Faith. In the Empire to Iustinian succeeded Iustin second 11 years; he was a just Prince, in giving 560 way that an exemplary punnishment should be inflicted on a great mn, who had op∣pressed a poore woman; but he was unfortunate in his wars against Persia; so he fell into a Phrensie, and dyed. In France, a hill neer Rohan bellowed many dayes like an Oxe, and then brake a sunder to the destruction of many Villages, People and Cattel. King Clothaire dying left his kingdom to his four sons. Levigildus king of the Visigoths in Spain, wins Corduba and other places: the Exarchat of Ravenna now began. Alboinus reigns in Lombardy 3 years. In the Church, Iohn 3. sate Pope 12 years: the Christians are persecuted by the Jews and Samaritans in Palestina, but are suppressed and punished by the Emperour. The Monothelites increase about this time. The French and Spanish Clergy differ about the time of Easter. The Church of Armenia is vexed by Cosroes the Persian. Alboinus king of Lombardy, murthers the Christians of Italy and Sicily; and he not long after is murthered. Theodimiras in Galicia king, of an Arian becomes a Catholike. 2 Coun∣cels held within this Decad. In the East, Martian was forced to raise the siege from Nisibis. Apamea taken by the Per∣sians. The Avares passe Danubius and doe much hurt: Cosroes defeated by Iustinian the 570 General. Tyberius is Emperour 7 years in Britain. Vssa founded the kingdom of the East-Angles, containing the Isle of Ely, Norfolk, Suffolk and Cambridge-shire. The Lombards enter France, and are repulsed: Charibers brethren dissent: Civil wars in France. Livigild winneth Campanio. Alboin the Lombard or making his wife drink in her fathers skul, is murthered; she is poysoned. Clephes Alboins sn, reigned 1 year 6 moneths, and was slain: then Lombardy was governed 10 years by 30 Dukes. Longinus the Exarch lost his eyes at Constantinople, for which he killed two Patritians. The Huns expelled Germany by the French.
In the Church, Bennet is Pope 5 years; Pelagius 2. succeeded 12 years. He was the first elected Pope without the Emperours consent, the City being besieged by the Lom∣bards. Two Councels held this Decad. In the East, Hormisda Cosroes his successour, is beat by the Romans. Mauritius regaineth all 580 from the Persian that was lost. Tiberius died of a surfeit of Gourds. Mauritius succeed∣ed 16 years. The Huns take Sirmium: they are defeated by Commentiolus. Philippicus beats the Persians twice; and Germanus once. Malgo Conanus King of Britain, a wicked Prince. Crida founded the kingdome of Mercia, containing 17 Shires, and half of Hart∣ford-shire; after the death of Carecaus, lost the East part of the kingdom: wars between the Scots and Picts. Childebert of France goeth against the Lombards, at the Emperours desire; he is murthered. The kingdome of the Sueves in Gallicia, after 176 years posses∣sion is annexed to the Visigoths. The Lombards chose themselves a new King: Livigild the Visigoth kils his own son. Recaredus the first, becomes a Catholike, he was a good Prince. In the Church, Gregory is sent to the Emperour, to excuse the Election of Pelagius. 11 Councels assembled this Decad. The Benedictines expelled out of Mount Cassine by the Lombards▪ They build a Covent at Rome. Christ's seamlesse Coat was found by a Jew. The Pope and Bishop of Constantinople differ about the title of Universal Bishop. Mauritius makes peace with Cosroes; the Huns invade Thrace. Piscus defeats the Huns, and 590 expels the Sclavi out of Thrace; he is removed and then restored: he beats the Huns a∣gain. Cosroes deposed by his Subjects, and restored by Mauritius, and made his Guard of Christians. Edilwach 1 Christian king of the South-Saxons; a great famine in his time, so that people drowned themselves. Ethelfred defeated the Britains, & slew 12000 Monks at Bangor. Ethelbert king of Kent converted by Augustine; he built S. Pauls in London. Scots and Britains have war with the Saxons and Picts. Childebert the French king, takes divers towns in Italy. Agilulphus the Lombard is baptised, and named Paul; he hath divers victories. Chaganus the Hun, invades the Venetian territories: He abuseth Tomilda the widow, and then staketh her for her treachery. In the Church, Gregory the great sate 13 years; he was elected against his will: he stiles himself, Servant of Gods servants; he added to the Liturgie [Give peace in our time O Lord] and [Lord have mercy on us] and Hallelujah: He confirmed Prayer to Saints, Purgatory, and sacrifices for the dead: He redeemed many Captives, and kept dai∣ly 3000 Monks. 12 Synods held within this Decad. Gregory, upon a great Plague, of which 800 died in an houre, instituted the seven-fold Letany or Procession, called the Great, Roman, and Gregorian. 40 Virgins brake out of S. Radegunds Monastery, who expelled the Abbesse, and beat the Bishops and Monks. Gregory reproves Iohn o Constaninople for assuming the title of [Universal Bishop.] By Gregory the Britains and Lombards are converted. Mauritius will not redeem the Captives taken by Chaganus, therefore they are slain. Phoeas 600 is beaten for urging the Emperour against Commentiolus; this Commentiolus with Priscus kill Chaganus his 2 sons, 12000 Huns, and took 13000, at which Mauritius was offended: he was forewarned of his death: upon suspition he imprisoneth Philippicus, because his name began with Ph. but Phocas slew him with his two sons, and so succeeded 8 years. Theodosius son to Mauritius is slain, as he was going to Cosroes. Narses suffers him self to be beaten by Cosroes, with whom he joyns, then is reconciled to Phocas, and burnt at Constantinople. Mauritius his widow and daughters put to death. Phocas tyranniseth over the Nobility; attempts to kill his son in law Priscus; he is at last cut in peeces and burnt. In France Pipin is brought to Clothayrs Court by Caroloman his father. Liu∣ba Prince of the Visigoths is slain by Victericus. Padua burnt by the Lombards, upon which Venice increaseth by new commers. In the Church, Sabinian was Pope 2 years: he hated Gregory and his writings. Boniface 3. succeeded 1 year. He appropriated the name Pope, by Phocas his means, to the Bi∣shop of Rome. Boniface 4 succeeds: He instituted the Feasts of All-Souls, next day af∣ter All-Saints: He consecrates the Pantheon to the Virgin Mary and all Martyrs. 4 Councels this Decad. The Agnoetae held that Christs divinity was ignorant of the last day. The Trithets founded by Iohannes Grammaticus or Philoponus, made three Natures or Essences in God. The Iacobites from Iacob the Syrian, were Eu∣tychians. Armenii so called from their
Countrey, held a Quaternity in God;  made God passible, and denyed that Christ took his humanity from Mary. Boniface called Universal-Bishop by Phocas. The Emperor is in a dream accused of homicide, for not redeeming the Captives; therefore growes penitent. Mahumet begins to broach his doctrines. The Bishop of Antioch abused and burnt by the Jews, and the Christians persecuted by them. In the East, Heraclius reigns 31 years: he makes his son Heraclius Emperor, and new∣names 610 him Constantine. The Sclavi plant themselves in Dalmatia and Istria, now called Sclavonia from them. Palestine and Ierusalem won by the Persians, who subdue Egypt, and take Damascus and Carthage. Cosroes refuseth to make peace with Heraclius, except he will reject Christ, and adore the Sun. The Emperor is betrayed by Chaganus, and defeated in Thrace. Cosroes is adored as a God. Ebald King of Kent becomes a Gentile, and marrieth his stepmother, but is reclaimed by the Archbishop. Brunchild in France sets the Kings at variance; at last being found guilty of the death of ten Kings, is tyed by the hairs of her head to a wild-horse and torn in peeces. Victericus the Visigoth is slain by his own people at a feast. Sisebutus his successor and brother converted 90000 Jewes: Eleutherius the Exarch stileth himself King of Italy; he is slain by his souldiers, and his head sent to Constantinople. In the Church, Deus-dedit sate Pope 3 years: He ordained, that none should marry their godfathers or godmothers, and that none should answer for their own chil∣dren in baptisme. Boniface 5. succeeded 8 years; He instituted Sanctuaries. Six Councels gathered this Decad. Cosroes carrieth the Crosse of Christ from Ierusalem to Persia. The Jewes flie out of Spain into France, where strict lawes are also made against them. Heraelius robs the Churches, to pay the souldiers in his Persian expedition; He leaves the care of the City, and of his son, to the Patriarch, and a Patritian. Seventy Ambas∣sadors 620 betrayed by Saes the Persian, and sent in chains to Cosroes. The Persians defeated by the Emperor, and the Temple of the Sun overthrown. Ninive is taken, and Cosroes driven to Seleucia. Sarbora with his forces revolteth to Heraclius, who returneth with the Crosse and other spoils to Ierusalem, and driveth the Jewes out of the City. Cosroes flaieth his General Saes, because he did not catch Heraclius. Siroes the eldest son of Cos∣roes, kills all his brothers first, and then his father. About this time the Faith was im∣braced in Northumberland, and the Archbishoprick of York founded. In Scotland, King Ferquhard, for Pelagianisme, is imprisoned by his Nobles, and then kills himself. In France, Pipin Caroloman's son is made by Clothaire the 1 Duke of Brabant. Mahumet flieth to Mecha from his enemies; from this flight the Turks begin their Computation, called Hegira: He becomes of a Prophet a Robber, and takes Mecha. In the Church, Pope Honorius sate 13 years: He built and repaired divers Churches; he covered S. Peters with brasse, taken from the Temple of Romulus. Heraclius the Emperor becomes a Monothelite; this heresie was condemned in the 6. General-Councel held at Constant. The feast of the Exaltation of the Crosse, instituted Sept. 14. being now regained from the Persian. The Saracens being denied their pay, and called Dogs by the Emperors Treasurer, they make war against Mauritius; they take Gaza and other places, with Arabia, and defeat 630 the Emperor twice, whose garrison they drive out of Damascus; then they invade Egypt, and take Ierusalem, which the Emperor fearing, plundered it before: It was held by the Saracens; till Godfrey of Bulloign's time, 463 years. The Saracens take Antioch, Edessa, Daras, and all Mesopotamia. Erpenwald King of the East-Angles, slain by his people for being a Christian. Dagobert becomes sole Monarch of France; he founded a Col∣ledge for Fair women, and beautifieth S. Dennis; he hath divers victories. Rotharis the Lombard gave liberty of conscience to Catholikes and Arians. Isaacius the Exarch robs the Popes treasure. Mahumet dieth. The Persians subdued by the Saracens. In the Church, Severinus, Iohn 4. Theodorus Popes, succeeded each other in a short time, Martin sate Pope 6 years. Six
Councels were held within this Decad: in the 6. of Toledo, the Kings of Spain are ordered to swear, that none but Christians should be suffered to live within their Kingdomes; hereupon the Jewes are banished. Amandus Bishop of Uiricht converts Gaunt to the faith. The Christians are permited to exercise their Religion at Ierusalem. About this time, England was divided into Parishes. In the East, Constanine 2. Heraclius his son, reigned 4 moneths, and is poysoned by his step∣mother Martina, who with her son Heracleon reigned 4 moneths; she lost her tongue, 640 and he his nose, for the murther of Constantine, whose son Constans reigned 27 years. Winceste-Church in England, and Malmesbhury-Abbey, founded by Kenwalk. Frequbard 2. King of Scotland, ravisheth his Daughter, and killed his Queen. Dagobert of France re∣pairs Utrieht, and bestows it on the Bishop of Colen. The Saracens take Caesarea in Pa∣lestine after 7 years siege; they subdue all Asia, 839 years after Antiochus the Great lost it. Haumar builds a Temple in Ierusalem for his Superstition, in which he was murthered. Hothman his successor makes Africk tributary, and conquereth Cyprus. In the Church, Pope Martin for opposing the Monothelites, is sent by the Exarch to Constantinople, where he is imprisoned, and then banished to Pontus. 6 Councels held this Decad. The Emperor sets out an Edict, forbidding Disputations about one or two Wills in Christ. Pyrrhus the Monothelite, Patriarch of Constantinople, recanteth and relapseth. The Emperor buyes two years peace of the Saracens for a great sum; they take Rhodes, and defeat the Emperor in a Sea-fight, he escaped in a disguise, then he beats the Selavi. 650 Muhavias the Saracen makes peace with the Emperor, and promiseth a daily tribute. The Emperor kills his brother, and is affrighted in his sleep about him. Peada of Mercia the first Christian king there, laid the foundation of Medhamstead, now Peterburgh, but was slain before he finished it. Sigebert of France adopteth Hildebert son of Grimoald, but afterward having a son Dagobert, him Grimoald shut up in a Monastery in Scotland, and makes his son Hildebert King, whom Clodoveius imprisoneth, and makes his son Childerick King. The Saracens Fleet burnt by the Christians. In the Church, Eugenius 4. supplieth Martins place being absent, he appointed Bishops to have prisons of their own for Clergy-delinquents. Pope Vitalianus succeeds 14 years; he brought Organs into the Church. Four Councels held this Decad. The Roman Clergy sollicited by the Emperor to subscribe to the Type or Edict, but in vain. Maximus the Abbot, for refusing is scourged, his tongue cut out, and his right hand cut off, and then banished. Caesara. 9. of Persia, or Parthia rather, is baptised at Constantinople; and by her means, her husband and people. The Saracens make peace among themselves, and refuse to pay the Emperour his Tri∣bute; 660 he is defeated by the Lombards, and transporteth from Rome to Sicily all the brasse-monuments; He intended to make Syracuse the seat of the Empire. Sapores go∣vernour of Armenia rebelleth; but is killed by his horse. The Emperour stayes at Syracuse, and is slain. Constantine his son succeeds 17 yeers, who slew Mezentius his Competitor, and cuts off his two Brothers noses, that they might not rule with him. Wulphere king of Mercia kills his 2 sons with his own hands, for being baptised, but repents, and finisheth Peterborough-Church, which his brother began. Clovis of France openeth S. Dennis Tomb, and upon this fals mad. Gundebert and Pertharit two brothers, strive for Lombardy, but both are expelled by Grimoald D. of Benevent. The Saracens depopulate Afric. In the Church Adeodatus sate Pope 7 years. 5 Councels this Decad; one was held in England, about the difference between the English and Scots for observing the Feast of Easter. The Emperour robs the Church of Rome, and gives her priviledeges. The Saracens take Syracuse, and carry thence to Alexandria the brasse-monuments, which Consrans had taken out of Rome: they befiege Byzantium 7 years together. 30000 Sa∣racens 670 slain, their Fleet fired by Callinicus with wild-fire. Peace granted to them for 30 years paying a tribute of Gold, Captives and Horses. The Bulgars seat themselves in
the lower Mesia called from them Bulgaria. The Emperour is forced to peace with them. Bamba the Visigoth overcommeth his Rebels: he is poysoned. Childeric the French king, for causing a Gentleman to be whipped, is slaine by him, with his Queen great with child. The Saracens invade Spain, and loose to Bamba 270 ships. In the Church, Donnus the first sate Pope 2 years; he subjected the Church of Ravenna to Rome. Agatho succeeded 4 years. 5 Councels this Decad. Christs Napkin, 8 foot long, found by the Jewes, taken from them by the Saracens, and given to the Christians. Constantine being dead, his son Iustinian succeeds 10 years. Divers countries taken from the Saracens, who are forced to pay a yearly tribute of 1000 Crowns, with a horse 680 and servant daily for 10 years. Iustinian defeats the Selavi, and is defeated by the Bul∣garians. Cadwallader the last King of the Britams, becomes a Monk in Rome. K. Maldwyn of Scotland is strangled by his wife, and she is burnt. In King Eugenius the 6. his time, it rained blood through all Britain for seven dayes. In France, Theodoric of a Monk is made King; he persecutes his Bishops. The Maronites take from the Saracens all from Taurus to Libanus. The Saracens have civil-war among themselves. In the Church, Leo 2. was Pope; He ordered the kissing of the Pax. To him succeeded Bennet 2. The Emperor gives way, that the Popes election stand good, without his or successors approbation. Iohn 5. succeeds; After him is the 8. Schisme between Peter and Theadore, the one being chosen by the Exarch, the other by the people; a third is chosen, Conon by name; then follows the 9. Schisme between Theodore and Paschal. at last Sergius succeeds 14 years. 7 Councels held this Decad. All the Manichees in Armenia burnt by Iustinian. Sergius appointed to be sung at the Com∣munion, [O Lamb of God, which takest away the sinnes of the World!] The Saracens offer satisfaction to the Emperor for wrongs done by them, which is re∣jected, 690 and the peace broken; He hireth the Sclavi, and by them beats the Saracens, but 20000. of them revolt, the Emperor is thereby defeated, and kills the rest of them: upon this losse, Sabatius governour of Armenia delivers up the Country to the Saracens. Leontius being delivered by the Emperor out of prison, and made governor of Greece, takes Iustinian, cuts off his nose, and banisheth him into Pontus. This Leontius reigned 3 years; He expels by his brother Iohn the Saracens out of Africk, and he again ex∣pelled by them; He sets up Tiberius Absimarus 7 years; he cuts off Leontius his nose, and thrusts him into a Monastery. The Saracens in Syria defeated by the Romans. Pipin is made Major of th Palace over all France; he had Charles Martel by his Con∣cubine. Ina King of the West-Saxons built S. Andrews Colledge in Wells, beautified Glassenbury, and was the first that paid Peter-pence. The Jewes conspire against the King of Visigoths in Spain; they are upon this made slaves. The Venetians choose them a Duke called Paulus Lucius, upon the Lombards incursions into their territories. In the Church, Pope Sergius rejecteth the Councel of Trullus, for adding 103 Canons to the 6. General Councel; He is accused of whoredome, and strangely acquitted by the Bastards at 19 dayes old. 6 Councels called within this Decad. It was de∣creed that Easter-week, called Septimana in albis, should be kept holy; the Virgin Mary's Nativity is made a Feast. The Saracens killed in Armenia. Mahumet reduceth again the Country into obedience 700 12000 Saracens killed in Cilicia. Philippicus is banished, for dreaming he should be Em∣peror. Iustinian is restored again to the Empire by the Bulgarians, 8 years; He hangeth Abismarus, Heraclius, and Leontius; He breaks league with the Bulgarians, and is beaten by them. Offa King of the East-Saxons, enlarged Westminster-Church; He with Kenred King of Mercia, went to Rome and became Monks. Eugenius the 7. of Scotland lost his Queen by two Rebels who entred his chamber, and missing him, killed her great with child. The Normans make the first onset upon France, and do much mischief on the Coast. Aripert invades Lombardy, and doth many cruel acts; the Saracens invade Spain, and do much hurt. Cacus Prince of Poland expels the Franconians out of his domi∣nion, builds Cracovia, and
makes it his chief residence: He destroyed a mischievous Monster, by flinging into its cave a Calfs-skin stufft with brimstone, pitch and nitre, which he devoured, and so dyed. In the Church sate Iohn the 6. 3 years; He repaired Churches, and redeemed Cap∣tives; upon his intreaty, Gisulphus D. of Benevent gave off plundring of Campania. Aripert the Lombard bestoweth the Cottian Alpes on the Church: This was the first Province the Pope possessed. Iohn the 7. succeeds 3 years; He built our Ladies Chap∣pel in St. Peters Church: Zozimus succeeded 20 dayes, then Constantine 7 years; the Emperour met him at Nice, and kissed his feet. Callinicus, Patriarch of Constantinople, had his eyes put out, and banished to Rome: The Emperour could not procure the Pope to confirm the Councel of Trullus. Faelix Bishop of Ravenna, lost his eyes, and is banished to Pontus for refusing to pay his tax due to the Pope at his Consecration: The Pope freeth Papia from Millans jurisdiction. Iustinian sends an Army against Chersonesus, which killed multitudes, rosted the Nobles upon spits, & 73000. children were drowned: The Chersonesians at this proclaim Philip∣picus 710 Emperour 1 year, who beheaded Iustinian, and cut the throat of his son Tiberius. Thrace is wasted by the Bulgarians: Philippicus is taken, and his eyes put out: Anastasius Artemius succeeds 2 years. The Saracens send a Fleet against Constantinople. A mutiny in Phaenicia in the Emperours Army, in which the General is killed, and one Theodosius chosen, who besiegeth Constantinople, takes Anastasius, and thrusts him into a Monastery; his General Leo Isaurus is chosen 24 years. Theodosius, to redeem his son, resigneth and becomes a Priest. Solyman besiegeth Constantinople, where he dyeth, with most of his Army. Omar reneweth the siege, and departeth with loss. Constantine Copronymus born. The Archbishop of Thessalonica and the Bulgars set up Anastasius again, but the Authors are executed. The French beat the Goths quite out of France. Charles Martel, heir to Pipin, doth great feats. The Danes waste Herefordshire. Ethelbald King of Mereia builds Crowland Abbey. Mordacus King of Scots, built many Churches and Abbeys. Roderick the Visigoth, is killed with his Army by the Saracens, who makes Corduba the seat of their Kingdome. The Goths retire into Cantabria. Pelagius defeateth the Moors, and is made King of Oviedo. Aripert of Lombardy is drowned with his Treasure in the River Papia. A great dissention falls out between the Bishops of Aquilaeia and Grada. The Sa∣racens waste and take much of the Empire. In the Church, Gregory the 2. sate Pope 17 years; He redeems Cumae from the Duke of Benevent: Two Councels held this Decad. Omar persecuteth the Christians. Ger∣many converted by Boniface. Radboldus D. of Frisia will rather go to Hell with many, then to Heaven with a few. Iohn, a blind Monk, made Patriarch of Constatinople, be∣cause he foretold that Philippicus should be Emperour. Leo makes his son Constantine Emperour; from him all the West falls off, for prohibiting Images; His Army also rebels. Nice in Bitinia besieged by the Saracens. Charles Martel 720 hath great Victories against the Germans, Bavarians, Frisians, and Moors. Luitprand the Lombard, takes Ravenna from the Exarch, and loseth it. Pane the Exarch, and his son, are slain at Rome, for intending to kill the Pope. Eutychius the Eunuch was the last Ex∣arch, for he was expelled afterward by Luitprand: The Exarchs had ruled in Italy under the Emperour 182 years. Chaganus defeats Musalmas and his Saracens. In the Church, Pope Gregory sits, and is oftentimes attempted to be slain by the Empe∣rours emissaries; At last he excommunicates the Emperour. The Jews are seduced by a false Messias. 3 Councels held this Decad all at Rome. The Jews great enemies to Images. Leo, upon hope of long life, pulls down Images, he was called therefore Iconomachus; His Edict against Images causeth much trouble; He burneth a great Library, and 12 Library-keepers in it; His Statues are overthrown, and Constan∣tinople besieged by the Greeks. The Frisians are converted. St. Austins bones redeemed from the Saracens, and translated to Papia. Franconia and Hassia converted by
Winifred.  Tiberius the Usurpers head is sent by the Exarch from Italy to Constantinople. The Saracens plunder Asia. One Philippicus scourged for absolving Witches, who had killed some 730 Infants. Solyman the Saracen General, takes many Towns and Captives from Leo. In France, Charles is victorious over the Moors and Goths. In Spain, Alphonsus King of Leon assumes the title of Catholique. Rittogarus, a German Prince, for being beaten by Venda daughter to Cracus of Poland, kills himself. The Venetians kill Orso their Duke, and choose annual Magistrates. Luitprand the Lombard, and the Exarch, make league a∣gainst the Pope. In the Church, Gregory the 3. sate 11 years; His Revenues in Sicily and Calabria amount∣ing yearly to 8000 l. are detained by the Emperour. Luitprand besiegeth Rome, and takes four Cities from the Pope; the Emperour will not be perswaded by the Pope and Italians to restore Images. One Councel held at Rome this Decad. Boniface founded the Bishopricks of Ratisbone and Saltzburg. Copronimus succeeds Leo 34 years; he takes Ardavastus the Usurper with his two sons, and puts out their eyes, and causeth Anastasius the Patriarch to be led back upon an Asse through Constantinople, for aiding him. A great earth-quake in Syria, and a Plague in 740 Constantinople. The Emperours Fleet beats the Aegyptian Moores, and the Saracens of Cyprus. Charls dieth in France, and leaveth four sons; the two elder Caroloman and Pi∣pin subdue the Gascoins, Almains and Saxons. Pipin becomes Major of the Palace alone. Luitprand the Lombard recovers Spoletum and Benevent by the Popes aide; therefore re∣stores him four Cities, with the Patrimony of Ancona, Sabina, and Narne. Rachisius the Lombard breaks the peace made with the Pope; upon which he with his Queen enters a Monastery. The Polonians choose Palatius again: Venda drowns her self out of supersti∣tion. The Huns or Hungarians transplant themselves out of Scythia into Panonia. Solo∣man the Saracen rebelleth, and is executed. The Venetian choose Dukes again. Theo∣dat Orso's son is elected. In the Church, Zachary sate 10 years; He composeth the distractions of Italy. 7 Coun∣cels were called in this Decad. The Christians of Antioch are permitted by the Sara∣cens to choose them a Patriarch after 40 years vacancy. Peter Bishop of Damascus hath his tongue cut out by the Saracens, for refuting Infidels. The Pope would not have the Childe in Bavaria baptised with false Latine, to be rebaptised, being no heresie. Gervilius Bishop of Mentz, for murther, hawking, and hunting, is deposed. The Pater Noster and Creed ordered to be read in English, at Cliffe-Councel. Constantine makes his son Leo Emperour: the Exarchat fals to the Lombards possession. 750 Constantinople repeopled by Armenians. Constantine sends Organs and other Presents to Pipin. He expells the Sclavi out Macedonia, but is beaten by the Bulgarians. Chilperick the French King, and last of the Merovinges, is thrust by Pipin into a Monaste∣ry, who reigns alone 17 years: he with his sons Caroloman and Charls are anoin∣ted by the Pope at Paris. Pipin forceth Aistulphus the Lombard to make restitution to the Pope, and to buy his own Peace: He subdueth Saxony: Vaifarius Duke of Aquitain forced to make peace with Pipin. Alphonsus of Spain recovers Navar, and much of Portugal, and rooteth out Arianisme. Aistulphus the Lombard having taken Ravenna claimeth jurisdiction over Rome; but Pipin helps the Pope. Aistulphus breaks his neck in hunting. Desiderius made King who bestows Ferrara and other places on the Pope. Poland is invaded by the Moravians and Panonians. The Venetians to curb the Dukes power, joyn two Tribunes to govern with him. Seleucia is repaired by the Saracens, and called Bagdet. Habdel the Saracen oppresseth the Christians, the Turks waste Armenia and Persia. In the Church, Stephen 2. was Pope but 8 dayes. Stephen 3. succeeded 5 years. He was the first Pope that was carried on mens shoulders. Pipin bestows on him the Exarch, and the Country about Luna, with Corsica, Soranum, Parma, Rhegium, Mantua, Spole∣tum and Benneventium. Paul succeeded 10 years; he is opposed by Theophilact Anti∣pope, which made the tenth schisme. Paul built a Monastery in Rome, where the Greek-Psalms were to be sung. In this Decad were held two Councels. Boniface is slain by the Frisians who were revolted from Christ. The Turks receive Mahumets
Alcaron.  Constantine defeats the Bulgarians divers times, but lost his Fleet: He beheaded the Pa∣triarch: he makes Nicephorus and Christopher his sons Caesars. Leo marrieth Irene the Athenian. Fergusius of Scotland strangled by the Queen, which fact she confessed, be∣cause he preferred Concubines to her, and so stabs her self before the people. Pipin sub∣dueth all Aquitain, and instituteth the Parliament of Paris. Charls the Great succeed∣ed in France, Burgundy, and Aquitain. Soyssons left to Caraloman. The Danes descen∣ded of the Cimbri, being expelled Scythia, place themselves in that Chersonese called Cimbrick from them. The Venetians depose their Duke Monegario, and put out his eyes for tyrannising. In the Church, a schisme which is the 11. is made by Philip a Priest, but he is cast out of the Lateran the fifth day, and Stephen the 4. chosen, who sate 4 years. This Decad produced 3 Councels: The Emperour assembleth all the Asian Monks at Ephesus, commanding them either to marry, or lose their eyes, and to be banished into Cyprus: He expels the Monks, and sels their Monasteries. The Saracens invade the Empire, and defeat the Emperours army in Isauria. The Bulga∣rians break the peace, which cost the lives of 12000 of their men. Leo the 4. succeedeth 770 Emperour 5 years: His brother Nicephorus for aspiring is banished. Telerick king of Bulgaria expelled by his subjects; is baptised in Constantinople, and made a Patritian. five of the Saracens Amira's killed in Syria by Leo's army. By putting the cold Crown kept in the Temple on his head, he sickned and died. Constantine 7 succeedeth with Irene 17 years. Mac-Donald seiseth on the Aebudes; he with the other rebels are killed by Argiles forces. Charls taketh Defiderius the Lombard, brings him into France, and restores all except Lombardy to the Pope. Charls beats the Saxons, and forceth them to be Christians. He expells the Westphalians out of his Kingdome, and takes Navarre, kils two Saracen Kings, instituteth the 12 Peers of France. Godfrey King of Denmark subdueth the Saxons, who are enjoyned to present every new King with 100 white-horses. The Spaniards are forced by the Saracens to pay a yearly tribute of Christian Virgins. Lescus 2. chosen King of Poland, for detecting the fraud of one Lescus, who used sinistrous means to be Prince. In the Church, Adrian was Pope 24 years; he first sealed with Lead. Desiderius makes a lay-man ArchBishop of Ravenna, whom the Pope expels. Desiderius for oppressing the Pope, is subdued by Charls. The title of Patritians in Rome abolished by Pope Adrian. 9 Councels assembled this Decad. Habdalla the Saracen, commands all Christians and Jews to be marked in their hands: The Pope and Councel gave full power to Charls and his successors to choose the Pope. A Sedition raised at Constantinople, in behalf of Nicephorus. Charls is sent to by Irene, for a match between his daughter and her son: Shee recovereth the booty from the 780 Selavi. Irenes forces defeated in Italy by the French, and break off the marriage of her son, whom she married to a mean Armenian called Mary. The Danes invade England; a League made between France and Scotland. The Scots and Irish make war upon each other. Pipin son to King Charls is crowned at Rome, King of Italy. The Saxons rebell, and are subdued: they are transplanted into Brabant and Flanders. The Dukes of Benevent and Bavaria rebel, and are subdued. Charls subdueth the Sclavonians. Ethel∣burga daughter to Offa the Saxon, poysoned her husband unwittingly, and fled into France, where she is thrust into a Monastery. Irene forced by the Saracens to pay tri∣bute; her Fleet is surprised by them. In the Church, Pope Adrian is god-father to Pipin Charls his son: he repairs Churches, and feeds 100 people daily in the Lateran. In this Decad were 5 Councels; one whereof was the 2. of Nice, or 8. General of 350 Bishops, for restoring Images. In Thrace, was digged out of a wall a stone-Coffin, with this inscription, Christ shall be born of the Virgin Mary, &c. Charls founded the Bishoprick of Breme. A Councel at Constantinople, disturbed by the people, about Images. Constantine undertakes the government, and deposeth his mother, and admits her again upon entreaty; he is defeated by the Bulgarians: he puts out the eyes of Nicephorus, 790 Christopher, and his Uncle Nicetas: Upon this, the Armenian Legions rebell: He put away his wife, and marrieth her maid: he overcomes the Saracens, and spoiles the Bulgarian Country. Irene puts out his eyes, the same day he so served his Uncle.
He dieth shortly after, and she reigns alone: She extinguished the line of Leo Isauricus, (About this time, the Sun darkned 17 dayes together) She makes peace with Charles, and puts out the eyes of Copronymus his son. Intercourse prohibited between Charles and Offa's subjects. The Danes waste England again. Egbert King of the West-Saxons becomes sole Monarch of England. Charles defeats the Hungarians and Saxons again; His son Pipin rebelleth, and is put into a Monastery. Charles builds a Bridge at Mentz over the Rhine; he kills 4000 rebellious Saxons. Alphonsus in Spain kills 70000 Moors, and frees the Land of the tribute of Virgins: He takes Lisbon from them, and makes a League with Charles. S. Iames is made Patron of Spain, whose Body was now found, and a Church built by Alphonsus for it. He sends rich Presents to Charles, who takes Buda in Hungary. In the Church, Adrian is yet Pope: He repairs the walls of Rome ruined by the Tiber. To him succeeds Leo 3. 21 years. 4 Synods held within this Decad. The Councel of Frankfort condemns the 2. Councel of Nice. Charles founded the Archbishoprick of Hamburgh, which afterward was translated to Breme. The Patriarch of Constanti∣nople is excommunicated by the Abbot, for consenting to the Emperors second marriage, his first wife yet living. In the East, Irene and Charles treat about a marriage; mean while Nicephorus banisheth her, 800 and reigns 8 years, he makes peace with Charles; Sicily and a part of Italy are reserved for the Greek Empire. Bardanes is proclaimed Emperor, but he waves it, and enters into a Covent: Nicephorus puts out his eyes, and makes his own son Stauratius Emperor; He is beat by the Saracens, and forced to pay an annual tribute; He tyranniseth, and loseth Sardis with much treasure, and 6000 Greeks to the Bulgarians. In the West, Charlemain is crowned Emperor by Pope Leo; He reigned 14 years; He repaireth Flo∣rence, punisheth the plotters against the Pope, takes Nuceria and other places from the Greeks, transplants the Saxons into France, and gives their lands to the Vandals, he wasts Bohemia, kils Lescus the Polonian; he builds Dresda & Numberg; then by will leaves Italy to Pipin, France to Lewis, Saxony and the rest to Charles. The Spanish Moors waste Sardinia and Corsica. Egbert the English Monarch expels Balred of Kent, which he makes a Province, and calls the whole Island by the name of England. The Scots begin to weare S. Andrews Crosse in their Banners, upon the Victory they had against Athelstane of Northumberland, which S. Andrew appearing promised to them. Frisia is subdued by the Danes. The Earldome of Arragon by marriage falls to Garzias King of Navarre. Mauritius Duke of Venice, flung the Bishop of Grada from an high tower, for reproving him of his lusts; upon this flieth with his father. Quarrels between the Herocleans and Aquileians. The Venetians side with the Moors against Pipin. The Saracens divide themselves into six Principalities. In the Church, Pope Leo sits again, after he had been beaten and imprisoned upon false crimes, of which he cleares himself in a Synod at Rome. 4 Councels were held in this Decad. Paulus Diaconus was the first that composed Postils for the year, at the command of Charles. In the East, Nicephorus and most of the Nobility slain by Crumnus the Bulgarian. Stauratius after two moneths is thrust into a Covent by Michael Curopulata. Thrace and Macedon 810 wasted by the Bulgarians; the Saracens defeated by Leo the Generell, who succeeded Emperor 7 years, Michael being retired into a Monastery, whose sons were gelded by Leo, and banished with their mother; He beats the Bulgarians into a peace. Michael is condemned to be burnt for conspiring against Leo, but is reprievd till after Christ∣masse, in the interim Leo is killed in the Temple. In the West, Pipin dieth at Ravenna, he left one son; his eldest brother Charles dieth issuelesse. Pipins son Bernard is made King of Italy. Charlemain, a little before his death, crowns his son Lewis Emperor; then dieth aged 72 years. His son Lewis, called the Pious, succeeded 27 years; He makes Lotharius King of France, and his Colleague. Pipin is made King of Aquitain, and Lewis King of Bavaria. Bernard Pipin's son rebelleth, with divers Bishops. Bernard dieth, and leaves three sons. The Bridge at Mentz burnt in three houres, which was not built in ten years. Lewis subdueth the Vandals. In Spain, the Moors rebell, and are slain by Alphonso. Popielus Prince of Poland had one of his sons
devoured by Rats, as he used in  his anger to wish. Siward and Ringo striving for the Kingdome of Denmark are both slain in battel. The Norwegians infest the Danish coast. Gaunt-Monastery burnt by ac∣cident. In the Church, Steven 5. sate 7 moneths: To him succeeded Paschalis 1. 7 yeares; he redeemed Captives, and built Churches. 10 Councels were held in this Decad. Herbert a Bishop is sent to the King of Swevia; to convert his people. St. Iames of Compostella began about this time to be famous for miracles Leo an enemy to Images. The Romans are permitted by the Emperor to choose their own Popes. In the East, Michael Balbus is released, and reigneth 8 years: He geldeth Leo's sons. One 820 Thomas aspires at the Empire, besiegeth Constantinople, but is defeated, taken and exe∣cuted, with his son. The Moors do much hurt by sea; they build Candy in Crete; they are there overcome by the Imperialists, who shortly after in their security are slain by the Moors. Euthemius Governor of Sicily revolteth to the Moors, but he is killed at Sy∣racuse. To Michael succeeded his son Theophilus 12 years: He puts to death the mur∣therers of Leo; He makes his subjects to weare short haire, because his were thin. In the West, Lewis warreth against Hungary; Lotharius is crowned Emperor at Rome; Afric wasted by the Imperial forces; A new plot detected against the Emperor. About this time it rained Corn in Gascoign. In Spain, the Moors are beacen; The country is wasted by the Normans. The Danes commit pyracies, at far as Constantinople. Harold King of Denmark, being expelled, is baptised with his brother Ericus, at Mentz. St. Marks Body is brought from Alexandria to Venice, which is laid in the Castle-chappel, and a Church erected to it. The Saracens invade Palestine, and waste Sicily. The Mo∣nastery of Gaunt rebuilt by the Abbot. In the Church, Eugenius 2. sate 3 years. A 12. Schisme is made by Zifinius the Antipope. Valentine succeeded 40 dayes. Then Gregory 4. 17 yeares. 8 Councels held in this Decad. The Greek Emperor gives way to erect Images without the City, but not within. Ebbo Bishop of Rhemes sent by the Pope to convert the Danes. At Acon Organs are used, the first in the Western Church. Denmark and Swedeland con∣verted. In the East, Theophilus defeats the Saracens; His son-in-law Alexius fights successefully against the Lombards. The Emperor was almost surprised by the Saracens, who take 830 many Cities from the Empire; they are beaten out of Asia by Manuel the Emperors Generall. In the West, Lewis pardoneth the Conspirators; his Empresse falsly accused is restored to his bed. Pipin upon his second rebellion is committed to Trevers, whence he escapeth. The Emperors sons take arms against him. The Pope with his Bishops banish the Empresse, and imprison the Emperor; who again by the German Peers is restored, his wife recalled, and his sons pardoned. Frisia invaded by the Normans, and Antwerp burnt by them. Lotharius takes some places in Italy from the Pope. Lewis makes his son Charles King of Normandy. Pipin dieth, and the Kingdome of Aquitain is divided between Lotharius and Charles. Lewis of Bavaria rebells against his father. The Danes defeat Egbert King of England, and are defeated by him; At Portsmouth they beat, at Southampton are beaten. About this time ended the Picts Kingdom, being utterly destroyed by the Scots. The Bishops of Lions and Vienne excommunicate Lewis for marrying his Kinswoman: The Bishop of Utricht slain by her command, for threaten∣ing to excommunicate Lewis. Ordonius the Spanish King takes Cauria and Salmantica, and kills the Moors, who in battel slew Sancho King of Navar. Regmer the Dane taken by Hella King of Ireland, and stung to death with serpents. Ericus King of Denmark, of a Persecutor becomes a Convert. Iohn Duke of Venice forced to flie into France, from whence returning is put into a Monastery. In the Church, Pope Gregory 4. instituteth the Feast of the Holy-Trinity; he calls the Feast of All-Martyrs, All-Saints. 4 Councels held within this Decad. The Feast of All-Saints translated from the 12. of May to the 1. of November. S. Bartholmew's Bones drowned in the Indian sea, are brought from Lipara to Benevent.
In the East, Theophilus taketh Sosopetra the Saracens chief City. The Persians, for want of pay, salute Theophilus Emperor, who is taken and imprisoned, and at last executed. 840 To Theophilus succeeds his son Michael 25 years. The Bulgarian King is expelled by his subjects, for being a Christian: the Emperor gives him another country. In the West, Lewis dieth; Lotharius succeeds 15 years. Pipin obtains Normandy. Lotharius is twice defeated by his brothers: The difference is referred to 120 Noblemen, who award to Lotharius, Italy, a part of France, Burgundy, and Austria, which from him was called Lotharingia. Lewis King of Germany beats the Vandals. Bononia rased by the Em∣peror, for abusing his Son. The Bohemians rebell, and are subdued by the Emperor, whose forces are at last mastered by them. The English defeat the Danes. Kenneth the Scots King, removes the Marble-stone (brought from Spain to Ireland, and thence to Scotland) out of Argile into Scone, which he inclosed in a Woodden-Chair, wherein the Scots Kings were crowned. In France, Charles the Bald reigns. The Normans enter France as far as Paris. Alphonsus 3. of Spain, called the Great, makes S. Iames-Church of stone, which before was earth; He wasteth the Moors Country. The Normans loose 70 ships at Gallecia. Toledo taken by the Moors. Popielus Prince of Poland, with his wife and children devoured by Rats, which grew out of the Bodies they had murthered. The Venetian ships taken and sunk by the Saracens, who waste Dalmatia, and take Ancona; They fire also the Suburbs of Rome, and rob the Churches of St. Peter and St. Paul. In the Church, Sergius 2 was Pope 3 years: He is opposed by Iohn a Deacon, which made the 13. Schisme. Sergius (at first) was called Os Porci. He built the Castle of S. Angelo. Leo 4. succeeded 8 years; He built a new City begun by Sergius, and calls it Leonina; He with the Neapolitans beats the Saracens at sea. 7 Councels as∣sembled this Decad. The Romans refuse to confirm Leo Pope, without the Em∣peror. Iohn the Patriarch deposed, for opposing Images. In the East, Bardas the Emperors Uncle made him kill his Tutor Theodictus, because he 850 was not advanced. Michael sends his mother and sisters into a Monastery: He is beaten by the Saracens at Samosata, and beaten again by Amer the Saracen in the West. The Saracens are expelled Benevent by Lewis, who is made Emperor by Lotharius, and he enters a Monastery. Lewis reigned 18 years: He makes the Dalmatians pay Tribute; He warreth against the Selavi, Vandals, and Sarab. He wins most of France. The Danes enter the Thames, plunder Canterbury and London, but are defeated in Surry. The Scots beat the English, and are beaten by them. The Picts passe into Denmark and Norway. In France, Pipin escaping out of his Monastery, is taken and imprisoned. The Normans take Tours and Anjou, and upon civil-wars at home, return. In Spain, Toledo and Corduba rebell. Alphonsus raiseth the Moors from the siege of Conimbria. The Danes invade Holland. Lotharius confirms the Venetian priviledges. In the Church, Leo made many Collects. He builds Centum-cellae, or Civita-Vecchia, spoiled by the Saracens, and calls it Leopolis. To him succeeded Iohn 8. who, some say, was a woman, others deny it. Bennet 3. succeeded 2 years; opposed by Anasta∣sius, in the 14. Schisme. Nicholaus 1. succeeds 9 years: He hid himself, that he might not be chosen. This Decad afforded 9 Councels. The Manichees are punished by Theodora in the East. In the East, Constantinople is besieged by the Russians. Bardas, by Michaels negligence, made Caesar: he favoured Learning. The Church of Sophia burnt. Bardas killed by Basilius, 860 who is made Caesar; he kills Michael, and reigns 19 years; he caused restitution to be made of half, which Michael had spent on his Flatterers; he raiseth the Saracens from Racusa, and takes Samosata from them, and helpeth Lewis against them. In the West, Caroloman rebels against his father Lewis the Emperor, forceth the Sclavi to peace; he expels the Saracens out of Campania into Calabria; he is reconciled to his brother Charles. Lotharius forsakes his Concubine, and takes his Wife again. Lambert Duke of Spoletum loseth his Dutchy for plundring Rome. The Saracens lose many places to the Western Princes. Bari is taken, and in it the Saracen-Sultan. Ethelred the English King defeated the Danes nine times; slew nine of their Earls, and one of their Kings. The Danes challenge Pictland, and commit great outrages in Fife. Thierry son to
Sigebert  Duke of Aquitaine is made the first Earle of Holland by the French King Charles. The Normans waste Anjou and other places. Charls invadeth Lotharius his kingdome, and is crowned at Mentz, and divides the Kingdome with Lewis King of Germany: the Saracens are expelled Grada, by the Venetians. Baldwin of Flanders reconciled to Charls the Bald. Thierry of Holland, subdueth his rebellious people, and the Frislanders; obtaineth Zealand, and drives the Danes out of Holland. In the Church, Nicolaus sits yet; he opposed the Synod of Constantinople, and excom∣municates Photius the Patriarch, and is excommunicated by him; and forceth Lo∣tharius to take his wife again. Hadrian succeeds 4 years: He threatueth Charls and Lewis for invading the kingdome of Lorrain. 16 Councels held this Decad; one whereof was the eighth General Councel of Constantinople, against Photius. The Sclavi in Moravia receive the Gospel: the Arch-Bishop of Colen and Trevers deposed for cau∣sing Lotharius to repudiate his wife. Lotharius denies the Popes power in Temporals. The King of Bulgaria becomes a Monk, and puts out the eyes of his Apostate son. The Huns and Russians converted: The Pope in the Synod of Constantinople obtaineth ju∣risdiction over the Bulgarians; but they fell afterward to the Greek Church. In the East, Basilius refuseth to acknowledge Lewis Emperour: therefore the match be∣tween Constantine his son and Lewis his daughter is broken off. Basilius takes Caesarea in 870 Cappadocia, with much booty. The Saracens invade the Empire, but are expelled: They of Tharsus and Cilicia are beaten at Sea. In the West, Lewis is crowned King of Lorrain at Rome, and is taken prisoner by Aldegisus D. of Benevent. Lewis warreth a∣gainst the Bohemians, who are forced to pay Tribute. The Emperour dieth at Millan; and Charls the Bald crowned at Rome. 2 years after, Lewis of Germany dieth; his three sons divide his lands. The Emperour is defeated for incroaching on them: he makes Boso King of Arles, and is poysoned by a Jew. Lewis the Stammerer succeeds 18 months; he dyeth. Caroloman the next heir resigns (being paralitick) to Charls the Grosse 8 years, so the Empire is translated from the Western French to the Eastern. Edmunds-bury in England built to the memory of Edmund the Martyr. Peace made between the Danes and English. Denewolf of a Cow-heard is made Bishop of Winchester, for entertaining King Elfred in his flight from the Danes: the Scots beat the Danes, and are beaten by them. In France, Caralomans eyes are put out for rebelling: a great Plague of Locusts, and Dearth ensueth. Peace in Spain between Alphonsus and the Moores. Most part of England subdued by the Danes. Canutus their king is baptized in England: the Nor∣mans defeated in Frisia: the Saracens are beaten by the Persians; they force the Pope to pay tribute, they take Syracusa. In the Church, Iohn 8. sate ten years; he payes to the Saracens 25000 crowns, to leave his territories: He is imprisoned by the D. of Spoletum, whom upon his escape to France, he excommunicated. 7 Councels held this Decad. Bels first used in the Greek Church; upon the sending of twelve Bels to Basilius the Emperour, by Urso D. of Venice. Photius the Patriarch is restored by a Synod of Constantinople. In the East, Basilius imprisoneth his son Leo, for wearing a Dagger; but is freed by some 880 words uttered by a Parrot: Basilius being wounded by a Stag, dieth. Leo 6 succedeth 25 years; he loseth much by the Lombards, and his forces in Macedonia are defeated by the Bulgarians, who desire peace, upon the comming of the Hungarians to aide the Empe∣rour. In the West, Charls the Emperour, with Lewis king of Germany, besiege Vienna, and drive Boso out of France. Lewis robs the Church of Mentz, to pay the Normans, who had invaded his Territories; upon his death Charls seiseth on his lands: the Normans burn Constance and Trevers. Guido E. of Tuscany aids the Saracens against the Emperour, who are afterward reconciled. Bavaria and Austria spoiled by the Sclavi: the Empe∣rour is deposed for giving away Normandy, and being unsit for government. Arnulph succeeds 12 years. England about this time was divided into Shires, Hundreds and Ty∣things, under King Elfred. The Danes are forced into France. The Scots beat the Irish, and take Dublin. Boso makes himself King of Burgundy. Paris besieged by the Normans; of them Caraloman buyes his peace, after he had taken Vienna: they waste France, and be∣siege Paris again; the Emperour to quiet them gives them Neustria, now called Nor∣mandy. Odo of Saxony, of whom came the Capets, defeats the Normans in Flanders. Gallecia in Spain is made a kingdome, and Ordogno Alphonsus second son King thereof. Alphonsus is forced by his son Garzia to resigne Leon to him, who died
childelesse: so  Leon falls to his brother Ordogno, who beat the Moors. The Hungarians being deluded by Leo, invade the Western Empire, chiefly France, to be eased of their Tribute laid on them by Charlemain. In the Church, to Iohn (whose brains were beaten out with a hammer) Martin 2. suc∣ceeded 1 year; then Adrian 3. 1 year; then Steven 5. 6 years. 3 Councels were held in this Decad. Godfrey King of the Normans baptised. The Monastery of Mount Cassin burnt by the Saracens. Photius the Patriarch deposed. In the East, Simeon the Bulgarian, upon the departure of the Hungarians, vexed Leo again; who to quiet them, restores their prisoners. The Saracens take Lemnos and Taurome∣nium 890 in Sicily. The Lombards lose Benevent to the Marquis of Tuscany, after 330 years possession. Thessalonica taken by the Saracens. In the West, Arnulph makes the Duke of Moravia King of Bohemia. Guido is crowned Emperor by the Pope. Arnulph is aided by the Hungarians against Zuindebold the Moravian, whom he had made King of Bohe∣mia; He takes divers Towns in Italy; Rome is taken by means of a Hare: his wife is convicted of adultery; he falls into a Palsie, and dieth of the Lousie-disease; His sonne Lewis 4. succeeds 12 years. The Danes do much hurt in England; the Scots help the English against them. The Normans are beaten in Britany. Charles the Simple of France and Odo have great wars, Ordogno of Spain, and Garzias King of Navar, are defeated by the Moors. Possessions are given to the Hungarians, for their service to Arnulph the Emperor. In the Church, Formosus is Pope 4 years: He is opposed by Sergius the Antipope, which made the 15. Schisme. Boniface 6. succeeds, who was expelled within a moneth for his lewd life. His successor was Steven 6. 3 years: He abused and mutilated the dead body of Formosus, which he caused to be digged up; he is taken by Aldebert Marquis of Tuscany, and strangled in prison. Romanus succeeded 3 moneths. 5 Synods held within this Decad. In the East, the Saracens invade Greece, and are defeated, and then defeat Himerius the Em∣perors Generall. Constantine son to Leo is crowned Emperor. The Saracens defeat the 900 Emperors Fleet. In the West, Lewis is beaten by the Hungarians, who waste all Ger∣many. The rebellious Frislanders are subdued by Thyerry the Hollander; who in signe of subjection enjoined them to make low-doors, that they might stoop as they entred. Berengarius in Italy is defeated by the Hungarians, and their departure is procured with mony. In Spain, Alphonso defeats the Saracens, then entred a Monastery, which shortly after he forsook, then he was imprisoned and lost his eyes. Ramirus of Spain invades Toledo, takes Madrid, and defeats the Moors. Roan in France with other places taken by Rollo D. of Normandy, who besiege Paris and beat the French. In the Church, Theodorus 2. sits 20 dayes: Iohn 9. succeeded 4 years: He confirmed the Acts of Formosus, which caused a sedition, so that he fled from Ravenna. Benet 4. succeeded 2 years. The 16 Schism, in which Leo 5. after 40 dayes, is im∣prisoned by Christopher, aided by the Marquis of Tuscany, and after 7 moneths, is sent unto a Covent by Sergius 3. Theodora, the Marquises Concubine, ruleth in Rome, Sergius makes her daughter Marosia his Concubine, of whom he begot Iohn the 11 or 12. This Decad produced 5 Councels. The Bohemians and Nor∣mans converted to the Faith. Leo the Emperour takes a fourth wife, against the Custome of the Greek Church, therefore he is Excommunicated by the Patriarh of Constantinople, whom for this, Leo banished. In the East, to Leo succeedeth his son Constantine 8. 50 years, who ruled with his mother Zoe. Constantinople besieged by Simeon Prince of Bulgaria, who is hired to return home. 910 He breaks the peace, and takes Adrianople. The Italian Princes crave help against the Saracens, who had invaded Calabria and Apulia. The Greeks beat the Bulgarians, and are beat by them. Zoe is sent into a Monastery, and Romanus rules with the Emperor his son-in-law. In the West, the
Emperor buyes his peace of the Hungarians: he dieth  of grief, and in him endeth the race of Charlemain in Germany. Conradus Duke of Fran∣conia succeeds 7 years. Henricus Auceps aspires. The Dukes of Suevia disturb the peace. The Emperor is beaten by the Duke of Merspurg. Ratisbone taken from the Emperor by Arnulph Duke of Bavaria, and lost again. Conradus sickneth, and commends Henry Duke of Saxony to the Empire: This Henry reigned 17 years; He was sirnamed the Falconer. In France, William Earl of Aquitain founded the Monastery of Clugny. Robert Earl of Paris rebels against the King for his insufficiencie, who is surprised and im∣prisoned by Robert Earl of Vermendois. In Spain, the Moors are beaten again, and the Rebels suppressed. The Navarrois are defeated by the Castilians. The Venetians ob∣tain leave of the Emperor to coyn mony. The Hungarians invade Italy. In the Church, Anastasius sate 2 years. Iohn 10. succeeded 16 years: He falls out with Albericus Marquis of Tuscia, and is expelled the City; whereupon he calls in the Hungarians, who commit many outrages. Albericus is slain by his people. One Councel was held this Decad at Constans, inhibiting marriage in the 7. Degree. In the East, Romanus crowns his wife and son, and subscribes before the Emperor; he is 920 overcome by the Bulgarians, who take Hadrianople, but are expelled by Romanus. The Sa∣racens at Lemnos are defeated by the Emperors fleet. Romanus makes two of his sons Cae∣sars, & another a Church-man. In the West, Burchard D. of Sweve is forced to acknowledg Henry Emperor, who gets Lorrain from Charles of France. Arnulph is forced to obedi∣ence. The Hungarians being defeated by the Emperor, make peace for nine years, after which time they are expelled Germany. The Vandals subdued, and Brandeburgh taken by the Emperor; multitudes of Vandals killed neer the Baltic sea. In France, Robert Earl of Paris is chosen King, whom Charles assisted by the Normans slew: then Raoul Duke of Burgundy is chosen, who leagueth with the Normans. Charles is released, and again imprisoned, then dyeth. In Spain, the rebellions of Castile, Navar and Gallecia are suppressed by Ordonius 3. who dyeth in his expedition against the Moors. Elfred, an English Nobleman, who had conspired to put out King Athelstans eyes, abjured him∣self at Rome, fell down and dyed 3 days after. Athelstan overcomes the Welsh, and beats the Scots. Venice burnt by the Hungarians. Siffrid the Dane having wasted Flanders, and ravished the Earls daughter, hanged himself. In the Church Anastasius sits, who consecrated a Boy of 5 years old Bishop of Rhemes. Raoul King of Burgundy is made King of Italy, to cross Berengarius, who is expelled Italy, who therefore called in the Hungarians, that burn Papia. The Pope makes Hugh, Earl of Arles, King against Raoul, who returned to France. Guy, this Hugh's brother, imprisoneth, and strangleth the Pope, after he had killed his brother Peter. Leo 6. succeeds, whom Guy after 7 moneths imprisoned; he dyed, and Stephen 8. suc∣ceeded two years. Marozia the strumpet, was the death of these two Popes. 3 Coun∣cels kept this Decad. Raoul King of Burgundy, bestows on the Emperour the Spear that wounded Christ. In the East, the Russians waste the country about Constantinople: divers Greeks gelded by the Beneventines. In the West, the Hungarians being denyed their tribute of the Em∣perour, 930 spoil Germany, but are at last defeated and expelled. Misna made a Marquisat, and Guelders an Earldom: Henry dieth, to him succeeds Otho the first his son 42 years. The Palatine for rebelling, is banished, who being pardoned, conspires with Henry the Emperours brother. In England, King Athelstan drives the Britains out of Devonshire into the remote parts of Cornwall; he takes Westmerland and Cumberland from the Scots; to him was sent out of France, Constantine the Great his sword, in the hilt of which was one of the nails of the Cross. In France, Lewis son to Charles returns out of Eng∣land, and reigneth 18 years. In Spain, Sancho King of Leon recovers his Kingdom, to whom Ferdinand of Castile selleth a horse and a hawk, conditionally to double the pay∣ment everyday, after it should become due: This Ferdinand is taken prisoner by the Navarrois, and released; so was the King of Navar taken and released: Ferdinand escapes out of prison by his wises means, who exchanged apparel with him. Sancho makes Castile a Kingdom, in satisfaction for his horse and hawke. About this time some Bishopricks were founded in Denmark. The Istrians by surprising some Venetian Virgins, as they presented themselves
after their custome, in our  Lady Church, (the memorial whereof is kept at Candlemasse) are forced to pay a yearly tribute to Venice. Comaculum refusing to pay, is taken and annexed to the Venetian Ter∣ritories. The Saracens are beaten in Castile and Germany: Genua is taken by them, and cruelly used. In the Church, Iohn 11. sate 6 years; Marozia delivers Rome to Hugh, who imprison∣eth the Pope; whom Albericus freed, and expelled Hugh with Marozia. Leo 7. suc∣ceeds 4 years. Two Councels held this Decad. The Audean Hereticks obtain now the name of Anthropomorphites. Romanus makes his son at 16 years, Patriarch of Constan∣tinople, to whom he procures a Pall from the Pope. In the East, Romanus hires the Turks to leave Thrace: he is sent to a Covent by his sonne 940 Steven. Romanus having lost two of his other sons, dieth. Constantine reigned 12 years; he inviteth Schollars into Greece. In the West, the Emperour and French King are re∣conciled. Henry the Emperours Brother obtains pardon for his Rebellion. Otho be∣ing wounded in hunting, makes his son Ludolphus his Colleague and successor, but afterward changed his mind: He makes his Brother Henry, Duke of Bavaria; who ex∣pelled thence the Hungarians. Otho defeates the Danes. In Italy, Hugh made a league with the Saracens: his people upon this revolt; he flies into France, and becomes a Monk. The Saracens beaten out of Calabria by the Greeks. Otho invades Flanders, and is opposed by the Gauntois. Aquileia taken by Henry the Emperours Brother. St. Wen∣ceslaus is made King in Bohemia by the Emperour; he refused the Title, not the Govern∣ment: he is murthered by his brother in the Church; and his wicked mother the cause of this murther, was swallowed quick in the Earth. Otho beats the Danes, and wastes their Country. In Spain, Zancho is poysoned with an Apple by Gonsalvus the Re∣bel, whom he had pardoned. Ferdinand loseth many places in Castile to the Moores, and dieth for grief. Ramire defeats the Moors in Leon. In France, the D. of Normandy is reconciled to the King, who takes Rohan, and makes Robert Earl of Paris. Hugh Ma∣jor of the Palace, takes the King in England. Analph of Ireland intrudes into Northum∣berland, who is banished by King Edmund, and Cumberland bestowed on the Scots. King Edmund is slain treacherously at a feast. Analph is recalled by the Northumbrians, and made King there. In the Church, Steven being dead of a wound received in a tumult, Martine the 3. sate 3 years; to him succeeded Agapetus the 2. 9 years. In this Decad were called 5 Councels. The Russians persecute the Christians. Otho spreads Christianity in Den∣mark, Swethland and other northern parts. In the East, the Emperours Fleet is defeated by the Saracens at Candy. Bardus the Empe∣rours 950 General, taketh much from them. Romanus poysoned his Father, who died not in two years after, some of the poyson being spilt. In the West, Otho forceth Boleslaus the Bohemian to submit: he adds Belgium and Burgundy to the Empire: divers rebell a∣gainst Otho, who at last submit. The Bishop of Saltzburg's eyes are put out for calling the Bavarians into Bavaria, where they were all slain. Otho subdueth the Vandals; Otho by marrying Adelheida becoms King of Italy, which he leaves to Berengarius except Verona and Aquileia, which he gave to Henry his brother. Berengarius playes the tyrant, and wars with the Pope for the Dutchy of Spoletum. Piedro of Venice is banished, and turns Pyrat against the Venetian ships, the report of which killed the Duke his father with grief: he is notwithstanding recalled by the State. The Church of Grada is made Me∣tropolis of Venia and Istria. Harold the Dane holdeth of the Emperour, and receiveth the Faith. Five of the Hungarian Kings hanged in Bavaria. In Spain, Garzias of Castile, invadth Leon: he pursueth his wife with her Adulterer, and kils them both in bed. The Moores mean while invade his Territories. In France, Lewis is killed by a fall from his horse; His son Lotharius succeeds 32 years: Hugh by his death, leaveth his Dutchy of Paris to Hugh Capet, who is declared Duke of France and Earl of Poitou. The Northumbrians and Mercians revolt from Edwy king of England, for his evil life, and stup his brother Edgar against him: The King hereupon dieth for grief. Edgar reigned 56 years; He rigs out a great Fleet to guard the Coasts. Malcolme King of Scotland is murthered in Murrey. In the Church, Iohn 12. sate 8 years, he was the first Pope (say some) that changed his name from Octavian to Iohn. 3 Councels held this Decad. St. Matthews reliques translated from Ethiopia to Sulernum. Helena Queen of Russia is baptized at Constan∣tinople; she sends to Otho for Priests to convert her Subjects.
In the East, Romanus 2. reigned 3 years; he beat the Saracens in Crete, by Nicephorus Phocas; he was forbidden to return to Constantinople, because there was a prophesie, that the Conquerour of Crete should be Emperour: which fell out true; for he succeeded 6 960 years: he beats the Saracens out of Cilicia: He is sorry that his forces took Antioch; be∣cause he was told, that if it were taken he should miscarry; he becomes covetous and odious; he kils Otho's Ambassadours, who by his own order came to treate with him about a match, between young Otho, and his daughter Theophania: He is killed by Iohn Zimisces, and his own Empresse. This Iohn succeeded 6 years; he thrusts the Em∣presse into a Monastery, and sends Theophania to Otho: In the We, Otho's aide is intrea∣ted by the Pope against Berengarius, whom Otho defeats, and causeth his son Otho to be crowned: He sends the wife of Berengarius to him; he setleth Lombardy, and deposeth the Pope for adhering to his enemy: He banisheth Bereus with his wife and children into Bavaria. Adelbert his enemy being defeated, the Pope is by him restored: then to re∣venge the death of his Ambassadours, he cut off the Noses of divers Calabrian and Apu∣lian Greeks, and sends them to Constantinople. The Saracens lose Crete, Cyprus, with 100 Cities, Cilicia, Tripolis in Phenicia, Antioch, Calabria, and Apulia, all this within this Decad. Harold of Norway, by sacrificing his two sons, obtained a Tempest which dis∣persed the Danish Fleet, that came to demand tribute. Mecislaus King of Poland is Bap∣tized; he builds many Churches, and erects two Archbishopricks. Edgar King of Eng∣land, imposeth a yearly tribute of 300 Wolves upon the Welch: He is cheated of his wife by his favourite Ethelwolde, whom he slew, and then married her. The Danes land in Scotland, and are forced to flie to their ships. In the Church, Pope Iohn is deposed for divers crimes. Leo the 8. is chosen, but upon the Emperours departure Iohn is restored again; Leo flieth to Otho; he is slain in the act of Adultery by the womans husband. Bennet the 5. is chosen. Otho returneth and setles Leo; so Bennet is banished to Hamburg. This makes the 17 Schisme. Iohn 13 succeeds 6 years; he is imprisoned 11 moneths, and restored by the Emperour; he was the first that consecrated Bels, and gave them names. 6 Councels held this De∣cad. Miesco King of Poland ordereth, that every Knight at the reading of the Gospel should draw his sword in defence thereof, and at the naming of it, to say, [Glory be to thee, O Lord.] Hungary is converted. In the East, Bardas overcomes the Rebels in Asia: the Rossi expelled out of Bulgaria. Zimi∣sces 970 is murthered by an Eunuch for complaining against the wealth of the Eunuchs. Ba∣silius and Constantine sons of Romanus succeed 50 years. Bardas rebelleth, and joyneth with the Saracens. The Imperialists beaten by the Bulgarians. In the West, Otho marrieth with Theophania: Otho the father dieth, and Otho the son succeeds 10 years. Henry Duke of Bavaria opposeth him a while, then desisteth; Henry afterward rebelleth, and flieth into Bohemia, which is wasted by the Emperour, and Henry with his son banished: Otho makes peace with Lotharius. Elcain the Saracen Prince makes Alcair in Aegypt his Seat: they lose Fraxinetum, and recover Consentia. The Venetians drive them from Capua. Piedro Duke of Venice, for his tyrannies is killed with his son: he set his Pa∣lace, S. Marks Church, and 300 houses on fire: His successor Pietro Ursulo repaired all again, and bestowed a Table of Gold on the High-Altar. The Isle of Sembia in Russia is subdued by Aquinus the King of Denmarks eldest son: his youngest son Sueno rebelleth against him; at last, this Harold the father is slain, and Sueno succeeds. A part of Lorrain is given by Otho to the Bishops of Liege, Trevers, and Colen. S. Iames of Compostella over∣thrown by the Moors; they are defeated by king Pharemund. In England, king Edgar built 47 Monasteries, besides Rumsey-Abby for Nuns; he is murthered by his mother in law: she in pennance built the Monastery of Malmesbury and Wharwell. Duffus the Scots king is bewitched and murthered: Culenus his successor, for his wicked life, is also slain by a Thane whose daughter he had ravish'd. In the Church, Domnus 2. sate 3 moneths; Bennet 6. succceded: he is strangled in the Castle of St. Angelo, by means of Boniface 7. which makes the 18 Schisme: he seeing the City bent against him, flieth to Constantinople with all the Jewels of the Vatican. To him succeeds Bennet the 7. 9 years. This Decad produced 5 Councels. The Patriarch of Constantinople prohibits Zimisces to enter the Church, for murthering Nicephorus; he layeth the fault on the Empresse, who is made a Nun, and he an Emperour. A Wheele-wrights son is made Archbishop of Mentz: hence a Cart-wheel was added to the Arms of that See.
In the East, Basilius by the Saracens help recovereth Calabria and Apulia from Otho, whom they put to flight, and took him in Merchants Cloths, but he redeemed himself, and s∣seth 980 on Benevent. Larissa is taken from the Greeks by Samuel King of Bulgaria. The Ar∣my proclaims Barias Phocas Emperour, who laid siege to Constantinople; but he died suddenly: Upon this, the Greeks submit to the Emperour. In the West, the Greeks are expelled out of Illyricum and Dalmatia by Otho: in his abscence, Germany is wasted by the Selavi, and Brandenburg taken. Otho having defeated the Saracens of Italy, is woun∣ded by a poysonable arrow, and dieth: he is interred at Rome. His son Otho 3. suc∣ceeds 17 years. Henry of Bavaria proclaims himself Emperour, seiseth on Otho, but is forced to restore him to the Bishoprick of Mentz: Otho subjugates Bohemia, and insti∣tutes the Palatinat of the Rhene. In France, Lotharius invadeth Lorraine, takes Verdun with the Earl, and then restores them: to him succeeded his son Lewis 5. who is poi∣soned by his wife. Hugh Capel is chosen, and Charls of Lorrain the heir rejected; he ta∣keth Leon and driveth Hugh from it. In England, the Danes doe much mischief, but are beaten in the West. Richard Earl of Normandy having invaded England, is perswadd by the Pope to return. Hay a plough-man in Scotland, put the Danes to flight, after they had defeated the Kings forces. Great troubles between the Countries of Anguse and Mernes. In Spain, to Pharemund succeedeth Alphonsus 5. King of Leon 28 years. In Den∣mark King Sueno Apostatiseth; he is taken three times by the Iutians, and redeems him∣self, 1 for his weight in Gold, 2. and twice his weight in Silver: the last time he is re∣deemed by the Danish Ladies, who sold their Jewels to free him; therefore he made women capable to inherit: He is at last expelled his kingdome by Ericus King of Swed∣land. Otho prohibiteth all Italy from commercing with Venice: wherefore the houses of the Caloprini are rased, their wives and children imprisoned, for incensing Otho against Venice: the Duke becomes a Monk. In the Church, Iohn the 13 sate 8 moneths; and is starved by Boniface the 7. who after 9 years returneth to Constantinople, and after 4 moneths died suddenly: his body was dragged through the streets: succeeded Iohn 14. 11 years; he was expelled by Crescentius the Consul, and is by him again recalled. Two Synods held this Decad. Adelbert B. of Prague, preacheth to the Hungarians, and leaves Bohemia. In the East, Samuel Prince of Bulgaria takes many Greek Commanders prisoners, whom the Emperours army redeemeth by seising on his Tents. In the West, Otho is crowned 990 at Rome; he puts Crescentius to death for rebelling, and restores the Pope: he makes Crescentius his widow his Concubine, whom he burned, for causing him execute an Earl whom she falsly accused. In France, Charls taketh Rhemes: he is betrayed and dieth in prison. Hugh dischargeth the office of Major of the Palace, and erecteth a Constableship: he excluded Bastards from inheriting the Crown. To him succeeds Robert his son. In Spain, Sancho poysoned his mother with that poyson she had provided for him: Hence the custome of Spain is for the women to drink first. Barcelona spoiled by the Moores, and the Earl killed; 70000 Moores are slain, and all recovered from them. In Eng∣land the Danes are hired by Etheldred to depart; they enter the land again with divers fleets, and waste many parts of the kingdome. Kenneth in Scotland poysoned the Prince of Cumberland, that his own son might succeed; whom he declareth heir: he is affrighted in a Vision for this murther; visits the Shrine of Palladius, and is murthered by a wo∣man. Constantine the Bald, assumeth the crown: Malcolme, Kenneth's son opposeth him in vain: Kenneth, Malcolme's base brother, and Constantine are slain in a battel. Grime, Ne∣phew to Duffus makes himself King. Adelbert B. of Prague labouring to convert Borus∣sia, is slain there. In Hungary King Stephen establisheth Christianity. In Denmark, Sueno by the Scots help, recovereth his kingdom. Olaus king of Norway is defeated at Sea, and drowned by Sueno, who thereupon possessed that kingdome. The Venetians take Cor∣cyra, and destroy Pharos: they obtain of Otho, jurisdiction over their own Churches: It is ordered that the Duke of Venice should be also stiled Duke of Dalmatia; they take 40 Pyrat ships. In the Church, Iohn 15 sate 4 moneths; Gregory 5. 3 years; the 19 schisme follows: for Crescentius expelleth him, and sets up Iohn Bishop of Placentia; but Gregory is restored, Iohn whipped, exoculated and slain; and Crescentius after the losse of his members hanged. Silvester 2. succeeded 4 years; this Decad produced 7 Synods.
In the East, the Bulgarians are beaten by the Emperour, who recovers most of his Cities: he sends forces against the Saracens, now before Capua. In the West, Otho visits the bo∣dy 1000 of Adelbert in Polonia: He is taken at Rome, and released; at last is poysoned with a pair of gloves, which Crescentius his widow gave him. Henry 2. succeeded 23 years, he defeats all his opposers: he being in danger at Papia, leapeth down from a Wall, and dis-joynts his thigh, whence he halted, and from this was nicknamed, The lame. He had wars and peace with Flanders, and quarrels with the D. of Bavaria. Robert the French King makes his son Robert Duke of Burgundy, being escheated to the Crown. Alphonso of Spain correcteth the Gothic Laws. Sancho King of Navar stiles himself King of Spain: His son Garzia is dis-inherited for accusing his mother of Adultery, and Ramire made King of Arragon. Alphonso besieging Viscum in Portugal is shot dead with an arrow. The Danes are burnt in a Church at Oxford: they rase Excester, spoil Norwich, take the Isle of Wight; the Canterburians redeem their peace with money. In Scotland it is agreed that Grime should remain King, and Malcolm with his heirs should succeed. Grime ty∣rannizeth, he is taken by Malcolm in Atholl, and his eyes put out: To him succeeds Malcolm 2. 13 years. Boleslaus is made King of Poland by the Emperour, who giveth the spear of St. Maurice, and a nail of the Cross for the Armes of that Kingdom. Cra∣covia is taken by the Bohemians, and Prague by the Polanders, with the Vice-grave and King, whose eyes are put out. Boleslaus subdueth Moravia. Giula Governour of Tran∣silvania invades Hungary. King Stephen takes Giulas wife and children, and treasure enough to build a Church in Alba. Giula is baptized with his Family, and dismissed. The Earl of Flanders, and the Emperour differ abou Lorrain: the EarI takes Valenciens, and restores it to the Emperour, who bestows it upon the Earl, with the Isles in Zea∣land, which occasioned a long War between the Flemmins and Hollanders. Ierusalem taken by the Saracens. In the Church, Iohn the 16. sate 5 moneths: Iohn the 7. succeeded 6 years, then Sergius 4. 3 years. In this Decad were held 3 Councels. The Greek Church is united to the Latine. The feast of Mary's Nativity observed by Fulbert B. of Charters. The Temple of the Sepulchre overthrown by the Prince of Babylon, upon the Jews importuni∣ty; but they are banished, and the Temple rebuilt by Mary the Princes mother. In the East, the Bulgarians are defeated, and there eyes put out, except their Commanders, 1010 who lost but one eye. The Emperour defeateth the Saracens, and subdueth all Bulga∣ria, Prince Iohn being slain. The Normans are expelled Apulia. In the west, Brem and Hamburg spoiled by the Saxons and Vandals. The Emperour is worsted by the Bohe∣mians. The King of Burgundy makes the Emperour his Heir; hereupon the Burgun∣dians rebell. In Spain, Pharemund the 3. King of Leon repaireth the Churches ruined by the Saracens. The Earldom of Castile falls to the King of Navar. Mahumet is the last King of the Moors in Corduba: Pharemund is slain in battell by Ferdinand of Castile, the first of that name, King of Castile and Leon 37 years. The Danes invade Canterbury again, kill the Archbishop, Monks and multitudes of People: Sueno kills the Bishop of London, takes it, and expels Ethelred. His son Canutus is expelled, and returns; and Ethelred being dead, the Kingdom is divided between Edmund Ironside and Canutus: Edmund is slain, and Canutus Crowned. The Danes in Scotland are overthrown at Aberden, in memory thereof a Bishoprick is erected there by Malcolme. The Polan∣ders invade Pomerania and are defeated by the Emperour: The Normans waste Frisia, and burn Utricht. The Saracens take Sardinia from the Pisans, and lose it again: they are expelled Italy by the Popes Army. In the Church, Benet the 8. sate 12 years. Gregory is set up by another faction, and Ben∣net expelled, which makes the 20. Schism. Benet is restored by the Emperour. 5 Councels assembled this Decad. Iews executed at Rome for whipping Christs Picture. 13 Manichees burnt at Orleance. It was decreed in the Councel of Nimi∣gen, that the Bread should stand on the right side of the Altar, and the Chalice on the left. In the East, Baslius being dead, his brother Constantine reigned alone 3 years, he takes 12 1020 Saracen ships which had invaded the Cyclaves. The Greeks recover Capua: To Con∣stantine succeeds Romanus Argyrus 5 years, whose eyes were preserved by his wifes en∣tring into a Monastery. In the West, the plague
rageth through Germany, and out of  the dead bodies grew Serpents. The Emperour recovers Capua, Apulia and Calabria from the Greeks. The Marquis beat out of Brandeburg by the Vandals, and he forced to live upon a Canons place in Magdeburg. To Henry succeeds Conrade 15 years▪ he Crowns his son King of the Romans, and goeth into Italy: he is crowned at Rome, and order∣eth that the Emperours should be crowned Kings of Italy by the Bishops of Milan, and to wait on them at their Imperiall Coronation. He hath Wars with Sieven King of Ba∣varia. Rudolph King of Burgundy revoketh the Act which he made to the Emperour. Boleslaus of Poland forceth his Gentry to pay Tithes, he maketh Russia pay Tribute. Olaus of Norway is slain by Canutus his faction, and Canonized: Sueno Canutus's son is beaten in Scotland. Boleslaus of Bohemia built 20 Churches: His successor Boleslaus 2. lost Cracovia, he lost his eyes, and resigneth to Iaromire, whose eyes were also put out by Udalric. Otho Duke of Venice is shaved and banished by Flabenico. Otho's brother Urso Bishop of Grada procures Flabenico to be banished. The Bishop governeth the State till his brother Otho's return, who died before the message came. The Earl of Hol∣land hath War with Frisia. Edward and Edmund, the sons of Ironside, are sent to Sweden to be murthered; but Olaus King of Sweden pitied them, and sent them to Steven King of Hungary, who used them kindly. In the Church, Iohn the 19. sate 9. years: A Saracen King is baptized at Rome. 3 Councels held this Decad. The Polonians will rather serve the Devil, then be Christians and pay Tithes, therefore they rebell, but are suppressed: The Greek Church falls off again from the Latine, because the Pope would not give way that the Patriarch o Constantnople should be stiled General Patriarch. The Gospel preach∣in Norway by the English. In the East, Argirus is beaten in Syria: He taketh Tribute of the Saracens. Mysia and Il∣lyria wasted by the Pazinaz. The Saracen Fleet beaten by Nicephorus. Zoe the wife of 1030 Argirus falls in love with one Michael, who strangle Argirus in the Bath. This Michael succeeded 7 years, he married Zoe. The Saracens waste Thrace. Michael slighteth the Empress: The Greeks are called into Sicily, where the Emperour recovers 13 Cities. Maniaces the Sicilian Governour called home, and one sent thither who loseth all. In the West, Rudolph King of Burgundy sends his Crown to Conrade, who expels Odo Prince of Champaign, out of Burgundy. Conrade taketh Milan, and banisheth the sediti∣ous Bishops: He takes Capua from Pandulphus. He giveth Burgundy and Suevia to his son Henry, who succeeded 17 years. Hardi-Canute King of England and Denmark: In his ab∣sence Harold Harefoot, base son to Canutus, invades the Kingdom: He banisheth Emme his mother in law. Her son Elfred is betrayed in England, and his eyes put out in Scotland. King Malcolme is murthered. Civil Wars in France between the Kings chil∣dren. Robert Duke of Normandy dieth at Nice in Bithynia; William his bastard son suc∣ceeded. In Spain, Ferdinand takes divers places from the Moors, and expels them. The Queen of Poland flyeth with her young son, the treasure, and two Crowns of the Kingdom, to the Emperour▪ who sends the young King Casimire to Paris, who enters the Monastery of Clugney. Poland being full of troubles sends to Casimire, who being a Deacon was unwilling to return, till he was absolved by the Pope, upon the Po∣landers promise to pay yearly, by the Pole, a half-penny to St. Peter, and to cut round the hairs of their head; the Nobles and Clergy were exempted from the pay: so he returns, and the Emperour restores him his two Crowns, and aides him against the Bohemians in Hungary. King Stephen and Conrade make peace, upon a Divine warn∣ing to Conrades souldiers to return home. Stephen nameth Vasul for his successor, but the Queen puts out his eyes, and makes Peter King, who reigned 3 years, and commits all places of trust to the Germans. Canutus of Denmark, makes war against the Duke of Normandy for repudiating his sister. An Agreement is made between Hardi-Canute of Denmark, and Magnus of Norway, that the survivour should enjoy both Kingdoms. Bretislaus of Bohemia, takes Cracovia and other places, with a Crucifix of 300. l. Fla∣benico is called home to Venice and made Duke; he banisheth the family of the Urseoli. In the Church, sate Benet the 9. 12 years; he was but 12 years old. This Decad af∣forded 3 Councels. The Saracen King of Carthage is baptized at Rome. Beren∣garius Arch-deacon of Aniou condemned for affirming that Christs body was not in the Eucharist.
In the East, the Emperours forces revolt to the Bulgarians. The Emperour repenting the murther of Romanus, enters into a Monastery and dieth. The Normans drive the Greeks out of Apulia. Michael Calaphates is forced to revoke Zoe whom he had 1040 banished, and then having lost his eyes, is thrust into a Covent. After 4 moneths Constantine Monumachus succeeds 12 years: he marrieth Zoe: Maniaces rebelleth, and is slain. The Emperour like to be stoned for keeping a Concubine, but Zoe pacified them, being she consented to the keeping of a Concubine. Caicius in Iberia rebelleth, and submitteth. One Leo is saluted Emperour, but his eyes are put out. The Pacinazae re∣turn to Muscovia. In the West, great differences between the Emperour and Bretslaus the Polander: The Empress purgeth her self of Adultery by fire, and then enters a Monastery. The Emperour bestows a part of Hungaria on Albert of Bavaria, and calls it Austria; he deserts the Russians, imprisoneth the Duke of Lorain for rebelling, and then releaseth him, he setles also Peter in Hungaria: He is crowned with his Empress at Rome. His Palace at Nimigen is burnt by the Duke of Lorain and Earl of Flanders, but they submit and are reconciled to him. William Duke of Normandy expelled by his Subjects, and restored by the Emperour, Ferdinand in Spain, makes the Moors his Tri∣butaries, he recovers from them the body of Isidore. Casimire in Poland subdueth the rebels and Russians; the Arch-rebel Mislaus is by the Prussians flei'd and hanged; and so they make their peace with Poland, on promise of tribute. In Hungary, Peter for ty∣rannizing is deposed; he flyeth to the Emperour. The Hungarians waste Germany. Peter s restored, and tyrannizeth again. Andrew and Bela, sons of Ladislaus the Bld, are invited by the Nobles, they restore Paganisme: Peter flyeth, and is restored again by the Emperour; at last his eyes are put out, and he dyeth. Andrew succeedeth, who re∣storeth Christianity: He gives the 3. part of Hungaria to his brother Bela. Sueno the Dane is overcome twice by Magnus King of Norway, who was killed with a fall from his horse. A great inundation in Flanders. Baldwyn the Gentle, Earl of Holland, hath great troubles with the Germans. The Turks are defeated by the Greeks. In England, Harolds body is by Hardi-Canute cast into the Thames; he died of an Apoplexie, and in him ended the Danes reigne. St. Edward, son to Ethelred, succeeded 20 years: he re∣mits the Dane-gilt. Severn infested by the Irish and Welsh, and Kent by the Danes. Emme, the Kings mother, clears her self of Adultery, by passing bare-foot and blind∣fold between 9 Plow-shares red hot: the Lord Coventry's Lady rideth naked, to free the City of their Tax. King Duncan of Scotland much molested by the Island-rebels. Sueno the Dane defeated by Macbeth. Witches foretell Macbeth's reigne, who thereupon kills the King, and usurpeth 17 years: He tyrannizeth over the Thanes. In the Church is the 21. Schism. Benet is deposed, and Sylvester 3. comes in by Symonie, and is expelled by Benet, and he by the People. He resigneth to Gregory the 6▪ so now 3 Popes live in Rome; they are all deposed at Sutrium, and Clement 2. chosen, who flyeth into Germany, and is poysoned. Benet 9. again 8 moneths: then Leo 9. suc∣ceeds 5 years. This Decad had 8 Councels. In the East, the troublesom Pacinazae have peace granted them for 30 years: The frontier 1050 Provinces are so taxed by the Emperour, that they let in the Turks, Zoe and Constan∣tine die: Theodora Zoe's sister reigned 1 year; she banished Nicephorus whom Constantine named his successor, and makes Michael Stranoticus her successor. He is thrust into a Covent by Isaacius Comnenus, who after 4 years, being affrighted with lightning, became a Monk. In the West, the Pope makes peace between Germany and Hungary. The Duke of Bavaria is expelled and flyeth to Hungary. Tourne and Seven taken from the Earl of Flanders by the Emperour. Henry 4. succeeds 50 years; his reign was full of troubles by the Saxons rebellions, and Pope Hildebrand's fury against him. In England, Goodwyn is choaked with a piece of bread, for so he wished if he knew of Elfred's death. Wil∣liam the Norman comes into England, and is promised to succeed, if the King die issue∣less. King Edward was the first King that healed the Kings-Evil. Macbeth in Scotland tyrannizeth over the Lords. In France, Henry crownes his son Philip at 7 years of age. Wars between Navar and Arragon. Ferdinand of Spain assumes the title of Emperour, which angred the German Emperour: He kils Garzia of Navar. Sanctius, son to Ferdi∣nand of Castile, invadeth Leon, and forceth Alphonsus to flie to the Moors of Toledo, where he was well used. Andrew of Hungary killed by Bela, who obtains the crown 4 years; he maintaineth Christianity. In Poland, Boleslaus the Bald was King, who reigned 24 years. Spitigenius King of Bohemia expels all the Germans. Uratislaus suc∣ceeded 36 years; he invaded Polonia. The Earl of Flanders, Baldwyn,
recovers the Islands  of Zeland from the Hollanders; he is reconciled to the Emperour. The Earl of Hol∣land at Dort, in Pit-falls, drowned the forces of the Bishop of Colen and Leige, kills the Bishop of Leige, and takes many prisoners. The Persian-Turks invade Media, Syria, and take Ierusalem. In the Church, Leo 9. sits, he imprisoneth Richard the Norman. Victor the 2. succeeded 3 years: Steven 9. succeeds 7 moneths. The 22 Schism, by choosing Cassin brother to the Duke of Lorrain, and Nicholas 2. who sate 3 years; he gives Sicily, Apulia and Calabria to the Normans, conditionally that they should hold them of the Church, and pay tribute yearly for them. This Decad produced 13 Councels. The Patri∣arch of Grada is translated to Venice. At Mentz, the Pope and Bishop quarrel about a Deacon that read the Gospel. The Whippers about this time, delighted so much in whipping-chear, that in one Covent 3000. brooms were worn in this exercise. The Patriarch of Constantinople is banished, for assuming power to throne and un-throne Emperours. Berengarius acknowledgeth Christs Body in the Eucharist, but denyeth his passing through the doors shut. In the East, Constantinus Ducas reigns 7 years: in his time St. Sophia's Temple was over∣thrown 1060 with earthquake: the Scythians waste Greece, and are consumed by the Plague: his son Michael Ducas with his mother succeeds 7 moneths. Romanus Diogenes aspireth, is condemned, then married to Eudocia the Empress, and so becomes Emperor 3 years; he slighteth his wife, and beats the Turks in the West: Richard the Norman strives to be Emperor. The Emperor is hindred by the Pope from repudiating his wise. The Earl of Flanders is made Regent to King Philip 1. of France; he subdueth the Rebels of Gas∣coin. Garzias of Gallecia, imprisoned by Sanctius of Castile: Sanctius is slain at the siege of Zamora. His brother Alphonsus reigns 43 years. Garzias King of Navar succeedeth in Arragon. Boleslaus of Poland subdueth the Russians in Hungary, Bela is killed by the fall of some Hourses; Salomon the son of Andrew succeeds 12 years: Bela's sons flie into Polo∣nia; but these are reconciled: St. Peters Church in which Salomon was crowned, was burnt the next night. Edward of England, enlargeth and enricheth Westminster Church. To Edward succeeded Harold son of Godwyn 9 moneths, & is slain by William of Normandy, who reigned 20 years. Kent keeps its priviledges. Edgar flyeth into Scotland; he should have been heir. Coverfeu is instituted. William is much opposed by Edgar and the Scots, who waste all, and burn York. In Scotland, Thanes are altered to Earls and Barons: Mac∣duff is made Earl of Fife, who is honoured with divers priviledges: Malcolm son to Dun∣can reigns 36 years; he is opposed by Macbeth's son. Dunbar for his service is made Earl of March. In Holland, the Earl is killed by the Earl of Guyck, and his forces defeated. In the Church is the 23 Schism, between Pope Alexander 2. chosen by the Cardinals, and Honorius 2. by the Emperour; he is forced from Rome, he holds Leonina and the La∣teran 2 years: He opposeth Richard the Norman, in his claim to the Empire. This Decad yeelds 11 Councels. The Christians at Ierusalem suffered by the Caliph to in∣habit a fourth part of the City, and to have a Patriarch. The Christians persecuted by the Sclavi, who killed their Prince. The Bishop of Bamberg with others make an expedition into Palestina: The Patriarch absolves Eudocia from her oath of not marrying. The Virgins Feast of Conception, instituted in England. In the East, Manuel Comnenus is taken by the Turks, and the Empress put into a Covent. Ro∣manus 1070 taken by the Turks, released, and his eyes put out. Michael Ducas reigns 6 years; he is defeated by the Turks. Michael is deposed, he with his wife and son are put in a Mo∣nastery. Nicephorus Botoniates succeeds 3 years. In the West, Otho of Bavaria is proscribed and his Country wasted by the Emperor, is reconciled with the loss of his Dukedom. The Saxons and Thuringers rebell, they are defeated. The Princes and Bishops com∣plain to the Pope against the Emperour: He and the Pope depose each other. Rodulph of Suevia chosen by the Germans, whom Henry being absolv'd defeateth. Henry is depo∣sed again. Rodulph after 9 battels, loseth his right-hand and dieth. Burgundy is divided into four parts. Lewis son to Philip of France falls out at Chess with the King of Eng∣land's two sons, which occasioned long Wars. William of England imposeth hard Laws on the English; appoints 4 Termes: he swears the observance of King Edward's Laws, upon the setting up of Edgar, who flies again into Scotland. Roy-Cross erected on the borders. He setleth Normandy, and useth Edgar honourably: He takes the Isle of Ely, forceth Wales to do homage: Hereford imprisoned, and Northampton beheaded for Re∣bellion. His son Robert rebels in Normandy, unhorseth his father, and is pardoned. The Tower of London begun. He makes a Forrest of 36 parishes. The Scots waste Northum∣berland. Solyman of Hungary hath divers Victories, and is at last defeated. Ladislaus is cho∣sen K. The Venetians are beaten by the Normans. Thyerrie of Holland defeats the Bishop of Utricht, and recovers Holland. Godfrey of Lorrain builded Delf. Rhodes and Cyprus taken by the Turks. The Bishop of Cracovia slain and quartered by the K. of Poland, for re∣proving his vicious life.
In the Church, Gregory the seventh sitteth 12 yeers. He persecutes the Emperour, is imprison∣ed, sends a Crown to Rodulph. Twelve Synods held this Decad. Canterbury is made Primate of England. The Emperour robbeth the Church of her Tythes, which causeth much trouble between the Pope and him. Bolestaus King of Poland excommunicated for murthering the Bishop Stanislaus. In the East, Constantinople is taken by Comnenus. Nicephorus is sent to a Covent. Alexius 1080 Comnenus, Isaac's son, succeeds, 37 yeers. The Normans strive to restore Michael. In the West, Pope Gregory is besieged in Rome by the Emperour; who takes Rome, and is Crown∣ed by Clement. Gregory hides himself in S. Angelo. Herman D. of Lorrain being Crown∣ed by the Saxons, is expelled by the Emperour, who again is defeated by the Saxons. Her∣man at last yieldeth, and is pardoned; and rebelling again, is stoned by a woman, and brained. The Saxons submit. Normandy is invaded by the French, and France by the English. Al∣phonsus in Spain getteth Toledo, with other places. The Arch-Bishop of Toledo made Pri∣mate of Spain. Alphonsus gives to Henry of Lorrain his daughter, with Portugal, to hold of Leon. Spain invaded by the African Moors. William King of England built two Mona∣steries in England, and one in Normandy: he dyeth, and is denyed burial at Caen. Succeeded William Rufus 12 yeers. Robert Duke of Normandy attempteth England. The King compounds with Odo his Uncle. Malcolm King of Scotland rebuildeth the Church of Dur∣ham, builds Dumfermling Church, and makes it the Sepulchre of the Kings of Scotland: he erected the Bishopricks of Murrey and Cathnes. Solomon of Hungary built Varadinum, and makes it a Bishoprick. Boleslaus of Poland falls mad: his Brother Uladislaus reigned 20 yeers, but would not be called King. Canutus of Denmark falls out with his people, and is slain with his brother in a Church. His brother Olaus succeeded 7 yeers. Uratislaus made King of Bohemia, Moravia, Lusatia, and Silesia, by the Emperour. In Flanders there was some difference between Robert and Baldwin about St. Omars. Robert goeth to Ierusalem, but is miraculously kept out of the Temple till he had promised restitution to Bald∣win. The disease called Erysipelas, or Ignis sacer, followed upon the sight of a fiery Dragon in the Ayre. Friezland bestowed upon the Bishop of Utricht by the Emperour. In the Church, Against Pope Gregory is set up Clement the third, 21 yeers; which made up the four and twentieth Schism. Rome taken by Henry, and burnt by Robert the Nor∣man, who carryed Gregory to Salernum, where he dyed. His faction the next yeer chose Victor the third, who sat two yeers. He is driven by Clement to S. Angelo. Clement flyeth to Ravenna.' Victor is poysoned. Vrban the second succeeded 11 yeers. This Decad produceth fourteen Councils. The Bohemians are inhibited by the Pope to Preach publikely in their own tongue. Bruno instituted the Carthusian Order. A Sect of the Messalian hereticks appear under the new name of Bogomili. Vrban the second makes Pisa an Arch-Bishoprick. In the East, Alexius builds a School and Hospital. He sends to the Pope for help against the In∣fidels. 1090 An expedition is undertaken into Palestina. The Christian Armies meet at Con∣stantinople. They promise to restore to the Empire all they did win, except Ierusalem. A∣lexius keepeth not promise with them. They restore to him Nice, and tender Antioch; which he refuseth. In the West, Henry makes peace with Strasburg and other places. 12000 Jews killed by the Croysadoers in Germany. Conrade is proscribed by Henry, who besiegeth and takes Mantua, with some other places. Conrade is made King of Italy. Godfrey of Bullen made Duke of Lorrain. Henry repudiates and imprisoneth his wife. Philip of France repudiates his wife, and is excommunicate for marrying the wife of Fulk Earl of Anjou. He forsakes her, and is absolved from two Excommunications. Upon the death of Vrban, he takes her again, and is excommunicated again. In Spain, Alphonsus changeth the Gothic characters into Latin. Ramire slain by the Moors, and they by D. Piedro in Navar and Aragon. The Moos invade Toledo, and kill Sancho heir to Al∣phonsus, with many Christians. William of England invades Normandy, is reconciled to Robert: they both besiege Henry. They are all three reconciled. The roof of Bow-Church, with six hundred houses in London, overturned with the winde. William and Robert are re∣conciled to Malcolm, who is slain at Alnwick Castle. The French King aideth Robert a∣gainst William. Peace is made, and Robert morgageth Normandy to William. The King drives the Welch into the Woods and Hills. A Well springs with blood fifteen days. Robert goeth to Palestina. The Earls of Chester and Shrewsbury oppress the Welch. Shrews∣bury slain in Anglesey by the Norwayers. William
builds Westminster-hall, and the  Tower-wall. In Scotland, Donald is restored by Magnus of Norway. The People rebel up∣on the Norwayers claim of the West-ne Isles. Edgar, Malcolmes son, is called in, and ayded by William Rufus. Donald is taken, imprisoned, and dieth. The Polander subdu∣eth the Prussians and Pomeranians. Civil wars in Poland. The Pomeranians are again subdued by the Polander. The Hungarians resist the Princes in their expedition into Syria. They are beaten by the Russians, with Coloman their King. Ericus King of Denmark with his Queen, go into the Holy Land. The Duke of Venice repairs Lauretta, and makes it a Ci∣ty. Two hundred Venetian ships sent to Syria: they take eighteen of the Pisan Gallies at Rhodes. They sail into Smyrna, and take Askalon. Robert of Flanders hinders the Cler∣gy from making Wills meaning he should be their Heir; but he is forced by the Pope to re∣voke his Decree. The Christians in the Holy expedition under Godfrey of Boullon, made Boemund Duke of Apulia King of Antioch; and Godfrey is King of Ierusalem. He kills 100000 Infidels at Askalon. In the Church, Vrban sits. Clement takes the Castle of S. Angelo. Vrban flyeth, end is restored. Clement flyeth. Vrban dieth. Paschal the second succeedeth 18 yeers. Thirteen Councils held this Decad. About this time were instituted the Feasts of Simon and Iude, Saint Iames, Matthias, and Mark. Some Italian Marchants begin the Order of Hospitallers in Syria. Three days at Easter and Witsontide in the Council of Constans appointed to be kept Holy. This expedition into Syria produced praying by Beads. The Cistersian Order founded. Six hundred thousand Croysodoers. In the East. Alexius betrayeth Vrspergensis and his forces going to Syria. He betrayeth the Croysadoers. Again restoreth Nice to the Turk, and hinders our expedition both by Sea 1100 and Land. Boemund in revenge takes Dyrrachium, and forceth him to promise his ayd. In the West, Brandeburg is recovered from the Vandals. The Emperour is taken and im∣prisoned by his son. The Bishops of Mentz, Colen, and Worms, devest him of his Robes. He dieth, and lay unburyed 5 yeers. His son Henry the fifth succeeded 18 yeers. He invades Hungary for their treachery to the Croysadoers. He hath wars with Poland and the Fle∣mings. Lewis the Gross reigns in France 28 yeers. Against him divers of his Nobility joyn with the English. The Russians are beaten by the Polanders. Boleslaus the Polan∣der, with Hungary, league against the Emperour. Boleslaus craveth Peace. The Danish King and Queen die in Cyprus. Magnus King of Norway slain in Ireland. Venice make a league with Hungary, and take Brandescum from the Normans. The Venetians send a hundred ships to Syria: for their good service at Sidon and Ptolemais, they obtain of Bald∣win, a Street, a Church, a Market, and other priviledges. Robert of Flanders sweareth Fealty to the Emperour, and is reconciled to him. The Haven of Staven in Frisia stopt by Corn flung over-boord by a rich Widow there. The Frieslanders rebel, and are subdued by the Earl of Holland. In Zealand the Hollanders are beaten by the Flemings. God∣frey of Ierusalem dieth of the Plague; his brother Baldwin succeeds 18 yeers. Boemund is taken by the Turks. Tancred his Deputy takes Apamea, and is taken and kept five yeers. Bemund is ransomed, and Baldwin wounded. Hugh Earl of Tiberias slain by a dart. Bertrand made Earl of Tripoli. Tancred beats the Turks. William of England slain in the New Forrest. Henry the first succeeds 35 yeers. He drives the Earl of Shrewsbury in∣to Normandy. Great dissention between the King, and Ansel Arch Bishop of Canterbury. The King and Robert of Normandy differ. Robert is taken, and Normandy subdued by the King. Robert imprisoned at Cardiff, and his eys put out. Flemings plant in Wales. The Emperour is espoused to Maud the Kings daughter at six yeers old. The martyed Priests are persecuted. In Scotland Donald dieth in prison. Edgar, Malcolms son, reigned 8 yeers. The first anoynted King there. He built Coldingham-Monastery, and enricheth the Church of Durham. His brother Alexander succeeds 15 yeers. He defeateth the robbers of Ross, and executeth the ringleaders. In the Church: Paschal was the first Pope that subscribed the yeer of his Papacy. Cle∣ment dieth, and Allectus is chosen; but he giveth over. Theodoricus chosen and de∣posed. Sylvester is elected and banished. So the Schism of 21 yeers endeth. Paschal suspends the Liegroirs from the Sacrament, till they had digged up the Em∣perours body, and laid it in a prophane place. He raiseth the Normans of Apu∣lia against the Emperour. Fourteen Synods this Decad. Fluentius Bishop of Flo∣rence deposed, for saying Antichrist was then born. Differences between the Pope and the Princes about investitures. Pomerania converted. The Bishoprick of Ely found∣ed. The Order of Regular Canons instituted. Bethlem made a Bishoprick under the Patriarch of Ierusalem.
In the East, Alexius profers to assist the Pope against Henry, if he will bestow on him the Latine Empire. To Alexius succeeds Comnenus, or Calo-Iohannes, 24 yeers. He takes 1110 Sosopolis from the Turks. In the West, Henry the fifth burieth his father at Spire: he forceth the Pope to crown him, and to confirm to him the Investitures. Divers in Italy and Germany revolt. The Bishop of Mentz excommunicates him. He beats the Saxons, and wastes the Bishop of Colens territories. He is beaten by the Saxons, and forced to deli∣ver the Bishop of Mentz. The Popes Legat excommunicates the Emperour. He wastes the Popes territories, and sets up Gregory an Anti-Pope, and invades France. The French invade Normandy. Alphonsus Duke of Portugal is saluted King by the Army, after he had deseated four Saracen Kings, whose heads are born by the Portugal Kings in their Ams. Saragosse is recovered from the Moors. Boleslaus of Poland beats the Prussians and Pomeranians: he wasteth Bohemia, and puts out the Palatine of Cracovia his eyes. Poland is plundered by the Hungarians. Pomerania subdued again. Dalmatia re∣volteth from the Venetians to the Hungarians; but the Duke recovers it again, and subdu∣eth Croatia. Dalmatia revolteth again. The Duke goeth against them, and is slain: so truce is made for five yeers. In Hungary, order is given to geld Bela the son of Almus: but he was presented with Cats stones in stead of his. Steven the second reigns in Hungary 17 yeers: he wastes Polonia. Canutus of Denmark is killed by Magnus. The people re∣bel; and Magnus is banished into Gothland. The Suevians chuse a King of their own; whom the Goths expel. Baldwyn is beaten by the Turks in Coelo-Syria. The Saracens repulsed from Ioppe. Baldwyn dieth. His cousen succeeds, called Baldwyn the second. An∣tioch is annexed to the Kingdom of Ierusalem; Roger being slain by the Turks. Con∣stance taken by the Earl of Anjou, is recovered by the King of England; who subdueth Wales: he oppresseth both Church and State. The Thames almost dry for two days. The first foundation of Parliaments. William the son of Robert set up in Normandy by the French and Flemings: he will not admit the Popes Legat. Henry beats the French and Flemings in Normandy, where Earl Baldwyn of Flanders is slain. Northumberland and Huntingdon are by Marriage annexed to the Crown of Scotland. The King seeth the Earl of Merne's son hanged for murther: he was set upon by thieves, and kills them: he built some Churches and Abbeys. In the Church: Pascal fits; he raiseth Forces against the Emperour. Maud, Princess of Hetruria makes the Church her heir. The Emperour strives to recover her lands. Upon Pascal's death ariseth the five and twentieth Schism; Gelasius the second, and Gregory the eighth, being both chosen. Gelasius dieth; and Calixtus the second succeeds 5 yeers. This Decad affordeth twelve Councils. Knights of S. Iohn of Ierusalem insti∣tuted. S. Bernard founded the Monastery of Clareval; who was Abbot there 36 yeers. The Premonstrants instituted. The Templers are also founded, to secure the high∣ways. In the East, the Emperour beats the Scythians in Thrace: he invades the Venetian territories. The Duke of Venice takes many Islands from the Greeks. In the West, the Emperour re∣signeth 1120 the Investitures. The Bishop of Mentz forced to disclaim tythes in Thuringe. Lo∣tharius of Saxony proscribed. The Emperour helps the English against the French: He di∣eth issueless. Lotharius Duke of Saxony succeeds 12 yeers. Conrad Duke of Suevia is crowned at Milan King of Lombardy. The Pope excommunicates him with the Bishop of Milan. Spire and Ulme taken by the Emperour. The Bishop of Mentz his eyes put out. Lewis of France beats the Emperour: he crowns his son Philip at two yeers old; who died by a fall from his horse. In Spain, S. Iames of Compostella is made an Arch∣bishoprick. Calatrava won from the Moor by Alphonsus of Castile: he makes him∣self Emperour of Spain. Alphonsus of Arragon is slain. Boleslaus defeats the Rebels in Poland, and rebuilds Cracovia, being burnt. Steven of Hungary being childless, hath blinde Bela preferred for his successor by the Pope: he is adopted by Steven. In Denmark, the People set up Ericus, and depose Harold. Ericus escapeth a danger. One Harold invades the Kingdom of Norway, and puts out the eyes of Magnus, and geldeth him. The Venetians beat the Infidels at Ioppa: to them is alotted a third part of Tyre. The Turks invade Syria. The King, with divers Nobles, are taken. Fulk Earl of Anjou leaveth his Earldome, and returns to Syria. Tyre is taken, and the King ransomed; who leaves his daughter in pledge, and redeems her with the Sara∣en spoils. The Hollanders rebel, and are subdued by the Emperour. Charles the good
of Flanders, with his Almoner, distribute in one day to the poor 78000 loaves. He is killed in the Church of Bruges for his charity, by the family of the Stratenses. William, Robert's son of Normandy, made Earl by the French King. He oppressed the people, and is killed at the siege of Alost. Prince William of England, with 150, is drowned in the sea. Nor∣mandy rebels, and is subdued. King Henry invadeth France, for aiding William Earl of Flanders. David King of Scotland punisheth severely unjust Judges: he built Holy-Rood∣house, and founded fifteen Abbeys. In the Church: Calixtus sits yet. Gregory the Anti-pope is carried about the streets of Rome on horse-back with his face to the tail, and then imprisoned. To Calixtus succeeds Hono∣rius the second, five yeers: he resisteth Roger in the Kingdom of Apulia. There were seven Synods held this Decad. At Rome, the Archbishop of Lyons slain, for slandering the Clergie. In the East, it is agreed that Antioch should hold of the Empire. Iohn, son to Isaac the Em∣perours 1130 brother, revolts to the Sultan of Iconium. The Emperour both commends and beats his son, for setting rashly upon the Turks. In the West, the Emperour is crowned by the Pope at Liege. Lotharius crowned at Rome. The Civil Laws are revived. The Emperour sub∣dueth Lombardy, except Milan and Verona: He expels Roger King of Sicily out of Italy, and giveth Apulia to one Raynulf. To him succeeded Conrad 3. fourteen yeers. He pro∣scribes Henry Duke of Saxony. The Guelphs and Gibelines begin now to quarrel, under these names. King Lewis the sixth of France dieth; to whom succeeded his son Lewis the seventh. 44 yeers. In Hungary, divers Lords rebel against King Bela, and call in the Polo∣nians and Russians, who are defeated. In Denmark, Ericus kills Harold, and two of his sons: Olaus the third escapeth in womans apparel, unto Norway. Harold of Norway is killed by Syward, and he by Harold's sons. The Emperour takes Frisia from the Bishop of Utricht, and gives it to Thierry Earl of Holland; who wastes the Bishops country, and ex∣pels him. To Baldwyn in Ierusalem, succeeds Fulk Earl of Anjou, 11 yeers: He takes Caesarea-Philippi, and buildeth two Castles neer Ascalon. In England, Steven, nephew to Henry, reigneth 18 yeers: He is opposed by his Peers, and defeats the Scots: He takes di∣vers Castles from his Lords, and drives the Earl of Gloucester into France. Peace between England and Scotland. In the Church, Innocent the second sate 13 yeers: Anastasius his Anti-Pope makes the 26 Schism. Innocent fleeth into France, and is by the French restored. The Towns that held with Innocent are taken by Roger, who spoils the Popes territories. He takes Inno∣cent, and compels him to crown him King of Italy. This Decad produced ten Councils. The Pope makes Genoa an Archbishoprick. The Feasts of S. Thomas, S. Luke, and S. Bartholomew, were instituted about this time. In the East, the Emperour died of a wound by a poysoned arrow, and makes his youngest son, Emanuel Comnenus, successor, 38 yeers. His coasts are infested by Pirates. He disco∣vereth 1140 Conrad's counsels to the Turks, and sells Meal mingled with Lyme to his Army. Roger King of Sicily takes divers places from him; who is defeated in Sicily by the Emperour's ar∣my. Servia and Hungary wasted by the Emperour. In the West, the Emperour takes Winsburge; where the women, in stead of their goods, carried out their husbands. Henry the Lion restored to the Dukedom of Saxony. The new Senate at Rome incense the Emperour against the Pope. The Emperour raiseth 200000 men for the Holy Land, under Conrad; whose projects at Constant are discovered by Emanuel: upon which, he returns, having lost the most of his men. He makes Frederic Barbarossa, his brother's son, successor; passing by his own son. The French King undertakes an Expedition unto Syria, to expiate his burning of a Church with three hundred people in it. King Lewis, in his return from Syria, is taken pri∣soner by the Greeks, and rescued by the Sicilian Fleet. Alphonsus makes Portugal tributa∣ry to the Pope. Alphonsus the Emperour takes Cordub and other places from the Moors. The Arragonians worsted by the Navarrois. The Moors lose Lisbon. Peter, an Earl of Poland, loseth his tongue and eyes, for reproving the King. He is deposed by the people, and sleeth to the Emperour; who would have testored him, but could not. Boleslaus his brother succeeds 27 yeers. The Hungarians put the Imperialists (who had invaded Hungary) to flight. Olaus Harold's son, claims Denmark; but is defeated by Ericus, and driven into Holland, where he was drowned. Ericus goeth into Syria; returns, and becomes a Monk, and resignes his Crown. His son Sueno is chosen by the Silanders; and Canutus, son
to  Magnus, by the Iutians. This bred Civil Wars. Ericus of Suevia is slain by Henry, Sueno's son of Denmark. Venice aideth Emanuel against King Roger of Sicily. S. Mark's tower built. The Pirates defeated by the Venetians. Fulk King of Ierusalem is brained with a fall from his horse. Baldwyn the third succeedeth, with his mother, 20 yeers. Edessa taken by the Sultan; who, for his cruelty, is slain. The Christian Princes fall out at Damas∣cus. Antioch taken by Noradin the Sultan; and Prince Raymund killed. The Earl of Flanders goeth into Syria. In England, Maud landeth, and is crowned: Steven taken, and-imprisoned. She fleeth to Oxford, and is carried thence in a Cossin to Gloucester. King Steven is released: he besiegeth Maud in Oxford; who escapes in a snowie night. Divers places yeeld to Steven. Maud goeth into Normandy. Henry lands in England with an Army, and goeth into Scotland; where he is knighted. King David of Scotland erecteth four Bishopricks. In the Church: Innocent sits yet: he takes Tybur: he opposeteth the Romane Government by two Consuls, and three hundred Senators: he is reconciled by S. Bernard with France. Celestinus the second succeeded five months: then Socius the second, eleven months: He was slain in a sedition. The Senate challenge the Pope's revenues. Eugenius the third succeeds seven yeers. He, by Lewis of France his Forces going for Syria, reduceth Rome to her old Government. He fleeth into France. Ten Synods this Decad. The Carmelites Order founded on Mount Carmel. Petrobrusianus denieth Baptism to Infants. The Al∣coran translated into Latine by Peter Abbot of Clugney. In the East, the Emperour being beaten by Roger twice, makes peace with him. The Greek 1150 Fleet overcome by William King of Sicily. The Emperour makes an Expedition against the Armenians in Cilicia. Baldwyn King of Ierusalem defeats the Egyptians, and kills 5000 of them. He gives Ascalon to the Earl of Ioppa. The Bishops complain to the Pope against the Templers, for refusing to pay tythes. Baldwyn beats the Turks, and defeats Noradin neer Iordan. In the West, the Emperour takes Placentia, and some other places: He holds the Pope's stirrup at Sutrium: He is crowned at Rome, and overthrows Spoletum. Fre∣deric the Emperour quarrels with the Pope, and is reconciled. The Pope quarrels again with Frederic, and excommunicates him. In Denmark, Canutus obtains the Government of Iu∣tia: he makes himself King. Sueno fleeth into Germany. The Kingdom is divided between Sueno and Canutus. Sueno kills Canutus at a feast; and Sueno is killed not long after. Waldemur, son of Canutus that was slain by Magnus, reigns alone. Ingo King of Norway with most of his Nobles, pursuing their enemies on the ice, are drowned. The Danes invade Suevia, and are driven back with cold. King Charles of Suevia is slain by Canutus son S. Ericus. The Venetians make Pole tributary. In Holland, the people of Harlem kill 900 Frisons, who had invaded the Countrey. Henry returns into England: thirty Castles revolt to him: he is adopted by Steven; who succeeded King 34 yeers. He reforms the Laws, and raseth divers Castles. He takes Cumberland and Northumberland from Malcolm, and gives him Huntington. He doth homage in France for Normandy. He is beaten by the Welch. Peace between France and England, by the marriage of Henry's eldest son Ri∣chard to Margaret the French King's daughter. Malcolm of Scotland forced to accom∣pany Henry into France; for which he was troubled at home, when he returned. In the Church: Anastasius the fourth sate 4 months: then Adrian the fourth, an English man, 4 yeers. He is forced to crown William King of Sicily. He excommunicates Frede∣rick, and is choaked with a flye in his drink. This Decad affordeth three Councils. Gra∣tian collecteth the books of Decretals. The Eremites of S. Austins Rule set up by Wil∣liam Duke of Aquitane. Christianity planted in Livonia. Petrus Waldo, a Mer∣chant of Lyons, father of the Waldenses. The Templers prevail at Rome against the Bishops. In the East, Emanuel the Emperour persecutes the Venetians, upon a Prophecie that they should 1160 be masters of Constant. He desires of the Pope to be Emperour of Italy, and thereupon promiseth to reconcile the Greek and Latine Churches. He besiegeth Damiata, and returns with much plunder. He is forced from Damiata the second time by rain. The Prince of Antioch taken by the Governour of Damascus. Almaricus, Baldwyn's brother, is King of Ierusalem twelve yeers. He aideth the Egyptian against the Persian: then, against pro∣mise, aideth the Greeks against the Egyptian. He implores the Turks aid. Syraconus the Turk, having killed the Egyptian Sultan,
makes himself Caliph. In the West, Frederick  burns Cromona, raseth Milan, and soweth it with salt; subdueth Lombardy, and plundereth Mentz, for killing their Bishops. The Lombards and Venetians joyn against him, and re∣pair Milan. He is crowned at Rome. Boleslaus of Poland, by gifts, winketh at the Prussians Idolatry; who rebel twice. The Polanders, in pursuing them into the marishes, are drowned. The Hungarians win Dalmatia, invade the Venetian Lands, and stir the Greeks against them. Bohemia is invaded by the Emperour. Waldemare King of Denmark submits his Kingdom to the Emperour. The Danes have Wars, then Peace with the Rugians. They are forced to Christianity. Absalon Bishop of Roschild beats the Vandals in their own Country. Ladislans, Vicar of the Empire and King of Hungary, aids the Emperor against Milan; whereupon, his Arms are changed from an Eagle to a Lion Argent. The King enter∣eth into a Monastery, and makes Vogislaus Governour; whom the King's son woundeth. The Venetian Merchants treacherously killed by the Greek Emperour: they take Clios. Thierry of Flanders maketh his fourth Expedition into Syria. Philip his son succeeds 25 yeers: he obtains Doway from the Earl of Heinalt. The Hollanders and Frieslanders, at variance. In England, the King and Becket differ: Becket fleeth into Flanders; his goods are confiscated; and appeals to Rome forbid. The Welch are subdued. Becket is restored by the French King's means. Malcolm King of Scotland builds the Abbey of S. Andrews. His brother William succeeds 49 yeers: to him is restored a part of Northumberland by Henry who repents of his grant, and quarrels with Malcolm: hereupon, the English invade Cumberland. In the Church: Alexander the third sits 21 yeers: his anti-Pope was Victor the fourth; which makes the seven and twentieth Schism. Victor and the Emperour are excommuni∣cated by Alexander. Victor dieth; and the Emperours faction chuseth Paschal the third. Alexander fleeth to Benevent, and fortifieth Tusculum. Paschal dieth, and Calixtus the third chosen. Seven Synods held this Decad. The bodies of the three Wise-men are translated from Milan to Colen. Paschal canonizeth Charles the Great. The Order of Humiliantes began now in Lombardy: these were poor people who in white cloathes had restitution of their possessions from the Emperour: these habits they retained still. In the East, the Emperour gives in Dowry with his daughter the kingdom of Thessaly, to Reyner son to the Marquess of Montferrat: he is beaten by the Venetians, and by the Sultan of Ico∣nium: 1170 he marrieth his son to the French King's daughter. Emanuel dieth. In Ierusalem, to Almaricus succeedeth Baldwyn the fourth. The Count of Tripolis is his tutor. He wastes the Country of Damascus. Baldwyn becometh leprous. In the West, the Emperour takes divers places in Italy. Divers places in Germany taken by the Bishop of Mentz, for the Em∣perour. At Venice, peace is made between the Pope and the Emperour. Henry the Lion being returned from Syria, where he was opposed by the Templers, is proscribed by the Em∣perour, and condemned of treason. In Poland, Miceslaus is deposed, and Casimire his brother chosen; to whom Miceslans submits. In Denmark are divers rebellions. In Bo∣hemia, Frederic son to Ladislaus, is aided by the Emperour to recover his kingdom: he in∣curreth the peoples hatred, for oppression, and preferring a Germane to prime places. Vitalis Michael, the Duke of Venice, is slain for suffering the Greeks to abuse the State. Two great Pillars erected at Venice by a Lombard, who desired that Cheaters might play at Dice be∣tween them unpunished. The Bank is here first erected. The Pope bestows a Ring on the Duke, to cast into the Sea, in signe of its marriage and subjection to them: a Custom yet ob∣served yeerly. The Pope priviledgeth the Duke and his successors to have a Canopie over them, and eight silver trumpets to be sounded before them. The Earls of Flanders and Hei∣nalt make War upon the Earl of Avignon, for murthering the Bishop of Cambrey. The Earl bestoweth West-Flanders on Philip the French King with his Neece. In England, Becket is killed in Canterbury-Church. Ireland is mastered. Becket's murtherers con∣demned to serve all their days in Syria. The King is enjoyned Penance, and to maintain 200 men in Palestine for one yeer. The King overcomes those that would have deposed him. He goeth bare-foot, and is whipped. The Scots King taken prisoner: then a peace is made. Itinerant Justices appointed. Prince Arthur's body digged out of Glastenbury Church-yard. The Scots aid Prince Henry of England against his father. King William of Scotland ran∣somed, upon the payment of a great sum, and rendering of divers Castles. The Abbeys of Arbroth and Hadington built. In the Church: Pope Alexander yet sits, but is kept out of Rome. Peace between the Pope and Emperour: so the Schism endeth. The Pope is recalled to Rome. Four Councils held this Decad. The Order
of Crossed Friars instituted. The Pope erecteth  a Bishoprick at his own City Alexandria in Italy, for their good service against the Em∣perour. The Albingenses driven out of Tholose, infect Bohemia. In a Synod of Rome of three hundred Bishops, Peter Lombard is declared an Heretick, but 36 after he was justified by Pope Innocent the third. In the East, Emanuel being dead, his son Alexius succeeds, under his Mothers tuition, 2 yeers. Andronicus, Emanuels cousin, kills the Tutors, strangles the Emperours mother, poysoneth 1180 his sister, murthers Alexius, and ings his body into the Sea; and so sets up himself 2 yeers. Isaac Angelus plotteth against him. Andronicus murthers Isaac's brethren. Isaac be∣ing in danger, fleeth to the Temple, and is proclaimed Emperour. Andronicus is tortured to death. Isaac Angelus reigns 9 yeers. The Pyrats takes seventy of his Ships. His Ge∣neral Brana aspireth, besiegeth Constantinople, and is killed. He makes a wicked League with Saladine; who takes all the Cities of Mesopotamia and Aleppo by treason. He in∣vaded Palestina, and is driven back by the Earl of Tripolis. King Baldwin dieth. Bald∣win the fifth succeeded, who after 7 moneths was poysoned by his mother, that her husband Guy of Lusignan night succeed, who reigned 10 yeers. The Apostate Christians called Mamelucks, are instituted by Saladine. The Earl of Tripolis calls in Saladine against Guy, whom he takes prisoner, and subdues all Syria, except Tyre and Tripolis. Guy abju∣reth the kingdom, and is released. Barbarossa coming towards Syria defeats the Turks three times. He is drowned in the River. In the West, Otho of Bavaria doth much mischief in Germany. He is expelled. Henry is maintained in Normandy by the English. Peace with Lombardy. At Erford Dyet, six Earls with many others, slain by the falling of the room. The Emperour and Pope at odds about the Bishoprick of Triers. The Pope denyeth to part with the inheritance of , to Crown the Emperours son, and to admit his Bishop to Triers. The Bishop of Mentz deposed for adhering to the Pope. Frederick hasteneth for Syria with an hundred and fifty thousand men, and is ill used by Isaac. Henry the Lion returns, takes Lubec and other places. In France, Philip the second reigns 42 yeers. The Jews are expelled France. The French have wars with Flanders and Burgundy. The Fle∣mings forced to Peace. Richard and Iohn of England besieged by the French, who make wars against England. King Philip and Richard undertake an expedition into Syria. Wars in Spain between Ferdinand and Alphonsus of Portugal. The Moors defeated, and their King slain. Sanctius regns in Portugal 26 yeers. He is ayded by the Hollanders a∣gainst the Moors. The Polander recovers much of Russia and Lituania. The Polonians and Hungarians invade each other. Peace for 2 yeers. Miceslaus the Kings brother, is received as King into Cracovia. Casimire takes the City, and pardoneth his brother. Ca∣nutus of Denmark defeats Harold the usurper. He denyeth fealty to the Emperour. The Danes beat Bugislaus the Vandal. The Emperour returns the Kings sister for not paying the rest of her Dowry. The Bohemians are proscribed by the Emperour: whom they slight. Great troubles in Bohemia between King Frederick and his rebellious subjects. subjects. Philip leaveth the Government of Flanders to his wife, and goeth into Syria with eighty seven Netherland Ships. In England, the King makes his son Iohn King of Ire∣land. The Welch swear fealty to the King. Richard joyneth with the French against his Father. Ieffery the Kings son trodden to death at Paris. King Henry dieth cursing his children. Richard the first succeeded 9 yeers. He releaseth his mother, and maketh the Bishop of Ely his Deputy. The Pope sends to the Scots King a Rose of gold. He pay∣eth part of his ransom, and Edinburgh Castle is restored. In the Church: Pope Alexander perswades a new expedition into Syria. To him succeeds Lucius the third 4 yeers. He is expelled the City. The Emperour sends an Army, ma∣ny of which die with poysoned waters. He refuseth to Crown the Emperours son. Vr∣ban the third succeeded 1 yeer. He dieth upon the loss of Ierusalem. Gregory the eighth succeeds 1 moneth. Then Clement the third 3 yeers. This Decad produced eight Synods. The Maronites forsake the Heresie of the Monothelites. The Temple-Church in London dedicated by Horaclius Patriarch of Ierusalem. Livonia converted, and Riga made a Bishoprick. In the East: Isaac is blinded and put into a Covent by his brother Alexius Angelus, whom he 1190 had ransomed, This Alexius reigned ten yeers. He pacifieth Henry with seventy talents. Alexius son to Isaac the Emperour, goeth for ayd to the Latin Princes. Acon taken by the French and English. Ioppa taken by Richard. He exchangeth Cyprus for Acon with Guy. Saladine dieth, and commands his shirt to be carryed before him. Guy is killed with a
fall from his window. His wife marryed with Almerick, who became King of Ierusalem and Cyprus. Earl Montfort defeats the Infidels. In the West: Henry the sixth reigns Emperour 9 yeers: he is Crowned at Rome: his Empress is taken by Tancred, and restored. He subdueth Salern, Calabria, Apulia, and Sicily. He makes Tancreds son Earl of Ta∣rentum. He forceth Alexius to satisfie the wrongs done to the Latin Princes. To him succeeds Philip his brother, and Otho Duke of Saxony, chosen by opposite factions. Philip the French King arriveth in Sicily, and quarrelleth with Richard. He leaves his Army with the Duke of Burgundy, and returns. He invades Richards territories, and solicites the Em∣perour to detain him. He surpriseth Eureux, and recovers Mayne in Spain. Portugal, Navar, and Arragon, league with Alphonsus the ninth of Leon, against Castile. Alphon∣sus of Castile is wounded by the Moors. Castile and Arragon invade Leon and Navarr. In Sicily, William rebelleth; his eys are put out, and he is sent into Germany. The Sicilians chuse another King, whom the Emperour Crowned with an iron Crown red hot, and nailed it to his head. In Hungary, Rela dieth; his son Emerio succeeds 9 yeers. His brother re∣belleth, and is pardoned. The Polander subdues the Prussians, and makes a perpetual Peace with Hungary. The King dieth, his son Lescus succeeded 6 yeers. Miceslaus the usurper defeated, and his son slain. The Queen resignes the Government to him. The Danes enter Vandalia. Waldemare Bishop of Sleswic invades the kingdom, is taken and imprisoned. Adolph Earl of Holstein makes great troubles in Denmark. In Bohemia, Wenceslaus is expelled by Primislaus. He with Ladislaus, make great troubles there. The Pisans are beaten by the Venetians. The Duke retireth into a Monastery. Flanders, upon the Earls death, is divided between Baldwin of Henalt, Lewis the French Kings son, and Maud the Earls widow. Baldwin leagueth with England, and helpeth Otho against Philip the Em∣perour. The Hollanders overcome the Flemings. Thyerry of Holland defeats the Earl of Guelders. Friesland is held of Holland. Richard of England is cast upon Cyprus. He takes Isa the Tyrant, and the Island. He is in his return from Syria taken by Leopold Duke of Austria, who sells him to the Emperour. He is released; he recalls his Queen, is Crowned, and expels the French out of Normandy. Iohn aspireth and is pardoned. The Bishop of Beuvoye taken, and his Arms sent by the King to the Pope, with these words of Iacob's son, See if this be thy sons coat or not. The French King is thrice beaten. The King is slain by a poysoned Arrow. His brother Iohn succeeded 17 yeers. The King of Scotland payeth the rest of his ransom, and sends his brother David into Syria. The Church of Scotland exempted by the Pope from the jurisdiction of York. David is taken by the Egyp∣tians, and redeemed by the Venetians. He returns, and builds the Church of Dundee, with some Monasteries. He with the King visit King Richard, and present him with 2000 Marks. The King puts out the eys of Harold Earl of Catness, then hangeth him, and geldeth all his male-children, because the Earl had deprived the Bishop of his eys and tongue. In the Church, Clement the third sitteth. He ayded Tancred against Henry. Celestine the third succeeded 6 yeers: he gets Tusculum from the Emperour: he makes Viterbium a Bishoprick: by his Legat into Germany, he solicites for a new expedition into Syria. In∣nocent the third succeeded 18 yeers: he resisteth Philip the Emperours Election. Two Synods held this Decad. The Jews in a Castle in York-shire kill themselves. S. Domi∣nic of Spain instituted the Iacobit or Predicant Fryers. In the East, Thrace is wasted by the Persians. Isaac is restored by the Latin Princes. Alexius fleeth. Isaac and his son are slain by Alexius Ducas. The Latins take Constantinople, of 1200 which Baldwin Earl of Flanders is chosen Emperour. Ducas is cast down from a Tower. Baldwins hands and feet are cut off, and he slain. His brother Henry succeeds 11 yeers: he recovers many places from the Valachians. Theodorus Lascaris makes Adrianople his seat; who kills the Sultan, and takes Alexius. Henry aideth Lascaris against David and A∣lexius Comnenus. The Tartars sit down in the Fens of Maeotis. The Pope takes the ti∣tulary kingdom of Ierusalem from Almericus King of Cyprus, and gives it to Iohn Bren a French Earl, who marrieth the Marquess of Monferrat's daughter. In the West, Philip seiseth upon high Germany: he is excommunicated by the Pope. Philip is Crowned again at Acon, by the Bishop of Colen; whom therefore the Pope excommunicateth, and placeth another Bishop. Philip besiegeth Colen, and takes it. Otho flees into England, and then compounds with Philip to succeed him. Philip is slain by Otho the Palsgrave, who is ther∣fore proscribed. To Philip succeeds Otho, and is Crowned at Rome, and expelled thence. He takes Acona from the Pope by force, with Apulia and Calabria from Frederick Duke of Suevia. There is long war with the King of Arragon and Raymund Earl of Tholose, for favouring the Albingenses. Philip of France recovers Normandy, having been out of
the French possession 316 yeers: he helpeth Arthur against King Iohn, and puts him out of his possessions in France. Peace made between Arragon and Navarr. In Poland, great contestation between Lescus and Miceslaus about the kingdom. Lescus is three times de∣posed and restored. The Polanders are beaten out of Russia, and so are the Hungarians. Lubeck yieldeth to the Danes; it is burnt: the King forgives the people their taxes, to rebuild it. The Venetians obtain Crete and the Aegaean Islands, at the taking of Constanti∣nople: they are assisted by the Western Princes to recover Istria. Crete is taken by the Ge∣noans, and retaken by the Venetians. The Earl of Flanders excommunicated by the Pope, for helping Venice against Hungary. The Earl of Holland, and Earl of Gelders, war a∣gainst the Duke of Brabant, and Bishop of Utricht. William Earl of Holland and Friesland goeth into Scotland to claim the kingdom. In his absence, Count Leos invadeth Holland; who fleeth upon the Earls return. In England, King Iohn seiseth the Archbishop of Yorks temporalties. The Barons refuse to aid King Iohn: he makes his Peace with the Scots by marriages: he takes Mount-Alban in France. Peace for two yeers. The Pope interdicteth England, and excommunicates the King: he takes homage of Wales, and mony of the Jews. King William of Scotland refuseth to aid King Iohn against the French. The Pope sends him a rich Sword and Helmet, with the title of Defender of the Faith. King Iohn's Castle at Barwick rased by King William: he erecteth the Bishoprick of Argile. Iohn King Williams youngest son, with fourteen more, drowned by an inundation at Bertha. The King builds Perth. In the Church, Pope Innocent sits. He sets out his Decretals. He excommunicates Philip the Emperour, and Raymond Earl of Tholose. Two Councils held this Decad. The Hereticks Almaricans, under shew of Chastity, committed all Uncleanness. The Greek Churches receive the Latin Ceremonies. The Order of women called Begines from Bege the Foundress. Saint Francis, Author of the Franciscans, or Fryars minors. In the East, Peter of Constantinople is Crowned at Rome, and in his return imprisoned by Las∣caris; 1210 during which time Iolanta governeth. At last, Peter is slain at a Feast, by Lascaris of Adrianople. The Latin Princes besiege Damiata, and take it, after nineteen moneths. The Sultan profered Ierusalem, with the Cross, and much mony, which the Popes Legat refused. In the West, the Emperour is denyed Ancona, and is expelled Rome; but not long after, he takes Acona, with Apulia, and Calabria. Against him, Frederick the second is set up by the Bishop of Mentz and others, 38 yeers. Otho troubleth Germany, and aydeth the English against the French, but with ill success. At last, being forsaken by all his friends, he dyeth. Frederick takes in divers places, and is Crowned at Rome. Philip the French King obtains England of the Pope. He warreth against the Earl of Flanders, for not ayd∣ing him against King Iohn of England; and is defeated at Scluse. Simon Earl of Mont∣fort in battail kills the Earl of Tholose, and Peter King of Arragon. The French beat the English and Flemings at the battail of Bovines. The King of Castile winneth Calatra∣va. The battail of Maradel, in which two hundred thousand Moores are slain, and many places recovered in Spain. Henry King of Castile, as he was at play, was slain with a Tile. Ferdinand succeeded, in whom Leon and Castile are perpetually united. Poland appoints a Governour for Pomerania, and takes a hundred Marks yeerly thence. Marryed Priests forced to leave their wives, in Poland. In Hungary, the Queen is murthered by Count Pe∣ter. The Danes take Stetin in Pomerania, and overcome the Livonians. King Iohn of England subdueth the Rebels in Ireland. London is appointed to be governed by a Ma∣jor and two Sheriffs. The King resignes his kingdom to the Pope. Hence the French are forbid to invade England. The English and Flemings take 300 ships from Philip at the Sluce. The Barons rebel, and are excommunicated. The King subdues them by the help of the Flemings, Lewis of France is called in by the Barons. The King poysoned by a Monk. His son Henry the third succeeded 56 yeers. Lewis is forced to abjure the Land, and to re∣store Normandy and Poictou. Alexander of Scotland aideth Lewis, and takes Carlile. A Peace is made: Alexander restoreth Carlile; and Henry, Berwick. In the Church, Innocent sits yet, who excommunicates Philip the Emperour three times. To him succeeded Honorius the third 10 yeers: he made Iohn de Columna General of the Sy∣rian wars. This Decad produced two Councils; one at Rome, for the deposing of Otho; the other was the Lateran, of 400 Bishops, against the Albigenses. Pope Innocent insti∣tuted the Order of the Holy Trinity, for the redeeming of Captives. The word Transub∣stantiation, first used in this Lateran Council. The Feast called Triumphus Crucis, was instituted in Spain, in remembrance of a great victory over the Moors. The Order of poor women instituted by S. Francis and S. Clare.
In the East, Robert of Constantinople cuts off his wifes nose, and slings her mother into the Sea: he loseth many Towns. To him, succeeded Baldwin the second 34 yeers: whose tuition was undertaken by Iohn Bren K, of Ierusalem. In Adrianople, to Lascaris succeeded Iohn Du∣cas 1220 his son 33 yeers: he defeated Isaac and Alexius, and Robert of Constantinople, who aided them. Theodorus Angelus taketh Thessalonica, and makes himself K. there: he is ta∣ken and exoculated by the Bulgarians. Ducas takes divers Islands in the Aegaean Sea. The Christians that besieged Cayre, are forced by the overflowing of Nilus, to rise thence, and to restore Damiata. Palestina is recovered by Frederick the Emp. He makes a Peace with the Sultan for 10 yeers, against the Popes will: e is crowned at Ierusalem, and makes Ray∣nold D. of Bavaria his Lieut. of Syria. In the West, Frederick expelleth the Saracens out of Sicily, and punisheth Pope Innocents two brethren: he renews a League with France. The Bish. of Colen murthered by Count Isenberg; for which he was broken on the wheel. Lom∣bardy rebelleth by the Popes instigation, who excommunicates the Emp. for feigning himself sick in his Syrian expedition: the Emp. goeth notwithstanding, and the Pope is angry thereat: having recovered Ierusalem, he is forced to return; to recover his own right at home. Avergne is forfeited to the Crown of France. The French K. dieth, and by his will bequeatheth 60000 Crowns to the Syrian wars. His son Lewis the 8 succeeded 3 yeers: he compoundeth for Languedoc with Simon Montforts heir: his son S. Lewis succeeded 46 yeers: his mother is Regent; which place is usurped by his unkle Philip, whom the Barons assisted, and the D. of Britain; who are beaten by the Q. Army. The Moors lose much in Adalusia. and Major∣ca also. The K. of Sevil is made tributary to Castile. In Poland, the Teutonicks being driven out of Syria, have possessions allotted them by Conrade the Kings uncle, to defend his Lands against the Prussians. The K. is murthered by Suentoplucus Governour of Pomerania, who makes himself Pr. thereof. Boleslaus is K. 51 yeers. Conrade puts the K. and his mother in∣to a Monastery. The K. of Denmark is ransomed, with his son. Lubeck revolteth from the Danes. The Dithmarks, who had revolted to Holst, submit to the K. Wenceslaus the K. of Bohemia's son wasteth Austria. Candia revolts from the Venetians, who recover it again. The rebels there kill Rayner their Governour. The Venetians being beaten by the Greeks, make Peace with them. Many people perish in Frisia by inundations. The Bish. of Utricht is taken by his vassals, and beheaded. Ferdinand of Flanders takes Henry D. of Brabant prisoner. In England, four yeers Truce is made with France. Some rebellions in Wales and Lincoln-shire, and a Sedition in London. Lewis of France takes Rochel from the English. The Gascoins rebel, and are reduced by Rich. E. of Cornwal. The kings brother sideth with the Barons against the K. he makes a dishonourable Peace with the rebellious Welch. In Scotland, the Bish. of Catness is burnt in his house by the people for exaction. Ennerness taken by the rebels. Upon the death of Alan of Galloway, high-Constable, his possessions are invaded by his base son, which caused great troubles. In the Church, Honorius sits yet; he leagueth with Lombardy against the Emp. To him suc∣ceeded Gregory the ninth 14 yeers: he excommunicates the Romans, for expelling him: he in∣stigates Iohn Bren to invade Sicily. By the overflowing of Tyber, 7000 people are drown∣ed. Three Synods held this Decad. The Gray Fryers about this time appear in England. The Pope demandeth two Prebends in every Bishoprick, which K. Iohn denyeth. In the East, Iohn Bren sends Baldwin of Constantinople for aid against the Greeks. Theodorus Angelus loseth his eys by the Bulgarians. The Latins being besieged in Constantinople, are re∣lieved 1230 by the Venetians, who obtained from Baldwin a piece of the Cross, with the Spunge and Lance which pierced our Saviour. Ducas of Adrianople takes Cyprus. The Sultan takes Gaza and Askalon, and defaceth Ierusalem, with the Sepulchre. Thebald K. of Navar, with some French troops, return from Syria without acting. In the West, the Emperour is absolved for a great sum: he receives from the Sultan of Babylon, a rich Tent, wherein the Sun and Moon by their motion shewed the hours of the day and night. Messana in Sicily rebelleth. The Emp. subdues Milan, and most of Italy; and refufeth to restore Sardinia to the Pope: wherefore he is excommunicated. The Popes Croysodoers defeated by him. Baldwin of Con∣stantinople leaveth with the French K. the Crown of thorns. The Moors in Spain lose the kingdom of Certuba after 260 yeers possession. They flee to Granada, and make it their king∣dom: they lose Valentia to the Arragonian. The K. of Poland and his mother escape to Henry the kings old Tutor, and recover Cracovia: he is chosen Governour again. Elizabeth the K. of Hungaries daughter is Canonized. Bela 4th reigneth 35 yeers: he protects the Cumani∣ans against the Tartars. The K. of Denmark receiveth by resignation some Towns from the Teu∣tonicks Mr. Wars in Bohemia between K. Winceslaus and his son Primislaus. The Venetians quiet Candy: they take Rhodes; joyn with the Pope against the Emp. and burn his best ship. Floris 4 E. of Holland slain by the E. of Clermont, and he by the Earl of Cleve. William
the second succeeded Earl of Holland 20 yeers. In England, the K. makes a League with the D. of Britain: he subdues the Irish. The E. of Kent imprisoned. Pembroke and others re∣bel. The Welch invade England. The Pope is denied aid. The K. reconciled to the Earl of Kent. The B. of Winchester causeth great troubles. The Welch Prince submits to England. The E. of Kent degraded. A traitor drawn in pieces for attempting to kill the K. The Popes Legats brother is killed by the Oxford-Scholars. The Scots make peace with the English. The Popes Legat is denied entrance into Scotland, by K. Alexander. In the Church: Gregory sits yet: he raiseth Italy against the Emp. for denying to restore Sardi∣nia. This Decad affordeth two Synods. Prussia receiveth the Faith. The King of England erecteth the house of Converts, now the Rolls. The Greek Church falls off from the Pope. In the East, Will. of Verona is made King of Thessalonica by Baldwin. Ducas of Adrianople grew so rich with selling of eggs to the Turks in a famine, that he made a Crown of the profits 1240 of eggs; which he therefore called Ovata: he suffered no apparel but of the manufactures of his kingdom to be worn. The Turks are expelled out of Cappadocia by the Tartars. The Sara∣cens beaten and killed by the Templers: they prosecute the Teutonicks for siding with the Em∣perour. The Sultan prevails in Palestine. The French K. and his two brothers are taken in E∣gypt. In the West, the Emp. prevails in Italy, and there stampeth leather money. Leopold of Austria takes the title of Arch-duke. Divers Cardinals taken by the Emperour, and released. Divers towns in Italy revolt from him: he is deposed by the Pope. The Gibellines are for him, Guelphs for the Pope. Henry Land-grave of Thuring, set up against Frederick: he defeats Conrad the Emp. son. Henry besiegeth Ulm, where he is killed. Much of Florence burnt by the two factions. Will. Earl of Holland set up against Frederic; who is defeated by Conrad Frederick's son. Lewis of France will not invade England, though the Pope requested him. Murzia and Granada made tributary to Castile. Poland is wasted by the Tartars and Civil Wars. Hungary is wasted by the Cumans. The K. fleeth to Frederic Duke of Austria, to whom he pawns three Provinces: but by the aid of the Knights of Rhodes, he recovers his king∣dom. Civil wars in Denmark, between K. Ericus and his brothers. A peace concluded. Ottocar K. of Bohemia, to enlarge his kingdom, buyeth Carintha and other places adjacent, towards the Adriatick Sea. Apulia is taken by the Venetians. Margaret of Flanders hath two sons, by two husbands, both which claim the Earldom. The French K. and Pope order, that to her William her younger son should succeed in Flanders, and Iohn the elder should have Henalt. William goeth into Syria: Iohn invadeth Henalt, and forceth his mother to buy her peace in England; banisheth the Italian usurers, and sends away the Popes Legat: he is forced to re∣turn from Poictou dishonorably. Griffeth Prince of Wales broke his neck from the Tower. The Welch invade England. The King sells his Plate and Jewels to the Londoners for want of money, and stampeth a new Coin called sterling-money. In Scotland, Argile rebelleth, and is overcome and pardoned. In the Church: Coelestine the fourth sate 17 days. To him succeeded Innocent the fourth 11 yeers: he excommunicates the Emperour, makes ten Cardinals, and gives them red hats: he deposeth Frederick; and demands the fifth of Benefices through Europe: he aideth Henry with money against Frederick. Two Synods this Decad. At Lyons, the Pope accuseth the Emperour of heresie; and he the Pope of exactions. The Cham of Tartary converted. Pet. de Vineis loseth his eyes for accusing the Pope, being hired thereto by the Emperour; and dasheth out his own brains. In the East, Baldwyn despairing to hold Constant, goeth into Italy to Frederick, with the trea∣sure which he took out of the Temple. Ducas Emperour of Adrianople, makes Michael 1250 Angelus and his son Despots. After him succeeded Theodorus Ducas, or Lascaris the yonger, 4 yeers. He forceth Michael and the Bulgarians to submit. Michael Paleologus sideth with the Turks; is called home, and made high-Constable. To Theodorus succeeded his son Iohn Ducas, 6 yeers old. His Tutor was Michael Paleologus, and then Emperour, con∣ditionally to resigne when Iohn was 24 yeers of age. Damiata restored upon the restitution of the French King. Sidon taken by the Sultan of Egypt, and recovered by Lewis, who returns into France. Bela King of Hungary sends Forces into Syria. The Tartars subdue Me∣sopotamia for the Christians: they take also Babylon and Aleppo, and subdue Syria. In the West, Frederick the Emperour dieth. The Empirestood long void. Conrad his son, mur∣thereth his brother Henry; spoileth Naples and Capua: he is poisoned by Manfred his bastard-brother. Richard Earl of Cornwal, and Alphonsus King of Castile, in competition for the Empire. Iohn Earl of Britain is the first
Duke thereof. King Lewis gives Gwyen  to King Henry, conditionally he renounce his interest to all other lands in France. At this time lived the great Astronomer Alphonsus the tenth, King of Leon and Castile. Theobald of Navar becomes vassal to Castile; who expels five Moorish Kings out of Spain. Al∣phonsus elected Emperour; but he neglects it. The Duke of Lituanid becometh apostate. The King of Hungary invades Austria and kills Frederick in battel. In Denmark, Abel the King's brother causeth the King to be beheaded and cast into the Sea: he succeeds King; is defeated by his subjects, and slain by the Frisians. The Bohemians convert Prussia. The Venetians take Padua. Venice taken by the Genoeses, and are expelled. The Dean of S. Marks priviledged by the Pope to wear a Mitre and Crosier-staff, at solemn times: they quar∣rel with the Genoans about a Church in Acon. William of Flanders returns from Syria, and is killed in a Turnament. Margaret loseth Nemours: she is fain to part with Henault to her son Iohn who dieth. Margaret's sons are taken; and released, conditionally that she bestow her daughter Beatrice on Floris Earl of Holland, and should have for her Dowry the Islands of Zealand. The Earl of Holland is crowned at Aken: he builds the Palace at the Hague: he helps Iohn against Margaret of Flanders: he is wounded at Utricht, and is slain by the Frisians. His son Floris the fifth succeeded young: his Protector Floris is slain. Henry Duke of Brabant made Protector, and is expelled. The Nobles chuse Otho; but the people, Alice the Countess. Henry the third of England exacteth money of the Jews: he confirmeth Magna Charta and reduceth Aquitain: his son Edmund invested in Sicily by a Ring which the Pope sent: his eldest son made first Prince of Wales, and Gover∣nour of Ireland and Aquitain. Richard the King's brother chosen Emperour: he is forced to swear the expulsion of strangers. The Pope dispenseth with his Oath. He resignes Nor∣mandy. Mayne and Anjou for money. Alexander the third of Scotland marrieth King Henry's daughter of England: he is oppressed by the Commons, and carried to Sterling. They restore him, and are pardoned: the chief of their faction, Menteith, is poisoned by his wife. Alexander is by King Henry made Earl of Huntingdon. In the Church: Innocent sits yet: he proferred Sicily to Richard Earl of Cornwal. Ale∣xander the fourth succeedeth 6 yeers: he takes divers places from Ecceline of Padua: against whom, Lombardy ariseth in Arms. The Pope, upon a sedition of the Romanes, fleeth to Viterbium. The Pontificians are driven out of Apulia by Manfred, who poison∣ed Conrad of Sicily, and got himself to be crowned. In this Decad there was but one Council held, at Uratislavia in Poland; where the Pope demands the fifth part of all Be∣nefices for three yeers. About this time the Bible was distinguished into Chapters, and the Aera of Alphonsus begins. Robert Sorbonius erecteth the Sorbonists Coliedge at Paris. The Books of W. de S. Aore, written against the Mendicants burnt by the Pope. The Carthusians renounce flesh-eating. Richard Earl of Cornwal sets the Order of Sacca∣tori, or Bon hommes. In the East, the Greeks set up forts against Constantine; which are taken by Alexius Stratego∣pulus. 1260 Baldwin dieth in France. Michael puts out the eyes of the young Emperor. Thrace invaded by the Turks and Bulgarians. The Tartars expelled out of Syria by the Sultan of E∣gypt. Tyre taken by the Venctians. Hugh Lusignan, Viceroy of Naples, arrvies at Acon besieged by the Sultan, who kills 500 Citizens: he takes also Ioppa and Antioch, to the loss of many Christians. Lusignan is crowned at Acon. Prince Edw. returns from Syria into Sicily, where he is wounded by an Infidel. In the West, a sedition at Colen; the B. is imprisoned by the E. of Iuliers. Charles K. of Sicily made Vicar of the Empire. Ottocar K. of Bohemia refuseth to be Emperour. Rodulph Earl of Habspurg chosen 17 yeers: he refuseth to go into Italy. Florence is taken by Manfred of Sicily, who expels the Guelphs. Charles the French Kings brother is made K. of Sicily and Ierusalem at Rome, for a tribute of 40000 crowns: he kills Manfred, and beheadeth Conradin D. of Austria, and the Marq. Baden. K. Lewis of France takes Carthage from the Moors, and besiegeth Tunis: his Army weakned by the Plague. The African Moors invade Castile: peace between them. Alphonso is molested by his Nobles for releasing the homage of Portugal. The Russians are defeated by the Palatine of Cracovia. The E. of Cracovia's wife delivered of 36 boys at a birth. The K. of Den∣mark and his mother taken in battel by the Duke of Holst. Albert D. of Luneburg made tutor to the K. He is expelled by the people, and the Land interdicted by the Pope. The K. of Bohemia finding his wife barren, begets his maid with childe, upon his wives permission, whom he at last divorceth. The Genuans take Cana in Candy, and a rich ship from the Venetians, who send another Fleet into Acon. In England, the Barons rise against the King, who takes London-tower, with Dover and Rochester-Castles. Oxford Acts made void. Great Civil wars between the K. and his Barons: he is taken, with his brother Richard. Leicester is slain. 500
Jews killed at London. Divers Bishops excommunicated by the Pope for siding with Leicester. London taken by Gloucester. The Prince of Wales reconciled to the King. Alan de la Zouch killed. Aquin of Norway expelled out of the Isles by the K. of Scotland. Olaus, Aquin's successor, quits his claim for a sum of 4000 marks, and 100 marks yeerly. In the Church; Urban 4 sate 3 yeers: he excommunicated Manfred, and instituted the feast of Corpus Christi, by Tho. Aquinas his perswasion. Clement 4 succeeded 3 yeers. This Decad were held five Councils. The whipping sect now begin. The Order of redemption of Captives instituted. The Lituanians fall off from Christ, and persecute his members. An hundred thousand Albigenses defeated by eight thousand Catholickes, under Simon Earl of Montfort. S. Austin's Eremites are reduced to one habit. In the East, the Emp. Michael acklowledgeth the Pope's Supremacie in the Council of Lyons, 1270 consisting of 500 Bishops, and 1000 Abbots. Alexius is Emp. of Trapezund. The Greeks beaten out of Asia minor by the Turks. Michael dieth, and is dishonourably buried. The Pyrates come to the Ports of Constant. Acon is again besieged by the Sultan. Hugh concludes a peace with him. Henry Prince of Meckleburg is imprisoned 26 yeers at Caire, and then returns home. Charles of Sicily claims title to Ierusalem from Maria Dominilla a preten∣der: his Viceroy is received by the Templers. The Hospitallers waste the Saracens Country and take from them Margath Castle; which they besiege, and are beaten off. The Sultan of Ba∣bylon defeated by the Tartars and Armenians. In the West, the Emp. taketh Austria, and besiegeth Vienna. Ottacar not able to relieve it, submitteth, and rebelleth again. The Emp. bestows the Exarchat and Hetruria on the Pope, to maintain the Syrian war. Ottacar, with 14000 Bohemians, cut off by the Emp. who bestows on Wenceslaus his daughter & the king∣dom. In France, Philip 3. reigneth 15 yeers: his Q. dieth at Tunis: his son Lewis is poy∣soned by Peter la Broch: the Q. is suspected, and poysoned with her son. Peter of Arragon drowneth his brother by the advice of his father. Henry of Navar being dead, the govern∣ment of that Kingdom is undertaken by Philip of France, in right of his son, who had mar∣ried the Infanta. Peter 3 of Arragon is K. of Sicily, in right of his wife. His brother Iames made king of Majorca and Minorca. Steven 5 of Hungary recovereth Buda from Ottocar, and subdueth the Bulgarians. Ladislaus his successor kills Ottacar in battel, in defence of the Emperor. Dansk, which was morgaged to the Marquess of Brandenburg is recovered by the king of Poland; who defeated the rebels that conspired his death, for naming Lesco his suc∣cessor without the peoples consent. Poland troubled with the Prussians and Lituanians. In Denmark there is war with the D. of Sleswick. Olaus Magnus of Norway inhibits trading with strangers in his Country, till his Ports were shut up by their shipping. The king of Sue∣via being overcome by Magnus his brother, and the Danes, resignes up his Crown. Ottacar of Rohemia being disgraced by the Emperour, rebelleth, and is slain. Venice is distressed by the Genuans and Paduans: a peace with them for 5 yeers: and they renew their League with the Greeks. The Istrians revolt, and are subdued. The Ancomans incense the Pope against Venice. Troubles between Flanders and England; between Flanders and Liege. Marga∣ret Countess of Henneburg in Holland, died: she had at one birth 365 children, baptized by the Bishop of Utricht. In England, Edw. 1. reigneth 34 yeers: he finished the Church of Westminster. Leolin Prince of Wales refuseth to be present at his Coronation; against whom the king marcheth, and forceth him to submit. The King of Scots sendeth men and money into Syria: he, with his Q. are present at K. Edward's Coronation. Ferquard made Earl of Ross, for overthrowing a strong bragging Norman in the English Court. In the Church: Gregory 10 sits 4 yeers. He interdicteth the Florentines for banishing thence the Gibelliues. To him succeeded Innocent 5. five months: then Adrian 5. one month: then Iohn 20. eight months. He was killed by the fall of a room at Viterbium. Nicholas 3 suc∣ceeded 3 yeers: he alters the Government of Rome, and takes from Charles the title of Vicar of the Empire. One Synod held this Decad. At Saltzhurg, the Order of Celestines founded by Peter de Murcone. Michael the Greek Emperour despised at home, for acknowledging the Pope. At Lyons, in that Synod the Conclave is erected, and geniculation at the naming of JESUS, and the tenths of Benefices granted towards the holy war. In the East, Andronicus the Emperor imprisoneth his brother Iohn for his popularity. Asia minor 1280 divided by the Turks into Satrapies. The Christians persecuted by the apostate Cham of Tar∣tary. Iohn, son to Hugh K. of Ierusalem, succeedeth in Cyprus: then Henry, who is crown∣ed at Tyre. Tripolis taken, with the loss of 7000 Christians. Henry and the
Sultan make  peace. In the West, the Switzers, hitherto subject to Savoy, are subdued by the Emperour, who enlargeth the priviledges of Luca and Florence for money: he demolisheth 60 Castles in Thuring, which harboured thieves. Peter of Arragon, who married Manfred's daughter, is called in by the Sicilians, who kill all the French in two hours, when the bell rung to the Vespers. Peter's General defeats Charles his Fleet. Charles recovereth Naples; where the French are beaten by Iames, Peter's son. Wars between France and Arragon; in which Peter dieth of a wound. Philip the fourth raigns in France 28 yeers. Peter of Arragon dieth; whose two sons succeeded; to wit, Iames in Sicily, and Alphonsus in Arragon, who took Majorca from Iames. The Moors expelled Minorca. Great troubles in Castile. Lescus the Polonian spoileth Russia, and expels the Lituanians out of Poland. Lescus forced by his people into Hungary; who returns, and expels his competitor Conrad. The Tartars carry away out of Poland twenty thousand Virgins. Great troubles there, between Lescus and Conrad, and their brothers. Ladislaus of Hungary defeateth Oldamire King of the Cumanians; who return with the Tartars, and spoil Hungary and kill the King, whom the Pope a little before had cursed for his Concubines. Ericus King of Denmark killed with 56 wounds: the Rebels flee to Norway. The Norwegians and banished Lords invade Denmark. The Venetians make war upon the Patriarch of Aquileia for helping the Istri∣ans. The Pope makes peace between them. In Flanders, there is a rebellion at Bruges. War between Brabant and Guelders, about the Earldom of Nemours. Floris of Holland subdueth the Frisians, and transports his fathers bones thence to Middleburg. Many people perish in Frisia by Inundations. In England, Leolin of Wales is slain, and his head set upon the Tower: his brother David hanged and quartered. King Edward sits as a Peer in the French Parliament: he ransoms Charles king of Sicily's son: he makes the competitors of Scotland swear to stand to his arbitration. The Scots king dieth without issue, being slain with a fall from his horse. Six Governours appointed. Great troubles between Bruce and Baliol about the Crown. In the Church, sate Martin the fourth, 4 yeers: he excommunicates and deposeth Peter of Arragon, and bestows it on Charles Valois the French king's youngest son. Honorius the fifth succeeds 2 yeers: he is opposed by the Germans in a tax. Nicholas the fourth suc∣ceeded 4 yeers. This Decad yeeldeth four Synods. Seven rich Merchants of Florence instituted the Order of servants of Mary. The Order of Chaplains also and Anchorites set up. The Pope excommunicates the Greek Emperour, for breaking his promise made at Lyons. At Wesel, the Jews crucifie a young man. In the East, the Turks invade the Empire. Michael Strategoplus imprisoned by Andronicus. 1290 The Emperours forces defeated by the Turk. Ronzerius a Pirate made Cesar: he oppres∣seth Asia, and is slain by the Army of Michael the young Emperour. The Saracens take Syria, after 192 yeers possession by the Christians, since Godfrey recovered Ierusalem. Thir∣ty thousand Saracens killed by Cassan the Cham, who recovers Damascus; but loseth all a∣gain, being called home by domestick troubles. Ottoman the first, son to Erthogul, takes the title of Sultan. In the West, Wenceslaus king of Bohemia is confirmed in the Electorate, and chief Imperial Butlership. Adolph Earl of Nassau named Emperour by the Bishop of Mentz, who had got the other Electors to assent. The Styrians submit to Otho Duke of Bavaria, who is forced to flee. The Emperour takes pay of the king of England, for his aid against the French; with the which he buyeth Thuring for his stipend; and for sacriledge and adultery he is deposed, and is killed by Albert Duke of Austria, who succeeds 9 yeers. At his Coronation, the Duke of Saxony is smothered in the preass of people. France makes peace with Arragon, and war with England and Flanders. The Parliament of Paris is set up. Philip of France obtains Sicily by marrying with the sister of Charles the lame. King Lewis is canonized. Flanders united to the Crown of France. Iames of Arragon made king of Sardinia by the Pope. The Bohemians seize upon Cracovia. Ladislaus, who had escaped in a Monks habit, returneth, and beats the Bohemians in Cracovia. The Tar∣tars waste Poland. Primislaus Duke of great Polonia is crowned king, that title having been omitted 215 yeers: he is murthered by the Marquess of Brandenburg. Locticus suc∣ceeded, who refused the title of king: he is deposed, and Wenceslaus king of Bohemia chosen. Whilst Andrew king of Hungary is wasting Austria, the Peers, by the Pope's perswasion, chuse Charles, son to Charles Martel, for their king. The king of Denmark falls out with his Archbishop; wherefore the king is censured at Rome to pay to the Archbishop 49000 marks; and the Land is interdicted. The Frisons having put themselves into the king's pro∣tection, murther his Governour. Lubec craves protection of the Dane. In Rohemia, the Lords rebel, and make the Duke of
Uratislavia king; who was shortly after poysoned. Pera by Constantinople is taken by the Venetians, whose Fleet is taken by the Genuans at Corfu, who also take Cydon in Crete. The Genuans attempt Venice to no purpose. Great executions at Venice, for plots against the State. The Paduans build a Fort in the Venetians territories, which they demolished. They make the Greek Emperour pay his debts. Iohn D. of Brabant is killed. The Earl of Flanders, and his wife, the Prince of Wales daughter, are invited to France, and imprisoned at Paris: he sides with the English against France. Charles Valois invadeth Flanders, take Guy, and many of his Nobility prisoners. The Earl of Holland claims Scotland in right of Ada his grand-mother; but is disswaded from it by the King of England: he is slain for Adultery. His son Iohn the first succeeded, who subdued the Frisons, and proscribed Dort for rebelling: he died childless, the Earldom ha∣ving lasted in that line 437 yeers. Friesland torn with factions. King Edward of England banisheth the Jews. The French and English take each others ships at Sea. Aquitain sei∣sed on by the French King, because Edward came not upon his citation. Baliol doeth ho∣mage for Scotland, and aids the French against the English. The king takes divers strong holds in Scotland, with the Regalities, and Marble Chair. The English expelled by William Wallace. The Scots and Wallace beaten in the battel of Fawkirk. The King of of Nor∣way claimeth Scotland in right of his daughter deceased. Baliol is named king of Scotland by king Edward. Baliol took it so ill, that he was forced to plead at the bar against Mac∣duffs brother, that he fell off from the English to the French. Baliol is sent to the Tower: he is released, and goeth into France. In the Church▪ Celestine the fifth called before Petrus de Murcome, sits 5 moneths? he was an ignorant Eremite. To him succeeded Boniface the eighth, 8 yeers. He deluded Celestine by the sound of a Cane, and made him resigne: he persecuted the family of Co∣lumna, and opposeth Alberts Election: he causeth Iames to forsake Sicily, whose brother Frederick is chosen by the people in hatred of the French. Eight Synods held this Decad. The hereticks Pataren and Gazareni, about this time appeared, and held that marryed men could not be saved. Fratricelli a kinde of Anabaptists. Boniface sets out the sixth book of Decretals. The Church of Loretta inlarged, for reception of Pilgrims. In the East, Andronicus is excommunicated by the Pope, and the K. of Rascia set up against him. Ottoman keeps his residence at Neapolis, which he called Despotopolis, 20 miles from Nice: he 1300 beats the Christian Armies. In the West, the Emperour wastes the Lands of the Bishop of Trevers. The Helvetians begin to make head against the Emperours Officers. The Em∣perour is murthered by his brothers son, for keeping his Patrimony from him. To him suc∣ceeds Henry the seventh. Earl of Lutzenburg 4 yeers: he is crowned at Millan, and loseth many places in Italy. Philip of France excommunicated; he burns the Popes Bulls. The French are beaten by the Flemings in the battel at Cowtray. Philip is reconciled to the Pope: he defeats the Flemings, and makes Peace with them: he banisheth the Jews out of France. The Moors driven from Gibralter by the Castilians. Ferdinand of Castile wrongs his brothers, who summon him to Christs Tribunal within thirty days; he dieth within that time. In Hungary, three Kings are chosen by three Factions, viz. Wenceslaus of Bohemia (who is carryed thence into Bohemia, with the Crown of Hungary, by his father Ladislaus) Charles and Otho Dukes of Bavaria, to whom Wenceslaus resigneth the Crown. Otho is ta∣ken by the Vayvod of Transilvania: he is cursed by Cardinal Gentilis, for detaining the Crown from Charles. Otho resigneth, and is set free. In Poland, Wenceslaus King of Bo∣hemia, is chosen; who leaves Bohemian Governours, and returns home. To him succeeded Ladislaus 29 yeers. Dansk besieged by Brandeburg. Ladislaus employeth the Teuto∣nicks to defend it, who seise on it to their own use. The troubles of Denmark composed, by the payment of 10000 marks to the Archbishop by the king. The Norwayans invade Denmark but are repulsed. The king of Suevia imprisoned by his brethren. Wenceslaus of Bohemia selleth Misnia to the Marquess of Brandeburg: he is killed by a Russian: in him endeth the male line. Henry Prince of Carinthia claims the kingdom in right of his wife: they are both driven by the Emperour into Bavaria. Frederick the Emperours son striving for that kingdom is slain. Henry returns, and carrieth thence much wealth into Ca∣rinthia: he is expelled by Iohn the Emperours son, who reigned 36 yeers. The Venetians excommunicated by the Pope, for taking Ferrara; and all their goods confiscated in France. Zara besieged, and submitteth to the Venetians: they aid Charles Valois against the Greek Emperour. Many of the French faction killed in Gaunt and Brugis. Guy of Flanders dieth a prisoner in France: his son Robert succeeds 18 yeers: he hath wars with Holland, because the Earl neglected to do his homage for Zealand. Peace between Robert and the French. In Holland, William the good ruleth 32 yeers. In England, the
King confirmeth  Magna Charta, releaseth Baliol, and sends the Lord Segrave into Scotland; who is beat∣en there: the king marcheth with his Army three hundred miles into Scotland, without oppo∣sition. The Prince is sent thither with an Army. Wallas is taken and executed. The king in his journey to Scotland dieth. His son Edward the second succeeded 19 yeers: he impri∣soneth the Bishop of Chester in the cause of Gaveston. In Scotland, Robert Bruce having escaped out of England, kills Cumyn for betraying his plot to king Edward. Robert Reign∣ed there 24 yeers: he is forced into the Woods and Isles a while: he recovers divers Castles. In the Church, Boniface yet sits: he gives away France to the Emperour: he sleeth with his treasure to Anagnia, and is taken by the Columnii, and dieth of grief. To him succeeded Bennet the ninth 8 moneths: he was poysoned. Clement the fifth succeeded 8 yeers: he removeth his seat to Avignion, where it continued 72 yeers: at his Coronation, he lost a stone out of his Mytre, worth 6000 Crowns; the French king was hurt, and the Duke of Britain slain; with twelve more. The Pope being recovered of a great sickness, bestow∣eth Mentz on his Physitian: he makes Robert, son of Charles, king of Sicily, by paying eight thousand pound fealty, and the annual profits of Benevent. This Decad produced two Councils; one at Rome, against the French king; the other at Paris, against Pope Boni∣face. The first Jubile is instituted by Boniface. The Templars condemned in France, and Iames their chief Master burnt, with fifty more of that Order at Paris. In the East, the Turks are expelled by the Christians out of Thrace. In the West, the Empe∣rour rageth with fire and sword in Italy. He is crowned at Pisa and Rome. The Bishop of 1310 Liege, and two thousand, slain there: he burns many places, and is poysoned by a Monk in the Eucharist. Lewis of Bavaria, and Frederick of Austria, strive for the succession. Lewis is crowned at Acon by four Electors, and Frederick at Bonna by the rest. Three Cantons of Switzers enter into an offensive and defensive league. The Guelphs in Italy, the Emperours enemies, are slain, about a hundred thousand. The French king in hunting is killed with a fall from his horse. His son Lewis the tenth succeeded two yeers: he hanged his Treasurer, and died suddenly: his brother Philip the fifth succeedeth 12 yeers. The Salique Law is con∣firmed, and Lewis his daughter omitted. The League with Scotland is renewed. The Shep∣herds rebellion in France. In Castile, Alphonsus the eleventh is King 40 yeers. The Teuto∣nicks subdue Pomerania, and take Riga. Ladislaus of Poland recovers Cracovia from the Duke of Opolium, and takes away the Cities Liberties, for betraying it. Charles, son to Charles Martel, is King of Hungary 32 yeers. Christopher reigns in Denmark 14 yeers. The King of Suevia imprisoneth his brothers in a Castle, where they die. The people rebel: he fleeth: his son Magnus is taken, and he is slain. Iohn the Emperours son reigns in Bohe∣mia 36 yeers: he is made Lieutenant of the Empire: he aideth his father; and, after his death, Lewis against Frederick. Pr. Pandulo the Venetian, to pacifie the Pope, suffers himself to be tied like a dog with a chain under the Popes table. The Genuans war against the Venetians by Sea and Land: they besiege Pera. Crete rebelleth; so doth Gaunt. The French and Hol∣landers invade Flanders. Upon restitution of Doway and some other places, and a marriage between Philip's daughter and Robert's grand-childe, peace is concluded. At Middleburg a Colledge is erected, with a Dean and four Canons. In England, Gaveston is made Earl of Cornwal; is banished, and made General of Ireland: he is recalled, banished, returneth, and is made Secretary: the Lords strike off his head. The King is overthrown by the Scots at Bannocksburn. The Earl of Lancaster, chief of the Barons faction, is reconciled to the King. Edward Bruce, King Robert's brother, is crowned King of Ireland, and slain three yeers after. The Scots take Berwick, and many other places. King Robert invadeth Eng∣land. Divers put to death in Scotland, for endeavouring to betray the kingdom to the Eng∣lish. Robert King of Sicily proscribed by the Emperour; which the Pope makes void. Frederick Prince of Trinacry, calls himself King of Sicily. Robert is reconciled to Frede∣rick: they fall at oddes again. In the Church: Clement yet sitteth, who wrote the Clementine or seventh of the Decretals. The Emperour denieth fealty to the Pope. Succeeded Iohn 21, who sate 18 yeers. His tenent concerning deposing of Kings, is opposed by Occam. He besiegeth Genoa, and sets out the extravagants. This Decad were held seven Synods. The Templers suppressed at Vienna. Rhodes is bestowed upon the Knights Hospitallers. The Works of Lullius are condemned. Begwins and Beguards Hereticks, with the Armenian Hereticks, were busie about this time. Three Gentlemen of Siena set up the Order of White Monks of Olivet.
In the East, Andronicus, the Emperours grand-childe, besiegeth Constantinople; so that the Grand-father is forced to give him Thrace and Macedonia. Constantine son of Andronicus sent against the young Emperour; he is taken and imprisoned, they are reconcild: young Andronicus joyns with the Despot of Bulgaria against his Grandfather, and takes Constantinople; he attempts to relieve Nice, and is beaten by the Turks, who take Nice. The old Emperour is made a Monk, and called Antony; the Turks take Philadelphia. Prusa the Metropolis of Bithynia is taken, and made the seat of the Ottoman-Empire. To Otto∣man succeedeth his son Orchanes 31 years: the Christians recover Nice with divers Forts. In the West, Germany is vexed between the two Emperours. Ferdinand is taken, and after three years imprisonment, is restored to Austria, but renounceth the Empire. The Pope and Emerour quarrel; the Bishop of Magdeburg's brains are beaten out by the Citizens. The Emperour is crowned at Rome, and sets up an Antipope. Reynold Earl of Gelders is made Duke; Iuliers made a Marquisate: The Emperour besiegeth Millan. In France, to Philip succeeded his brother Charls King of Navar 6 years; he forced the Flemmings to submit; to him succeeded Philip of Valois, brothers son to Philip the fair, 22 years. In Spain, Arragon, Catalonia and Valentia unitd: Arragon sub∣dueth Sardinia. Silesia fals off from the Polander to the Bohemians, with whom the Teutonicks side: 130 towns burnt in Massovia by the Lituanians. Upon a marriage between the Kings son Casimire and the Dukes daughter, a peace is made with the Li∣tuanians: the Massovians and Teutonicks defeated by the Posacs and Lituanians. Ladislaus beateth the Bohemians and Prussians. In Denmark a great Rebellion, in which Waldemar Duke of Sleswick is chosen King; but two years after the King is reestablish∣ed, and Waldemar gives up his title of King. Henry of Austria is released for 30000 Crowns. The Bohemians rebell, upon the Kings attempting to exchange Bohemia for Bavaria: he invadeth Poland, and loseth one of his eyes with the moisture of the Li∣tuanian aire. At Brugis a great sedition between the people and Magistrates: they de∣tain their Earl, a prisoner 6 moneths; a peace is made, and they rebell again: the Earl is restored, and 22000 of the Rebels killed. Holland enjoyeth Zeland upon a peace with Flanders: Many towns drowned in Holland with 5000 people: A civil War in Sicily. The Emperour attempteth King Robert in vain. The Spencers in England are banish∣ed: the King wasteth Durham, Preston and Lancaster. The Scots beat the English: they renew their league with France. The Lords defeated at Burowbridge: Lancaster and other Lords executed. The Mortimers sent to the Tower. Peace with Scotland 13 years. The Queen and Mortimer proclaimed Traitours; the Queen landeth, the Spencers exe∣cuted: the King resigneth, and is murthered. Edward 3 his son succeeded 50 years: the King returns dishonourably from Scotland. Mortimer hanged. Baliol resignes Scot∣land; Hamilton's begin. In the Church, Pope Iohn sitteth yet; he sides with Robert against Frederick king of Si∣cily; he quarrels with the Emperour: against him is set up Nicholas 5. which makes the 28 Schisme. The Emperour excommunicated again: Nicholas is carried into France, where he giveth up his title. Three Synods held this Decad. The Poore-men of Lyons called Fratricelli condemned by the Pope: the French King maintaineth the Clergies temporalities against the Advocate, and is therefore stiled (Catholick). In the East, the Bulgarians are defeated, and do defeat the Emperour, who sets out a fleet, and enters into league with the Latine Princes against the Turk. Thrace is wasted by 1330 the Scythians and Turks; the Emperour takes 14 of their ships, and beats the out of Acarnania and Aetolia. Nice is taken by Orchanes, and so is Abydus: the Emperour is wounded in the foot: the Turks are driven from the siege of Philadephia: The Turks waste divers Islands: They are beaten at sea by Andronicus. In the West, the King of Bohemia takes divers Cities for the Pope, Parma and Padua taken by the Scaligers, and other towns of Italy by others: the Pope dares not absolve the Emperour; for fear of the French: He makes Edward of England Lieutenant of the Empire; and then displa∣ceth him: the Emperour appealeth from the Pope to a General Synod. It was con∣cluded in a Diet of Frankfort, that any Bishop may Crown the Emperour, as well as the Pope. Robert of Artois is defeated of his Earldome by the French King, who pro∣claims him traitour, for solliciting the King of England to claim his right in France. Philip aideth the Scots: Edward for this, and for seising upon Aquitain, proclaims war against him: he quartereth the Arms of France and England. At the siege of Lisle, the English are defeated; and the French at Sluce. Divers discontented Lords in Spain side with the Moors against Castile; The Castilians deeat the forces of Arragon and Navar. Peter of Arragon doth homage to the Pope for Sardinia and Corsica. Wars between
Ca∣stile  and Portugal. The Teutonicks waste Polonia, and at last by the King defeated; Peace made between them; the Lituanians burn themselves, wives, children and goods, that they might not fall into the hands of the Teutonicks. King Casimire ettleth the suc∣cession of Hungary upon Charls, who had married his sister. Russia taken by the Litua∣nians: Casimire takes Leopolis, where he found two crowns, and a piece of the Crosse, now kept at Cracovia. In Hungary was a great plague of Locusts; the Nobles of Den∣mark send to Valdemar Christophers son, being now in Germany, to recover the kingdome, which was now in competition. Wenceslaus of Bohemia, who in the French Court was named Charls, defeats the Lombards, and is made Marquesse of Moravia. Iohn of Bohemia releaseth his title to Poland for 10000 Marks: A Jew puts out his eye, having lost the other before. The Venetians joyn with Florence against Mastin Tyrant of Escalla. 60 several Ambassadors arrives at Venice to reconcile them and Mastin; Peace is grant∣ed to him, and he is made a Patritian of Venice. Lewis of Flanders buyeth Melchyn of the Bishop of Liege, and the Duke of Geldres; the Duke of Brabant challengeth it; but they are reconciled by marriages. The Flemmings defeated by the English: the Earle is against the Flemmings league with England: he flieth to Philip of France: The Earl of Holland doth notable justice on the Bailiffe of South-Holland, for forcing a Cow from a poor woman. William 4. of Holland ruleth ten years, he spoileth Prussia. The king of England doth homage in France for Aquitain, and returns discontented: he aideth Edward Baliol, because David King of Scotland refused to do homage. In the battel of Halydown-hill, the English are victorious and recover Barwick; he entreth Scotland, and returneth with Baliol: He enters Scotland again, and setleth Baliol, who contents himself with a Pension. The first Duke in England, is Prince Edward made Duke of Cornwall. The King sends to demand his Holds in Aquitain: he leagueth with the Em∣perour and Dutch; he is made Vicar of the Empire. Southampton burnt by the French: they besiege Burdeaux and are all killed. King Robert of Scotland having vowed an expedition into Syria, desired on his death-bed, Robert Douglasse to carry his heart to Ierusalem: Douglasse in his journey thither was slain, in siding with Arragon against the Saracens; that Family ever since bear an Heart in their Coat: This Robert had won 70 battels. Earl Murry Regent, during King Davids minority, was poyson∣ed by a Monk: The King and Queen are driven into France. Edward Baliol crowned; Aberden burnt by the English. Davids faction groweth to strong for Baliol. Salisbury and Arundel forced from the siege of Dumbar-Castle. At Blackburn the Scots are beaten; Perth and Sterling taken by the Regent. Baliol flieth into England. In the Church, the Schisme continueth, till Nicholas the Antipope was carried into France, where he resigneth: the Bononians rebell against the Pope, who dieth and left behind him a treasure of 1700000 Florens; to him succeeded Bennet 12. 7 years; One Synod held this Decad, at Toledo. Pope Iohn believed that the souls slept till the Resurrection. The Greek Church dissenteth from the Latine. In a Diet at Mentz it was concluded, that the Councel was above the Pope, and that the Emperour held immediately from God. In the East, Nicomenia in Bithynia is taken by the Turks. Iohn son to Andronicus is Empe∣rour 1340 41 years; he is as yet under the tuition of Iohn Cantacuzenus father-in-law to Or∣chanes; the Patriarch excommunicates him; upon this the Patriarch is deposed. The Turks are beaten out of Smyrna by the Venetians: they defeat the Venetians with those of Cyprus & Rhodes. In the West, the Pope takes Ferrara; Mantua & Verona from the Em∣peror, and denyeth to absolve him, till he resigne his Empire to him. Lewis is deposed and dieth. Charls 4. elected, he was son to Iohn King of Bohemia. Some of the Electors prefer the Empire to King Edward of England; he refuseth it: then they choose Ferdinand Marquiss of Misnia, whom Charls bought out with 10000 Marks. Gunther also be∣ing elected by some, compoundeth with Charls, and is poisoned. In France, Iohn Montfort loseth Britany; King Edward assisted him: he is taken and imprisoned. The Gabal of Salt now imposed. At Crescy the French lost 30000 with the King of Bohemia, and 11 Princes, 80 Barrons, and 1200 Knights. Calice lost, and the French who would have bought it, cheated of their money, and slain. The Dolphinate of Vienna sold to the French, on condition that the eldest son of France should be called the Dolphin. In the battel of Salcados 450000 Moores flame, and but twenty Castilians. The Alcavale, that is the Tenths of things sold, raised for the maintaining of the Moors war. Alphonsus of Castile obtaineth
of the Pope the Canaries, conditionally that he  plant Christianity there. Iames of Majorea killed in battell by the Arragonians: The Tartars and Bohemians driven out of Poland, by Casimire: He is excommunicate for his Concubines, and adultery: he totally subdueth Russia, and names Lewis of Hungary his heir. To Charls of Hungary succeedeth his son Lewis 1. 41 years; he sub∣dueth the Saxons in Transilvania: Andrew his brother and King of Naples, sels his possessions to the King, who aideth the Polander against Lituania and Bohemia. Zara fals off to Hungary, and is recovered again by Venice: they make peace for 10 years. Lewis to revenge his brothers death, whom his wife strangled, marcheth into Italy and takes the Kingdome of Naples: She flieth to the Pope with her new Husband, who for reconciling them hath Avignion. In Denmark, Waldemar reignes 35 years; he leagueth with the Swedes, invadeth Brandeburg, and goeth to Ierusalem. Prague in Bohemia is now freed from Mentz, and made an Archbishoprick. King Iohn being slain at Crescy, his son Charls succeeded, who also was Emperour, who built new Prague. The Vene∣tians troubled with an Earthquake, Plague and Famine: they invite strangers to come and inhabite their City. A great faction at Gaunt against the French, in which Artweld the chief man of the faction is slain, and E. Lewis is killed at Crescy; to whom succeeded Lewis of Male 38 years; he promised to marry the King of Englands daughter, but mar∣rieth the daughter of Brabant. William of Holland is slain in the battell he fought against Utricht; his Sister Margaret succeeded 8 years: she makes her son William Governour, reserving 10000 crowns yearly; but when the Emperour died, she assumeth Holland, and bestoweth Henault on William. Now began there the faction of Cabillaucks and Hoecks, which held 150 years; the Cabillaucks call in William against his Mother. Tourney besieged by King Edward, and truce granted for one year: He quarrels with the Pope, for denying him the making of a Cardinal. The order of the Garter institu∣ted; and the Round-Table at Windsor erected. Divers of King Edwards friends put to death in France. He taketh Caen in Normandy; with 10000 English he defeats 60000 French. King David of Scotland taken by Copland, who is rewarded with 500l. and made a Banoret. The English quite driven out of Scotland. King David and his Queen return. Great emulation between Douglasse and Ramsey: David upon the French score invades England thrice, and wasteth all as far as Durham: he is defeated and taken; Percy and Baliol spoil Lothian. Robert of Sicily being dead, Andrew the King of Hungary's son, whom he had adopted, succeeds in Apulia, for which he paid a great summe to the Pope: he is strangled by his wife, who married with Lewis Prince of Tarentium. In the Church, Bennet sits yet, he confirmed Verona to Scaliger, Mantua to Gonzaga, and Ferrara to Este. Clement 6. succeeded 10 years: he reduced the Jubile to 50 years; he makes some of the Electors choose a new Emperour. Nicholas a Tribune of Rome aspireth, and is confined to Avignion. This Decad had but one Synod, at To∣ledo. One Picard a Walloon began the Heresie of the Adamites. Popish Provisions put down in England. The Pope suppresseth the Whippers. Many Jews executed for poysoning the waters. In the East, Paleologus helpeth the Venetians, and Cantacuz: the Genuans. Losbos is given to Catelusius for his service against the Greeks, after almost 100 years possession by his 1350 posterity, it was lost to the Turks. Cantacuz: made a Monk, and his son suppressed. Solyman son to Orchanes breaks into Europe; and takes divers Castles with Calli∣polis the chief City of Chersonesus: as he was Hawking he is drowned in a Ditch; whereupon Orchanes dieth with grief. To him succeeded Amurath the first, his son, 30 years. The Janisaries now begin. In the West, Cleve for want of Heirs-male, fals to the Empire. Wenceslaus fouleth the Font, when he was Chri∣stened. The Pisans punished for carrying the Empresse and her daughter into the Stews. The Emperour is crowned at Millan and Rome: he publisheth the Golden Bull, and annexeth Brandeburg to Bohemia. Iuliers made a Dutchy; he helps the Pope a∣gainst Millan, and hath wars with Philip of Austria, who put him to flight, by corrupting some about Charls. To Philip of France succeeded Iohn his son 15 years: Charls grand∣child to the King of Castile, and Constable of France, is killed by the K.
of Navar. Charls  of Navar imprisoned for favouring the English; who beat the French at Poyctiers. Charls being released, makes new troubles. The Provost of Paris murthered. The King and his son transported into England. France spoiled by King Edward. Upon a Peace, King Iohn is released to get money. The Jews are again admitted. He returns into England, and dies. Peter King of Portugal banisheth Lawyers out of his Kingdom. Peter King of Castile puts his brother with many Nobles to death; he murthereth two more bro∣thers, and poysoneth his wife. Lewis of Hungary makes peace with Padua and Au∣stria; he invadeth Dalmatia, and takes divers Towns; he restores Tarvisium and Istria. The Russians rebell against Poland. Casimire is absolved, and buildeth many Churches. Prussia is spoiled by the Lituanians. Hungary disclaimeth all tribute from Polonia: The King of Denmark imprisoneth his Queen upon suspition of Adultery; he afterward begot Margaret of her, who became Queen of 3 Kingdoms. Ericus rebelleth against his Fa∣ther the King of Sweden. Istria spoiled by the Prince of Croatia, who makes restitu∣tion. The Venetians beaten by the Germans at Bosphorus. The Germans are defeated, and put themselves under the protection of Millan: At last a peace is made. The Vene∣tians make a dishonourable peace with Lewis of Hungary. Lewis of Flanders subdueth Brabant; he restores all again except Antwerp, which he retains for his wifes Dowry. William's forces in Holland are defeated by his mother the Empress, who was at last defeated by him, and is contented with Henault, and leaveth Holland with him, who in∣vaded Utricht, and fell mad: His wife is chosen Regent by the Cabillaucks, and his bro∣ther Albert by the Hoecks, who besieged Delf and took it. The Spanish Fleet at Win∣chelsey defeated by the English. Sir Walter Bently beats the French in Britain. Groats first coyned. The King wasteth France, and removes the Staple of Wooll out of Flanders into England. The battel of Poyctiers, where the French King with many Lords, Knights and Esquires are taken and slain. The French aid the Scots; they take Barwick and dis∣mantle it, they burn Northam. King David ransomed for 100000. marks. Peace for 14 years: The King cuts off Robert Stuarts succession to the crown, and appoints A∣lexander of Sutherland his younger sisters son for his successor, upon whose death Ro∣bert is reconciled to the King and to his hopes. The Pope makes Lewis of Tarentum King of Sicily, against the King of Hungary. In the Church, Clement keepeth the 2. Jubile: To him succeeds Innocent 6. 9 years. new troubles in Rome. Nicholas is sent home and restored to his Tribunat, and is slain by the Columni. The Popes Legat is sent to Rome, who recovers all in 5. years that was lost from the Church. One Councel held this Decad, at Toledo again. The Pope strives with Cantacuz, to unite the Greek and Latine Churches. In the East, the Turks take many places, and make Paleologus tributary, who craveth help against them from the Pope and Queen of Sicily. The Turks transport 60000. 1360 into Europe by the help of the Genuans. Amurath makes his seat at Adrianople, he cir∣cumciseth his sons. In the West, The Imperial Cities league against the Princes. In France, Charles 5▪ reigneth 16 years. Montfort kils Charles of Bloys, and recovereth Bri∣tain. King Charles makes his guard of 100. Scots Archers: He gives the Kingdom of Arles to Lewis Duke of Anjou. Peter of Castile treacherously killed the Moorish King. War between Castile and Arragon. Peter is driven out of Castile by the French; he fly∣eth to Prince Edward, and is restored, and abjureth his Religion. He is at last taken and beheaded. The Polander subdueth the Russian. Bosna and Bulgaria reduced to the obe∣dience of Hungary. About this time the Hanse-Towns being 77. begin to set up. Ham∣burg submits to the Duke of Holst. Magnus of Suevia taken, and imprisoned. Venice forceth the Paduans to buy their peace for 15 years. The Earldom of Burgundy falls to Margaret mother of Lewis by the death of Philip. The Duke of Burgundy marrieth the Earls daughter. King Edward of England affrighted with thunder, makes peace with France. King Iohn is released for 300000 crowns. The King being 50 years old, keep∣eth a Jubile: he turneth all the Records out of French into Latine or English. The Staple at Calice. King Iohn came to England to release his hostages, and dieth at the Sa∣voy. Prince Edward ill rewarded for his aide, by Peter of Castile. The Highlanders in Scotland are permitted by the King to destroy each other. In the Church, Urban 5. sate 8 years. The Viscount of Millan begs peace of the Popes Legat. The Pope comes to Rome,
and sends for the Emperour to suppress the Gibel∣lins. This Decad affordeth no Councel. Iohn Columbinus begins at Sena the order of Jesuites. Paleologus submitteth to the Roman Church, on promise of help against the Turks. St. Bridgets Order confirmed by the Pope. In the East, Paleologus being expelled by Andronicus his son, is restored by the Venetians: 1370 he taketh Tenedos from the Genuans, and gives it to the Venetians. At the Marriage feast of Bajazet, a Nobleman sent 100. Boyes, and so many Virgins in rich apparel, with two Cups in each hand, the one filled with jewels, the other with gold: the Des∣pot of Servia loseth Nissa to the Turk, and becomes his Tributary Aladin the Turks son in law rebelleth, and forced to sue for peace. The Servians fall from Amurath, and joyn with the king of Bosna. 20000 Turks killed in Bosna by the Christians. In the West, the Emperour promiseth more to the Electors to choose his son Caesar, then he was able to pay. War between Saxony and Brunswick, for the Dutchy of Luneburg. To Charles succeeded his ill-conditioned son Wenceslaus 22 years. Charles of Navar in∣dicted for attempting to kill the French King: he forfeiteth his estate, and is recon∣ciled to the King. Navars eldest son imprisoned, and his Officers executed for intelli∣gence with the English. The French invade the Isle of Wight: Montpelier rebelleth, and is reduced. The King leaveth the Government to his 3 brothers, and dieth rich. His son Charls 6. succeeded 42 years. The Kings of Aragon, Fez and Granado league against Castile, which makes peace with Portugal. The Duke of Lancaster claimeth Ca∣stile in right of his wife. Henry of Castile poysoned by a Monk. Casimire of Poland be∣ing dead, Lewis King of Hungary succeedeth, Casimir's sisters son, 13 years: he return∣eth to Hungary, and leaves his mother Regent of Polonia: the Hungarians kill the Go∣vernour of Cracovia, for which 160 Hungarians are killed by the Polacks. King Lewis perswades the Polacks to admit one of his daughters to the succession, which they do assent to, conditionally they might be eased of their Taxes. He subdueth the Vala∣chians, and adopteth his daughters husband. Magnus of Suevia is released for 12000. Marks. Wenceslaus of Bohemia drowneth his wifes Confessor, for not revealing her con∣fession. The Venetians and Genuans at War for Tenedos; They are reconciled by the Duke of Savoy. In Flanders, 17 Towns are drowned, and 5000 houses burnt in Gaunt. The French and Flemmings quarrel, for receiving Iohn Duke of Britain. The Earls heavy Taxes cause a civil War in Flanders. Wars between Holland and Utricht. Limoges taken by the English. Rochel besieged by the French: Peace between England and France. The English defeated in Garnsey. The French lose Aquitain. Richard 2. reigns in England 22 years. The French burn Rye, and the Scots Roxburg. Barwick taken and lost by the Scots in 9 dayes. In Scotland, Robert Stuart is king 20 years; he reneweth the League with France. In the Church, sate Gregory 11. 7 years. The Florentines quarrell with the Popes Le∣gats, and deny corne to Rome. They assist the Bononians and Pisans against the Pope, who curseth, and then absolveth them: He removes from Avignon to Rome. To him succeeded Urban 6. 11 years: against him Clement 7. is chosen by the French Car∣dinals, which makes the 29 Schisme, which continued 50 years: Urban sits at Rome, Clement at Avignon: Urban drowned seven Cardinals of Clement, being bound in sacks. S. Katherines Nuns founded by Katherine of Sena. The Cynique-heretiques, called Turelupini, went naked, and were given to the flesh. Wickliffs Doctrine condemned at Oxford. England, Hungary, and Germany declare for Pope Urban; France, Scotland, Arragon, and Sicily for Clement. In the East, Andronicus is setled in the Empire by Bajazet, for which he sweareth fealty 1380 to the Turk, and imprisoneth his father; who escapeth, and causeth the Turk to set up his son Manuel, who reigned 30 years. Andronicus flieth into Asia, and shelters himsele in the Turks Court. The Turks subdue and destroy the Christians in Bosna, Croatia, and the adjacent places. Tamerlan makes an expedition into Babylon, and Sultan Achumel flieth to Alcayre. One of Amurath's sonnes loseth his eyes, for plotting against his father. Lazarus Despot of Servia, with five hundred thou∣sand Christians, slaine in the Plains of Cassovia. One Cobelets a Christian, kills Amurath, as hee was viewing the dead. To him succeeds his sonne Bajazet, 11 yeares: He strangled his brother Iacup, to prevent competition; so this strangling of the Sultans brethren grew customary.
In the West, Civil warres  in Germany among the Princes. The Duke of Austria killed by the Switzers in battel; after much bloodshed, a peace there is concluded. In France, Charles 6. reigned 42 years; he contents himself with the three Flowers-de-luce for his Armes. The Parisians and Rohaners are punished for mutinying. The French invade England. Lewis of Anjou removed from his Regency, the Dukes of Burgundy and Berry put in his place. The English take 100 French and Flemish ships. The King assumeth the Government. His Brother made Duke of Orleans: Great faction between the Constable and Duke of Britain. The English help Portugal against Castile. The King of Castile expelled by Iohn base son to Peter. Navar attempteth to poyson the Dukes of Burgundy and Berry; He groweth leprous. Iohn, Peters base son chosen King of Portugal. The Duke of Lan∣caster marrieth in Spain, one daughter to the Infant of Castile, the other to the King of Portugal. In Poland, the Bishop of Cracovia falls down dead, as he was going to de∣flowre a Country-maid. King Lewis dieth, and Hedwigis the Queens daughter is cho∣sen. Iagello Duke of Lituania christened in Poland, and named Ladislaus; by marrying Hedwigis, he unites Lituania to Poland, and converts the Lituanians in Hungary. King Lewis being dead, his daughter Mary succeedeth 10 years. Charles King Andrews son of Sicily is received King by some, and is murthered by the Queens mother, who is drowned by the Governour of Croatia, and Mary imprisoned. Sigismund, Charls the fourths son marrieth Mary, is crowned, and persecuteth the Governour of Croatia; upon this the Lords rebell, and some of them are executed by Sigismund. He subdueth Bosna and Dalmatia. Truce between Denmark and Sweden. Margaret reigns alone 24 years: she hath War with Albert of Suevia, and takes him, with his son prisoners, and so she becomes Queen of all the three Kingdoms. The Venetians take Verona and Padua, and recover Treviso. The League with other States against Galeas Viscount of Millan. The Earl of Flanders forced by his people to hide himself: He expels the English for siding with Gaunt against him: they take Dam and Greveling. Iohn the French Kings son stabs the Earl, quarrelling for Bononia: to him succeeded his daughter Margaret. The French recover Dam. The English beat the Flemmings at Sea, and take many of their Ships. Iohn the Earl of Hollands son is made Bishop of Liege at 16 years old. The Earl of Northumberland is sent against the Scots, and recalled. Iack Straw rebelleth, and is slain. Barwick recovered from the Scots. The Duke of Lancaster having made peace in France, goeth against Scotland, but doeth no∣thing: he is reconciled to the King: the Duke claimeth Castile. Flanders put them∣selves under the Kings protection. The first Marquis in England, was Robert de Vere the Kings Minion, made Marquis of Ireland. Many Ships taken by Arundel and Nottingham: The Lords quarrell with the King about his favourites: the Chief-Justice and others executed. Peace with France and Scotland for three years: Warwick and Glocester are displaced. Edinburgh burned by King Richard: The Scots invade England, and do much hurt in Ireland, and in the Isle of Man. Cocker∣mouth taken by the Scots and French. The battell of Otterburn between Douglas and Piercy: Robert Earl of Fife the Kings younger son made Regent; his bro∣ther Alexander burned the Church of Murray, for which he was imprisoned. Ione of Sicily is strangled, and her sister Mary beheaded by Charles of Dyrrachium. Lewis of Anjou poysoned, whose son Lewis is made King of Naples by the Pope. In the Church, Boniface the 9. sits 14 years. This Decad produced one Synod. The Order of St. Peter of Pisa founded by a Pisan. The Archbishop of Magde∣burg, dancing all night with a woman, both fell down and broke their necks. The feast of our Ladies conception instituted. The Dominicans free the Virgin Mary from Original sin, and are opposed by the Parisians. Annates or First-fruits granted against the Turks. In the East, Constantinople is besieged 8 years by Bajazet. Manuel goeth into Italy for aide against the Turk. Philadelphia taken by the Turk, with other places: Caria submitteth. 1390 Sigismund in Hungary beaten by the Turks, and so are the Latine Princes who came to raise the siege from Constantinople. Bajazet hangeth the King of Caramania, and subdueth his Country. He is defeated at Mount Stella by Tamerlan, fettered with gold, and incaged. His son Solyman is kinged at Adrianople, Bajazet beateth out his own brains, civil Wars among his sons 15 years: Tamerlan restores to the
Christians the Countries taken by  Bajazet. In the West, the Jews are expelled Germany, and peace concluded there: the Emperour is imprisoned, and escapeth. The Bishop of Magdeburg, and Saxony quar∣rell. Iohn Galeas of Milan made Duke for 100000 crowns. Savoy made a Dutchie. The Electors dpose Wenceslaus, and choose Frederick Duke of Brunswick, who is slain by the Bishop of Mentz procurement, and Robert Palsgrave succeeds 10 years. In France the Duke of Britain invades the Constables possessions: the King marching against him, falls mad. Burgundy made chief Regent, he banisheth the Constable: the King recovereth, and relapseth at a Masque: The Regent incenseth the Queen against the Duke of Orleans, as if he aimed at the Kings death and his chidrens. The French re∣duce the Millanois to the obedience of the Dutchess, the Kings brothers wife. Iohn of Castile killed by a fall from his horse, to whom succeeded Henry 3. his son 17 years. The Rebels of Russia subdued by the Polander. The King of Poland Ladislaus, claimeth Hun∣gary, but is opposed: his brother Vitondus made great Duke of Lituania; he invadeth Scythia and is overthrown by Tamerlan. Sigismund of Hungary makes peace with the Po∣lander for 16 years: he puts to death 32 Lords. Margaret of Denmark makes a League with the Prince of Rugia, and with the Earl of Holst, and Duke of Scleswick. Stockholm stands out against the Queens decree, it is besieged. Albert promiseth to deliver it in 3 years, in performance whereof, Lubec, Dansk, and some other Hance-towns are pled∣ged. Stockholm surrendred. Copper-Mines adjudged to the Crown. Ericus, Margarets sisters son, is associated; he recovereth Gothland, paying to the Teutonicks 9000 Nobles. Wenceslaus of Bohemia escapeth 3 times out of prison: He knighted the Fisherma hat helped him. The Earl of Holland reconciled to the Lords, whom he suspectd to have slain his Steward and Concubine: His son is disgraced at Table in the French Court, because William the second's body was not recovered from the Fri∣sons; whereupon the Frisons are beaten, and the body brought thence to Valenciens, and there buried. Martin King of Aragon setleth Sicily on his son. In England, the King quarrels with London, for not lending him 1000 l. The Irish rebell, and are beaten: Warwick banished, and Arundel beheaded; Glocester smothered at Calis by Moubray; Hereford and Moubray banished. Mortimer next heir to the Crown slain by the Irish; the King to be revenged goeth thither: At his return he is taken, and re∣signeth to the Duke of Hereford. In Scotland, Robert 3. reigns 17 years. Great troubles raised by Duncan Earl of Buchan. 600 Highlanders decide their quarrel before the King. The Earl of March falleth off to the English, and with Hotspur wastes the borders. Wark-Castle taken by the Scots. In the Church, to Clement the Antipope succeedeth Bennet 13. Boniface, upon the in∣treaty of the Princes, is willing to resign, but Bennet denieth: He is imprisoned at Avignon by the French king, and escapes. One Synod held this Decad at Westminster, where Appeals to Rome are inhibited, and First-fruits opposed. Because Christ be∣gan to preach at thirty years, therefore the Jubilee is reduced to thirty years. Iohn Hus appeareth; divers of his Disciples burnt at Auspurg. The Order of White-coats in Italy now began; they professed extraordinary sanctimony. Greek being forgot in Italy 700 years, is brought thither again by Chrysolorus. In the East, Isa being expelled by his brother Mahomet from Prusa, flieth to Constantinople. 1400 Solyman makes his brother Isa Generall against Mahomet, who ruleth at Amasia, and kills Cardaules whom Tamerlan had placed there. Mahomet received as King by Prusa, Nice, and Nicapolis; He refused to marry Tamerlans daughter; He expels his brother Isa into Carmania, where he died obscurely. Solyman takes Prusa, against whom Musa another brother is imployed by Mahomet; who having married the Prince of Valachia's daughter, is received King at Adrianople in Solyman's absence: But the Greek Emperor helpeth Solyman, and expels Musa, who suddenly assaulting Solyman in his riot, strangles him and possesseth his kingdome, and besiegeth the Greek Emperor in Constantinople for aiding Solyman. In the Isthmus of Peloponnesus, a Wall is built neer to Corinth against incursions. In the West, Prague is besieged, because Wenceslaus will not release the Im∣perial Cities from their Oath made to him. Erfort wasted. A sedition in Mentz. In France, the Regent dieth, and Orleance is made Regent. Nemours is bestowed on the King of Navar by the French King. The Duke of Burgundy opposeth the Regent in his Taxes. The Duke raiseth an Army, and is in shew made friends with the Regent▪
who crosseth the Dukes intent in besieging Calice: He murthers the Regent, flieth into Flanders, and returns with an Army, justifieth his fact, is absolved, and reconciled to the sons of Orleans; his daughter is married to the Dolphin. The Teutonicks are called into Poland by the Kings brother, who rebelleth, but is beaten by Vitondus. Ladislaus kills 50000. Teutonicks in Lituania, and takes the Master, with many prisoners. Ladislaus son to Andrew is sent for by the Hungarian Lords. Sigismund flieth into Moravia, and by the Bohemian help recovers Hungary. Ladislaus returneh into Italy. Steven the Vaivod executed for rebellion, and intelligence with the Turks, who defeat Sigismund. He quar∣rels with the Venetians. Gothland is redeemed from the Teutonicks; the Danes defeated in Frisia. The Holsatians pawned Flensburg and News to the King of Denmark. The Genuans beaten at sea by the Venetians, who protect the Vicenzans. Escalla of Verona poysoned by Novello, who kills his sons, and takes the City. Novello cuts off the eares and noses of the Venetian Ambassadors; but he being taken and his three children, with Verona and Padua, are all strangled at Venice. They buy Zara from Ladislaus for 100000 Crowns. Iohn Bishop of Liege is expelled for refusing to take Orders; he is aided by the Duke of Burgundy, who burned the City and slew 36000. Parvis helps the Liegeois, who makes his son Bishop; both are killed by Iohns friends, with 40000 people; the Bishop is restored, and the City fined at 200000 Crowns. In England, Henry 4. reigneth 13 years. Exeter, Surry, and Aumarle executed for striving to restore Richard, who is starved at Pomfret. The Queen returns into France. At Hallydown-hill the Scots are beaten; the English defeated in Wales. A Battel at Shrewsbury between the King and some Lords. A rebellion raised by Mowbray and the Archbishop of York. Barwick and other Castles taken by the King. The Earl of Northumberland fleeth into Wales. Glendower spoileth the Marches; he is aided by the French with 140 sail. The Prince invadeth Scotland. Northumberland and the Lord Bardolf overcome and slain. A false Richard entertained in Scotland. Wark-Castle taken by the Scots. Prince David starved by the Duke of Albany the Kings brother. Douglasse kills many at Shrewsbury. Prince Iames going into France, is taken by the English; his father at the news thereof dieth with grief. Robert Duke of Albany Regent. The Scots enter England. The Earl of March is reconciled to the Regent. In the Church, Boniface 9. yet sitteth. Bononia with some other places recovered from Galeas by the Pope. To him succeeded Innocent 4. 2 years: He removeth into Viter∣bium, upon a sedition raised by Ladislaus of Sicily against him. Gregory 12. succeedeth: He swears to resign for the peace of the Church: He forbids all union between his Cardinals and those of France. A Pasquil set up in Rome against him: The Devil discharging him of his oath, his forces beat Ladislaus out of Rome. Lewis Duke of Anjou, confirmed King of Naples. 2 Synods in this Decad; one at Aquilcia, the other at Pisa, where Gregory and Bennet are deposed, and Alexander 5. chosen. The Order of the White-coats is condemned. A Church at Luca built to the Crucifix. In the East, Musa is taken and strangled by Mahomet, who reigns 8 years. Orchanes, Soly∣mans son, is taken, and his eyes are put out. Carmania subdued, and the Varachian 1410 Princes made Tributaries. In the West, Sigismund King of Hungary, son to Charles 4. reigneth Emperor 26 years: He meets the Pope in Italy about appointing the Councel of Constance; He laboureth with France and England for a peace. Cleve made a Duke∣dome. Sigismund, after his Brothers death, obtaineth Bohemia. Zisca rebelleth, and becomes Captain of the Hussites. In France, the Duke of Berry with the sons of Orleans make a faction against the Duke of Burgundy, whom the Dolphin also opposeth. Bur∣gundy plots the death of Berry, Burbon, and Orleans. The Dolphin is Regent, and Bur∣gundy proclaimed Traitor; he makes his peace. Agincourt-Battel. Burgundy leagueth with England. The Dolphin dieth, and the Queen is Regent. Normandy invaded by the English; The Queen confined to Tours; Burgundy doth all; The Constable, Chan∣cellor, and 1600 murthered. The English get the Isle of France and Normandy. The Dolphin murthereth the Burgundian. In Spain, 15000 Moors are slain: Arragon united to Sicily: Ferdinand Perez King of Sevil, buyes the Canaries from the King thereof.  of Poland subdueth much of Prusia, and defeateth the Teutonicks, and brings 5 of their Colours into Cracovia. Sigismund pawneth Sepusn to Ladislaus; He grants peace to the Teutonicks for 2 years. Upon the Popes request. Pipus the Florentine takes many places from the Venetians for Sigismund of Hungary; but being corrupted by Venetian gold, is by Sigismund choked with molten gold. 5 years peace between Hungary and Venice. The Danes are defeated in Frisia. Margaret of Denmark dieth, and
Ericus reigneth  alone 25 years: wars between him and the Dukes of Holst about the Dutchy of Scles∣wick. Wickliffs books are burnt in Prague, which made a sedition. Moravia is united to Bohemia: 7 Senators at Prague cast out at the windows. Sigismund the Emperour, upon his brothers death, reigneth in Bohemia 20 years. 40000 rebel with Zisca. The Vene∣tians recover divers places taken by Pipus: A part of St. Marks Church the Palace burnt; a Decree made against the building of a new Palace. The Duke reverseth the Decree of paying 1000 Ducats: the Turks claim Ionia from them; They take Lamp∣sacum. In Flanders, Philip the Good rules 44 years; he sideth with the English. The Frisons revolt from Holland: the Earl dyeth, being bitten by a mad dog. Iaquelin his daughter succeeds 18 years. The Bishop of Liege resigneth his Bishoprick, and ob∣tains of the Emperour the Earldom of Holland, being escheated for want of heirs∣male. In England, Henry the 5. reigned 9 years, he banisheth the French: some French executed for Treason. At Agincourt 10000 French slain, and as many taken by the Eng∣lish. The Emperour cometh into England; he with Burgundy fide with the English: Harfleu besieged, and relieved: the English take Caen, and other places. The Genu∣ans, French and Scots defeated: Queen Ioan suspected of Sorcery, and commited. Peace with France and Burgundy. Donald of the Isles, recovers his Earldom of Rosse: Wars between him and the Earl of Mar. Barwick and Roxburg besieged by Albany and Douglas. In the Church, sits Alexander 5. 11 moneths, then Iohn 22. He removeth to Ariminum. Gregory stayeth at Rome, and Benet goeth out of France into Aragon. Iohn goeth to the Councel at Constance, he with Benet are deposed. Gregory resigneth, and is made chief Cardinal. Iohn in a disguise is taken and imprisoned. Martin 5. is chosen 7 years, and so this Schism endeth. The Pope goeth from Constance against the will of the Emperor, and so the Councel endeth. The Pope loseth some Towns. In this Decad was held the Councel of Constance, where were 4 Patriarchs, 29 Cardinals, 346 Bishops, 564 Abbots and Doctors, besides multitudes of fecular Princes. In this Councel were found of the Benedictines 15107 houses in Europe. Huss is first Ex∣communicated; his books, and then himself, burnt. Wickliffs Doctrine is condem∣ned, and his books burnt. Ierome of Prague is also burnt: their ashes cast into the river. Sir Iohn Oldcastle hanged and burnt for Religion. Gerson persecuted by the Pope, for speaking against the Roman Church. Zisca's followers are called Thaborites. In the East, Iohn 7. son to Andronicus, reigned 5 years; then Iohn 8. 20 years. To Mahomet 1420 the Turk succeeded Amurath 2. his son 38 years. The false Mustapha set up by the Greeks, is strangled. Constantinople is besieged: Mustapha the Sultans brother taketh Nice, and is strangled. Servia, and much of Natolia subdued by the Turk: Smyrna annexed to the Turks Empire, the Prince and his son being taken. The Turks take Thessalonica from the Venetlans, and subdue Aetolia, whilest three Princes strive for it. In the West, Zisca is beaten by the Imperialists, and loseth his onely eye: He overthroweth the Imperia∣lists. Frederick Marquis of Misna, made Duke of Saxony and Elector, for money. Zisca dieth of the Plague, and orders a Drum to be made of his skin. The Elector is defeated by the Hussites, and flyeth: they burn Aldenburg. In France, the Dolphin is cited for murthering Burgundy, and for non-appearance is dis-inherited. The King dyeth, and his son Charles 7. reigneth 38 years. The English are beaten by the Bastard of Orleans: they take Pontarson, and the French Tournay. The battel of Harrings. Alphonsus of Arra∣gon first adopted by Ioan of Naples, and then Lewis of Anjou. Arragon and Navar joyn against Castile. Vitondus accepteth Bohemia, which the King of Poland refused. The Teu∣tons set against the Polander by the Emperour: the King breaks his leg in hunting. King Ericus of Denmark being returned from Syria, freeth all that should build timber∣houses in Elsenore from Taxes for 10 years, and for 20 those that built of stone. The League renewed between Scotland and Denmark. Vandalia forbid Traffique in the Danish Seas. Henry Duke of Scleswick slain in scaling the walls of Flensburg. The Pope rai∣seth forces against the Hussites. 3 Armies of Franks, Bavarians, and Saxons fall upon Bohemia: they all flee away without fight. The Venetians denounce War against Phi∣lip of Milan, for oppressing the Florentines. Philip takes Brescia, which again revolted. Philip of Flanders aideth the Duke of Brabant against the Duke of Glocester, and makes War against Iaquelin of Holland, whose heir he got himself to be after her death. He in∣stituted the Order of the Golden-fleece. The Lords of Holland dislike Iohn of Brabant, and call in his brother the Earl of St. Pol, but the Duke is received, and the faction of the Countess banished. Iaquelin divorced from the Duke, and married to the Duke of Glocester, who also forsakes her. King Henry of
England is declared heir of France, and  Regent during the life of Charls. The Duke of Clarence slain; the King pawneth his Crown to Cardinal Beaufort, for 20000 l. The Duke of Bedford Regent of France. Henry 6. reigneth in England 38 years; he is crowned King of France. The French beaten at Vernol; Great-Ordnance now first used in England. Warwick left Lieutenant in France. Talbot doth good service in France; Salisbury slain at the siege of Orleans, which is relie∣ved by Ioan of Ark. Suffolk and Talbot taken; S. Dennis and other places lost by the Eng∣lish: the Scots aide the French; the Earl of Buchan Constable of France: King Iames carried by King Henry into France, he is ransomed; Buchan and Douglasse slain at Vernol; Mordo with his two sons, and Lenox, executed in Scotland for oppression; Alexander Lord of the Isles, rebelleth and is taken; his brother kils the Earl of Cathnesse, and defeats the Earl of Mar. Alexanders brother is driven into Ireland, his head is sent thence to the King. In the Church, Clement 8. is chosen Antipope, by means of Alphonsus of Aragon, he sate 8 years; he is forced to resigne, and become Bishop of Majorca. Pope Martin who re∣fused to give the title of Sicily to Alphonsus, is reconciled to him. Iulian the Cardinal sent by the Pope against Bohemia, and to treat with the Emperour about a Synod at Basil: Rene King of Sicily, striving for Lorrain, is taken. Alphonsus seiseth on Naples. At Papia was a Synod held, which because of the Plague, was removed to Sena, and dissolved by the Pope, for fear of Aragon. The Adamites revive in Bohemia; and the Eremites at Rome: one Sect of the Thaborites, call themselves Orphans, for the losse of Zisca. Wickliff's body after 41 years, is digged up and burnt. In the East, the Prince of Epirus is forced to send his three sons to the Turk, Scanderbeg was one of them: The Turks taketh many places from the Christians; he exocula∣teth 1430 and geldeth Gregory son to the Despot of Sinderovia: the Greek Emperor with Demetrius Prince of Peloponesus repair to Italy for help, and are present at the Coun∣cel of Florence. In the West, Sigismund is crowned at Millan and at Rome; he makes Fran. Gonzaga Prince of Millan, and his son Lewis Marquesse of Mantua: the Empresse imprisoned upon suspition, and released: the Emperour died of a surfeit of Melons: his son in law Albert Duke of Austria, is made King of Bohemia. The English lose Char∣tres, are defeated at Vivaine, and subdue the Normans. Paris fals off to the French, the Duke of Burbon sets up the Dolphin, who are reconciled to the King. The Marshal of France burnt for Witchcraft. Peace made between Castile and Portugall. The Moores are beaten. The Genuans take Arragon, Navar, with 100 Princes, and 200 Knights at Ca∣jetta; they are sent to the Duke of Millan, and by him released. The Castilians and Portugals beaten by the Moors. Alphonsus 5. obtains many victories against theMoors; great troubles in Castile about the Constable. A sedition of Rusticks in Hungary. Ladi∣slaus of Poland, hath fealty sworn to him by the Vayvod of Valachia. The Swedes re∣bell against the Danes; the King hardly escapeth with his treasure into Gothland. Christopher Duke of Bavaria, sisters son to Ericus, is sent to, to be King. Iulian the Cardi∣nal flyeth out of Bohemia. The Thaborites take divers towns. The Cup is allowed to the Bohemians in the Councel of Basil. Bohemia much distracted upon the death of Sigismund. The Venetians defeat Philip of Millans forces by sea; they fight with him neer Cremona. Millan invaded by the Duke of Savoy and Montferrat. Philip loseth many places, and his Generall is taken. Flanders spoiled by the Duke of Glocester, who carrieth away many captive Children. The Hollanders for scouring the Seas from the Easterlings, have carried a Broom ever since on their main-top. Iaquelin surrendreth her Countries for the ransome of her husband. Ione of Ark is burnt for a Witch. The Treaty of Ar∣ras, where the Burgundian sideth with the French against the English: He is raised by the Protector of England from the siege of Callis. Warwick the Regent spoileth Picardy. The French twice beaten in Normandy. In Scotland the Earle of March made Earle of Buchan. Roxburg besieged by the Scots King, who is murthered by the Earle of Athol. His son Iames 2. succeedeth 23 years: the Chancellor and Regent at odds, and are re∣conciled. Douglasse troubleth the State; the Queen takes the young King from the Chancellour. In the Church, Eugenius 4. sits 15 years; the Columnii rebel, and he flieth in a disgui∣sed habite to Florence; the people fortifie the Popes Castle against him; they are at last reconciled: he helpeth Rene against Alphonsus; he attempteth to adjourn the Synod of Basil to Ferrara; but is opposed and suspended by the Synod: It is decreed, that the Councel is above the Pope. The Greek Emperour acknowledges the Popes Supremacy; neverthelesse he is deposed by the Councel of Basil. Queen Ioan of Sicily dieth, and nameth Rene her heire, who now was a
Prisoner in Bur∣dy.  Alphonsus is taken, as he was going to take possession. The Aragonians defeated by Rene; the Councel of Basil continued there, at Ferrara and Florence, 15 years. The Bohemians are declared sons of the Church by the Emperour and Bishop of Con∣stance; this was engraven on Marble, in golden letters at Prague; their pragma∣tical Sanction published at Paris, but condemned by the Pope as heretical. In the East, Theodore the Emperours brother, and the Turk besiege Constantinople: The 1440 other brother Constantine recovered Peloponnesus, and rebuilds the wall: He succeeds to his brother in the Empire 8 years. Peloponnesus divided between the other two bro∣thers; they pay tribute to Mahumet. The Turks are beaten out of Hungary by Iohn Huniades. Woldavia won by the Hungarians. Huniades defeates the Turk twice, and kils two Bassas. Scanderbeg escapeth into Epirus, and possesseth it. Bulgaria lost by the Turks, whereof 30000 were slain: Peace for 10 years between the Turks and Hungarians; these break the peace and are defeated by the Turks at Varna. Scanderbeg refuseth to make peace with the Turk. Peloponnesus taken by Amurath. Huniades defeateth the Turks in Rascia, and is defeated by them in the Plaines of Cassovia. Scanderbeg overcomes Mu∣stopha twice; Amurath dieth at the siege of Croja: To him succeeded Mahomet the great, his son 32 years; he begins with the murther of his Brothers. In the West, Frederick Arch-Duke of Austria reigneth 53 years: Wars in Bavaria between Lewis the father, and the son. Lucelburg sold by the Emperour to the Duke of Saxony, causeth war: The Emperour refuseth the Crown of Bohemia. Huniadies makes war on the Emperour for not restoring the King, and Crown of Hungary. The Imperial Cities and Earl of Wi∣ritzburg fall out. The Norimbergers defeated 8 times by Albert of Brandeburg. The Duke of Burgundy ransometh the Duke of Orleans, for 300000 Crowns. The Parliament of Tholose set up for Languedoc. Diepe besieged by Talbot, and relieved by the Dolphin. 5 years Truce with England: the Duke of Britain starveth his brother, for intelligence with the English. Pont L' Arch taken from the English by the Duke of Britain, who with French help, recovereth also Normandy. War between Castile and Navar. Ladis∣laus of Poland is chosen King of Hungary. Casimire the Kings brother made Duke of Li∣tuania, the Prince thereof being slain. Silesia wasted by the Polanders. The Turks ex∣oculate the Despot of Rascia and his sons, who fled to Ladislaus; war between Massovia and Lituania. The King is killed: Casimire refuseth to be King: Boleslaus Duke of Massovia was chosen; then Casimire accepted it, and reigned 45 years: He neglects Polonia, and resides in Lituania; he refuseth his Coronation-Oath, till the Polanders began to reject him, then he took it. Ladislaus being chosen King of Hungary; the Queen carrieth her son and crown of Hungary to the Emperour. Iulian the Cardinal perswades the Hungarians to break the 10 years peace with the Turks; whereupon the King is de∣feated and slain at Varna. Ladislaus Posthumus succeeded 14 years: he was son to Albert. Huniades kils the Vaivod of Valachia, who detained him, after the battell of Varna. Huniades and the Polander fight for Valachia. Christopher of Bavaria reigns in Suevia 8 years; he restores to Adolphus the Dukedome of Scleswick; the Rebels in Iutia defeated, and the chief of them executed: He is crowned first in Suevia, then in Norway and Denmark, he lost much treasure by shipwrack; to him succeeded Christiernus Earl of Oldenburg 30 years; Adolphus Duke of Scleswick was named, but he refused the Crowns. The Swedes chose Charls son to Canutus for their King. In Bohemia, Ladislaus Posthumus Alberts son reigneth 19 years: Menard the governour is imprisoned, and Prague taken by the Thaborites. A great losse of goods in Venice, by an inundation. The Venetians take all from Sforza, which they had given him, for aiding Philip of Millan, whom they defeat, and take Laudum with Placentia. Laudum recovered by Sforza. Saint Marks Church robbed by a Cretan of two Millions of Gold; the Venetian Embassador mur∣thered by Sforza. Philip of Flanders restoreth the Dutchesse of Luxelburg: he pa∣cifieth the factions of Hoecks and Cabillaucks. An inundation at Dort destroyed 100000 people. Philip and the Gauntois make war, because they refuse to pay his customes of Salt. The Duke of Orleans who had been prisoner in England 25 years, is ransomed by Philip Duke of Burgundy; who was therefore called the Good. The Duke of Glocesters wife imprisoned for Sorcery: Pauls steeple fired by lightning; Whit∣tington builds New-gate and a Colledge. The King hath with Renes daughter, whom he married, Awou and Mayne. Thomas Eyre built Leaden-hall: The Duke of Sommerset made Regent of France: the Duke of Glocester, and the Cardinal of Winchester die sud∣denly, within fifteen dyes of each other. The English surprise Fogeres, and in three years lose Normandy and Gascoine. The Irish suppressed: the Duke of Suffolk beheaded at Sea. Douglasse and his brother executed at Edenburg: William sonne to Iames Douglasse, the Kings favorite, displaceth the Chancellor and Re∣gent, which caused much mischief:, Sir Iames Stuart who had married
the Kings mother banished: the English beaten back from invading Scotland; 3 years peace concluded. Rene expelled out of Naples by Alphonsus, who promiseth to pay to the Pope yearly 8000 ounces of Gold. In the Church, Eugenius sits yet, in whose time the 30 Schisme breaks out: Amadeus Duke of Savoy being chosen; he was called Foelix 5. and sate 9 years, having been Duke 40 years, he became an Heremite: Eugenius dieth, to whom succeedeth Nico∣las 5. 8 years; he erected the Vatican Library: Foelix resigneth, and is made Car∣dinal and Legat. 4 Synods held this Decad; one of them at Lateran; to nullifie the Councel of Basil. The Feast of our Lady's Visitation instituted at Basil. Palmerius the Chronologer burnt for heresies. In the East, Constantinople is taken, the Emperor slain, and 60000 people carried away cap∣tives. Scanderbeg beateth the Turks many times. Mahomet striketh off the head of his 1450 fair Concubine Irene, at a publique meeting: He recovers Servia; he loseth an eye. Huniades beats him off from the siege of Belgrad, 40000 Turks slain, he be siegeth Rhodes, but is beat back by the Pope and Genuans: he loseth Lemnos, taketh Corinth, dismant∣leth Athens; he marrieth the daughter of Demetrius Prince of Peloponesus, whom he ex∣pelled, and gives him the town Oenum, and the Custome of Salt for his maintenance. In the West, the Emperour restores the Crown of Hungary; the Duke of Brunswick ta∣ken by the Bishop of Colen in fight. A sedition in Austria of ten years continuance. The Pope displaceth the Bishop of Mentz for refusing to pay his First-fruits, which caused much trouble: the Emperour is taken by the Citizens in Vienna, and released. Aqui∣tain revolteth to the French: A Parliament set up at Grenoble in Dauphiny. Talbot is slain, the Dolphin rebelleth, and flies into Burgundy. The French burn Sandwich; the Duke of Alenson imprisoned for intelligence with the English. The King being fore∣warned of poyson, abstained so long from meat, that he starved himself and died. The Moors in Andalusia defeated. By the death of Charls, Navar fell to Blanch the repudiated wife of Henry; and Arragon to Ferdinand son to King Iohn. To Alphonsus of Arragon succeeded his brother Iohn King of Navar, Father to Ferdinand the Catholick, 21 years, Casimire of Poland refuseth to restore Prussia to the Teutonick: at last he is defeated by them. Pedolia invaded by the Tartars. A league between Poland and Bohemia. Hunia∣des made Regent of Hungary: his death plotted by the Earl of Cilia. Ulric slain by La∣distaus, son to Huniades; he is executed, and his brother Matthias imprisoned; the king dieth, and the same Matthias is chosen, 32 years: he was forced to promise to his keeper Podiebral, who was Regent of Bohemia, to marry his daughter, and to pay him 60000 Crowns. Charls of Suevia is forced for his tyranny to flie to Dansk with his treasure. Christiern is chosen King of Suevia; the King seiseth upon Scleswick and Holst, being es∣cheated by the death of Adolphus: Hamburgh submits to Denmark. Ulrick Earl of Cilia, Governour of Austria, and of the king of Bohemia's person; he is removed and resto∣red; the King dieth. Pediebard crowned, he reigned 13 years; he is opposed by Sile∣sia for being a Thaborite. The Venetians expel the Florentines out of their territories. Cosmo aideth Sforza against them, who taketh Millan, and is honoured by the Pope with a rich Sword. A peace is made between Venice, Florence, and Sforza. The French king offended for the peace made between England and the Flemmings. Iack Cade rebelleth in Kent, and is executed. The Duke of York takes arms against the King; he submits, and swears Fealty. He accuseth Sommerset, and is accused by him; Sommerset sent to the Tower, released, and made Captaine of Calice. York, Warwick and Salisbury take arms; the battell of S. Albans; The King hurt and taken, York made Protector, and displaced. 9 years peace with Burgundy. Warwick goeth to Calice: the King forces bea∣ten at Blore-heath, by the Earl of Salisbury: At Ludlow the Yorkshire men take arms. Douglasse returning from Rome is pardoned, and made Vice-roy; He is slain at Sterling, for plotting against the King: His brother Iames besiegeth it, and is forced thence by Huntly: His forces forsake him, he flieth into England: The Family of the Douglasses put to the Horne. Archbishop of S. Andrews made Chancellor. Douglasse with the Eng∣lish invade Scotland: the King at the siege of Roxburg is slain by the breaking of a Cannon. In the Church, Calixtus 3. sits 3 years; he procured a warr between the Persian and Turk, he left behinde him 500000 crowns. Pius 2. succeedeth 5 years; He was Aenaeas Sylvius, and Scribe in the Councel of Basil; he will have no appeals from the Pope to a Councel; he thought otherwayes at Basil. Calixtus 3. instituted the Feast of Christs transfiguration, upon the defeating of the Turks in Hungary.
In the East, Ussum Cassanes the Persian makes war against Mahomet. Mytilene and other places taken by the Turks. Trapezund taken. David the Emperor and his two sons killed. Mahomet taketh Chalci from the Venetians. The Governor of Mysia flei'd. 1460 Scanderbeg dieth. Epirus taken again, and Scanderbeg's sons driven out. Mahomets Fleet spoiled, bound for Trapezund: The Turks waste Hungary. In the West, the Emperor tenders his Daughter to Mahomet, if he will alter his Religion; but Albert of Bavaria stole her away. The King of Bohemia freed the Emperor from those of Vienna. Bruns∣wick makes war against the Hans-towns. The Emperor entertained at Rome by the Pope. The Turks enter Germany. In France, Lewis 11 reigneth 22 years: His cove∣tousnesse causeth a Civil war: He redeems the Towns morgaged to the Duke of Bur∣gundy at the Treaty of Arras: The Duke with the Lords besiege Paris; the King disperseth the Lords by fair promises. He takes the Dutchy of Normandy from his bro∣ther, and flieth to the Duke of Burgundy. The King makes the Duke of Britain to re∣nounce the League with Burgundy, and causeth Liege to rebell against the Duke. The Dutchy of Guyen bestowed on the Kings brother. Divers Lord of Castile league against Henry their King; they force him to put away his supposed daughter, and to declare his brother Alphonsus heir. Alphonsus is crowned, and Henry deposed; but at last Henry prevaileth, and Alphonsus dieth. Peace setled in Castile, and Isabel the Kings sister is de∣clared heir, she marrieth Ferdinand of Arragon. Marieburg yields to the King of Po∣land. Pomerania after 180 years united to Polonia. Peace with the Teutonicks. Ladi∣slaus the Kings son is designed King of Bohemia, after the death of George. The Tar∣tars defeated by the Vaivod of Moldavia. Matthias is crowned King of Hungary at Alba; Venice alloweth him 60000 Crowns yearly, and the Pope 50000 against the Turks: his Uncle is beheaded at Constantinople by the Turks. Transilvania reduced by Matthias; he is beaten and wounded in Valachia, by the Vayvods treachery. War with Bohemia. 10000 Captives carried away by the Turk out of Hungary. The Swed s rebell against the Danes: the King forced to flie. Charles is sent for, but quickly forsaketh them again. A rebellion in Holst by Gerard the Kings brother, who is imprisoned. The Danes take two English ships: Their goods and persons attached in England. Gerard expelled out of Holst. King George of Bohemia condemned by the Pope of heresie; Matthias of Hungary set up against him. The Venetians lose Negropont to the Turk. Charles of Burgundy helps the Pope against the Turk; he falls out with his father, and is reconciled again. Arnold Duke of Guelders imprisoned a year by his son. Liege sub∣mits and is pardoned. Philip dieth: His son Charles succeedeth 10 years; he demo∣lisheth Liege for rebelling. Gaunt submits and is pardoned. In England, York is at∣tainted, and the King taken. York confirmed Heir to the Crown; he is slain by the Queen: his son Edward defeats the Queens forces, and she his. Edward 4. reigns 22 years. Henry and the Queen are overcome, and flie into Scotland. The Queen enters Northumberland with French forces, and is beaten: the King flieth into Wales; he is taken disguised, and sent to the Tower. Sheep transported into Spain. The King marrieth the Lady Elizabeth Gray. Warwick plotteth against King Edward, who is de∣feated, and committed to the Archbishop of York; he escapeth to London; He de∣feats the Lincolnshir-men. Warwick and Clarence flie into France; Edward flieth to Burgundy. Henry released, and the Crown entailed upon Clarence; Warwick is made Regent. In Scotland, Iames 3. reigneth 28 years; Roxburg and Wark-Castles taken; Donald of the Isles rebelleth, and is killed. King Henry resigns Barwick to the Scots; Peace with England 15 years. The Lords of Barcellone call in Rene to be King of Castile; the French assist. In the Church sits Paul 2. 6 years: He was a Dunce; therefore hated Scholars. He imprisoned Platina and Pomponius Leans; He spent upon the Emperors entertain∣ment in 17 dayes 18000l. Cardinals are priviledged to ride on Mules. Divers bribe the Turk, to be Patriarch of Constantinople. In the East, the Turks are twice beaten by the Persians. Dalmatia, Austria, Mysia, Bosna, 1470 Styria, and Carinthia wasted by the Turks; they win Taurica Chersonesus, and are beaten in Valachia. Ali-Beg defeated in Hungary. The Turks do much hurt in Hungary, Dacia, and Venetian territories; 30000 Turks killed in Transilvania; divers Islands taken by the Turk. In the West, war between the Palatine and Bavare about Mentz: The Grisons league with the Helvetians: The Archbishop of Strigonium flieth to the Em∣peror with much treasure; he is made Archbishop of Saltzburgh. Matthias of Hungary subdueth much of Austria: Peace with Hungary. The French King takes Amiens and S. Quintins from the Duke of Burgundy,
who recovereth S. Quintins; he hireth one to  kill the King. The Constable seeketh to corrupt Burbon. Peace with France and Eng∣land; peace also between Burgundy and Britain; The Constable is executed. Orange made a Principality subject to France. At Digion in Burgundy, a Parliament is erected: The King takes divers Towns from the Dutchesse of Burgundy. The Switzers begin to serve the French: The Archers are put down, which were instituted by Charles 7. The Bishop of Pampelone killed by the Constable, upon suspition of adultery with the Queen. Ferdinand the Catholique reigneth 41 yeares; He and Isabel claim Portugal, and seise on it; she is declared heire of Castile. The first Voyage of Spanlards to Guiny. In hatred to Matthias, Casimir is made King of Poland; but he is reconciled to the peo∣ple, and Casimir returneth. Poland invaded by the Hungarian's, and Russia by the Tar∣tars. The Teutonicks renew the war with Poland, and then submit: the Tartars waste Podolia, and the Turks Carinthia. It was agreed, that Matthias of Hungary should enjoy Moravia and Silesia for his life-time, and should be stiled King of Bohemia; but after his death, these Provinces should return to Bohemia on payment of 600000 Crowns, and the rest of Bohemia should fall to Matthias, if he survived Ladislaus. Much mischief done by the Turks in Hungary, during the Nuptials of the King with the Daughter of Arragon. Matthias recovers from the Turks 30000 Captives, and wasteth their Country 30 miles: He takes also divers Towns in Styria, because the Emperor kept not pro∣mise. The King of Denmark enters Suevia, without acting any thing; He is honorably entertained at Rome. George of Bohemia dieth with grief, that the Prince was taken by Matthias. Ladislaus the son of Casimir is elected 46 years. Matthias being rejected, in∣vadeth Bohemia. Sicily and Venice league against the Turks; they spoil divers Turkish places. The King of Cyprus doth bequeath his Wife and Kingdom to the Venetians: they settle her in it. The Turks are driven from the siege of Lepanto; Peace is made with them. S. Quintins taken by the French, they invade Burgundy. The Burgun∣dian sideth with King Edward against King Henry. The Frisons refuse to pay the Chimney-penny demanded by the Duke: he prevailed in France. The Duke of Guelders being angry with his Sonne, sells his Dutchy to the Burgundian for 92000 Florens, and an annual pension. The Emperor refuseth to make the Duke King of Burgundy; and he denieth to match his Daughter with his Son Maximilian. The Duke of Burgundy, and Rene Duke of Lorain, invade each others territories. Nancy, which Rene had taken, is besieged by Duke Charls, who is slain there: his daughter Mary suc∣ceeded: the French seise on some places of the Dutchy: Maximilian is espoused to her, and the Dolphin rejected. Henault recovered from the French; Guelders revolteth; the French lose Tournay; the Lord of Montigny is made Governor of Holland. In England King Henry is taken by Edward, and committed; Warwick killed in Barnet-Fight; the Queen is taken; Glocester murthers the King and Prince; Pembrook and Richmond escape into Britany; Oxford sent prisoner into Normandy; the Lawes of Henry can∣celled: the Burgundian animateth the King against the French, but faileth him; there∣fore he makes peace with France, upon a match between the Dolphin and his daughter Elizabeth. The King bribes the Duke of Britany to have the Earl of Richmond, but faileth: George Duke of Clarence condemned of treason; he is drowned in a But of Malmsey in the Tower: the King hated for his covetousnesse. The king of Denmark relinquisheth his Title to the Orcades, upon the matching of his daughter Margaret to the King of Scotland. S. Andrews made an Archbishoprick: the King persecutes the Archbishop, gives himself to magick and oppression; he makes one Cockram a Mason his favourite: Iohn Earl of Mar the Kings brother, for treason, hath his veins opened, so that he bleedeth to death. In the Church sate Sixtus 4. 13 years: He sets out a Fleet against the Turks; A Jubile at Rome, the Jubile now reduced to 25 years: He erecteth Glascow and S. Andrews into Archbishopricks in Scotland; in Castile he instituteth the Inquisition against the Jewes and Moors. Weselius a Preacher at Worms, burnt for speaking against Indulgences. In the East, to Mahomet succeeded his son Bajazet 2. 32 years: Zemes another son aspireth 1480— and flieth into Egypt and Rhodes. Epirus recovered by Iohn son to Scanderbeg; the Turks lose Bosna; they take Valachia, and invade Moldavia. Bajazet attempted to destroy the Janizaries, but failing, temporiseth with them: He bestows other lands on the King of Caramania for his kingdom. The two Bassa's sent against Egypt for receiving of Zemes, are defeated and taken. Baazet sues to the Egyptian Sultan for peace: Zemes is sent to the Pope: The Despot of Servia takes 7000 Turks with their plunder, and rescueth 10000 Captives. In the West,
Matthias takes Vienna with  other places. Maximilian chosen King of the Romans: the Duke of Saxony helpeth the Emperor against Matthias, and peace is made: Maximilian invades Picardy, takes Artois, Arras, and Burgundy; he brings back his daughter that was betrothed to the French king; he takes Belgrad upon the death of Matthias. In France, Charls 8. reigns 14 years: The Duke of Orleans leagueth with divers Lords against the Kings sister who was Regent; they submit, and league again: the King prevails against the Bri∣tains: Orleans committed to the Castle of Bourges, and afterward released: The Duke of Britain being dead, king Charles takes divers places from his daughter and heir Anne; the difference is referred to Maximilian, he takes her part. Francis of Navar poysoned; his sister Katherine succeedeth. The Castilians take the Canaries. The Duke of Bra∣ganza executed, for intelligence with Castile. Many Towns taken in Granado. Castile takes Malaga from the Moors: the Portugals begin to fail to the East: the Friars of Jerusalem receive an annual pension of 1000 Ducats from the king of Castile. Charles of Anjou dieth; he was Titular king of Naples and Sicily, from him the French kings claim their titles to those kingdoms. Novograd in Lituania is taken by the Muscovites. Casimir the King of Poland's son, will rather die, then lie with a Woman to recover his health. The Tartars spoile Moldavia. The Vayvod swears fealty to the King of Poland, who thereupon drives the Turks thence. Casimir's youngest son Bishop of Cracovia. The Polander beats the Tartars in Russia and Podolia. Matthias of Hungary warreth successfully against the Turks and Germans, and takes many Towns; he makes peace with the Emperor. To Christiern of Denmark succeedeth his son Iohn; he hath some controversies with the English. Steno Sture made Governor of Swedeland. Venice and Florence joyn against the Pope. Ferrara ingratefull to the Venetians, who had got him his Estate; most of the Italian Princes league against Venice; at last a peace is made: The Venetians have war in Austria and Rhetia; they are beaten neer Trent. Katherine the Queen of Cyprus resigneth her kingdome to Venice, to whom they allow 50. l. weight of gold yearly, and the Castle of Azola. In Holland, the Cabillaucks take Dort, and the Hoecks Leyden: War between Holland and Utricht. Mary of Burgundy is killed by a fall from her horse; Maximilian is received Governor of Holland, but re∣jected in Flanders; Her daughter Margaret betrothed to the Dolphin; Prince Philip is received. Troubles between Antwerp and Bruges. Egmo mad Governor of Holland; then Euglebert Earl of Nassau. Troubles in Frisia. As Maximilian endeavoured to recon∣cile Bruges with Antwerp, he is imprisoned, and some of his servants killed: Upon re∣signation of the government to his son, he is set free. The Emperor makes Albert of Saxony Governor of the Low-Countries; he is opposed by the Flemings, who take Rotterdam, and lose it again to Maximilian. The Scots invade England, and the English Scotland; Barwick taken from the Scots. The French will pay no Tribute to England. Edward 5. succeeds his father one moneth: Gloucester made Protector, then King; his name was Richard 3. he reigned 3 years: the Queens kindred cut off, the Princes are murthered, and Buckingham beheaded. Morton Bishop of Ely, attempteth to advance the Earl of Richmond, who landeth, and killeth King Richard; this was Henry 7. who reigned 23 years; the Kingdom is entailed to his heirs; He instituted the Guard. The Lord Lovel rebelleth; and Lambert a Counterfeit set up, who was crowned at Dublin, and overthrown at Stoke, he is made a Skullion in the Privy-kitchin. Peace with Scot∣land. England sides with Britany against France. The Northern Rebels overthrown, and the chief executed. In Scotland, Cockram the Mason is made Earl of Mar: The Kings brother Alexander Duke of Albany flieth into England; he is reconciled, and Cockram hanged: Albany made Regent, but out of fear escapeth into France; he died by a splint in Tilting with Lewis of Orleans. The Lords rebell against the King, and make his son Iames their Captain: the Kings forces beaten, and he slain: His son Iames 4. succeeded 26 years; he alwayes wore an Iron-chain in stead of a girdle, as a penance for his rebellion. A double-bodied Monster from the navel upward, born in Scotland. In the Church, sits Innocent 8. 7 years: He was the first Pope that advanced his Bastards. Zemez, Bajazets brother, delivered to him by the Master of Rhodes, for which he is made a Cardinal: this Pope died of an Apoplexy. In the East, the Turks aide the Rebels in Hungary against the King, whom they defeat, and took his General in Croatia. The Turks are beaten by Ericus Duke of Brunswick. —1490 Zemez poysoned by the Pope. The Turks do much mischief in the Venetian Territo∣ries. They take Lepanto, Modene, and other places; 60000 of them slain in Russia. In the West, the Emperour being dead, his son Maximilian succeedeth 25 years: he drives the Turks out of Croatia. Basil falls off from the Emperour to the Switzers: the
Em∣perour  is defeated by them, and grants them peace. Maximilian marrieth Anne of Bri∣tany by Deputy; but the French King marrieth her, and casts off Maximilians daugh∣ter. Charles besiegeth Naples, where the French malady breaks out. He takes Naples and loseth it again: He dyeth, to whom succeeded Lewis 2. Duke of Orleans, 18 years: he divorceth his wife, and takes Anne the former Kings widow: he takes Milan in his mothers right, and puts the Grandchilde of Gabeas into a Covent. Alphonso of Portu∣gal kill'd with a fall from his horse. Granado conquered by Ferdinand and Isabel. Ame∣rica discovered by Columbus; he brought home the Venerial Pox. Jews and Moors bani∣shed. The French King resignes to Ferdinand Roussillon, that he might not cross him in the Conquest of Naples. The Pope limiteth the discoveries of Castile and Portugal: The Moors of Castile compelled to embrace the Faith. The French invade Roussillon, because Ferdinand assisted Naples. Columbus makes a third voyage to America. Casimire of Poland dyeth, and Iohn Albert his son succeeded: 10 years he makes a League with Bohemia, and peace with the Turk. The Polacks defeated in Podolia by the Tartars: the King invades Moldavia, and is beaten. The Valachians carry many away captives out of Russia and Podolia: The Turks defeated in Russia. Ladislaus of Bohemia is made King of Hungary 26 years: he recovers Alba Regalis. The Hungarians plunder Mysia. The Turks bea∣ten from Belgrad: the King spoileth the Turks lands for 100 miles. Hungary, Pole and Russia league against the Turk. The Norwegians are dispensed to receive the Sacrament without wine. Iohn King of Denmark subdueth the Swedes: he taketh the Lubec ships, and they his: He is chosen King of Swedeland, and Steno deposed. The Venetians pro∣tect Pisa against Florence, they are Neuters to France and Naples. Sforza strives to get Pisa from the Venetians: they League with France against him; he cals in the Turk. Milan loseth Cremona. Eug. of Nassau subdueth the Brugeois, who built him an house, yet belonging to the Prince of Orange. Nassau and Guelders taken by the French King: The Boors of Holland do great insolencies. The Dutchy of Guelders escheated to the Emperour, who makes the Duke of Saxony hereditary Governour of Frisia, against whom the Frisons league: they rebell against his son: The Duke is slain at the siege of Gronengen. The King of England helpeth Maximilian against the French; he besiegeth Bolen: the French King payeth the charges of the War, and an annual sum, and so ob∣tains Peace. Perkin Werbe set up against King Henry by the Dutchess of Burgundy: he pretends he was the younger son to the Duke of York: he goeth into Scotland, and makes the Scots invade England: he marryeth the Earl of Huntly's daughter. The Cor∣nish Rebels defeated at Black-heath: The Scots are resisted by the Bishop of Durham, and Earl of Surrey: Perkin defeated and taken, and sent to the Tower; he is hanged at Tyburn, and the Earl of Warwick beheaded on the Tower-hill. Truce made by the Scots with England. In the Church, Alexander 6. sat 11 years; he makes one of his bastards Prince of Sicily, the 2. a Cardinal, and the 3. a Duke of Spain. Caesar the Cardinal, leaves his Hat, and marrieth the French Kings Cousin: he is made Duke of Valentinois, Valentia is made an Archbishoprick. At Paris begins the Order of Penitent women, converted from the Stews. Savanorla hanged and burnt at Florence for his opinions. In the East, the Spanish, French, and Venetian Fleets against the Turk are dispersed. Dyr∣rachium taken by Bajazet: Peace made with Venice. He is wounded by a Dervisar, whose 1500— body was torn, his brains dasht out, and the Order banished. 3 Bassa's defeated in a Rebellion. Constantinople ruined by earthquake, and repaired by Bajazet, by setting at work 80000 men. In the West, the Norinbergers are worsted by Brandeburgs forces: the Boors in the Diocess of Spire rebel. At Lyons, the Emperour makes a League with France and Spain: the Emperor hath War with the Palatine of Bavaria, for some part of that Country, and with Venice. The Swedes, in favour of Denmark, proscribed by the Emperour, they slight his Act. The Bohemians having wasted Germany, are driven out. Presburg or Possonium in Hungary, taken by the Emperour: he is not suffered to pass armed through the Venetian Lands. A League at Cambray between the Emperour, Pope and French against Venice. The Imperial Chamber is translated from Wormes to Ra∣tisbone. Verona, Padua and Vicenza taken by the Emperour. Milan is subdued again by the French. Sforza and his brother carried into France. At Roan and Aix Parliaments are set up. The French and Spaniard having expelled the Emperor from Naples, they agree that the French should have Naples, and the Spaniard Magna Graecia with Apulia. The Spanish General Gonsalvus expels the French out of Naples. The Genuans rebell, and are subdued by Lewis: The Portugals sail to Calecut. Philip is
acknowledged heir  of Castile, and succeedeth with Ione his wife. Philip dyeth, the title of Catholique made Hereditary by the Pope to the Kings of Spain: The Portugals overcome at Cambaia. Ormus in the Persian gulf taken: the King of Cambaia made tributary to Portugal: The Venetians are stript of Tarentum and Brundusium by the Spaniards. The Polander makes peace with the Muscovite and Turk. The King of Poland dyeth: His brother Alexan∣der succeedeth 5 years. Lituania united again to Poland: the Tartars expelled Russia and Podolia: the King dyeth, to him succeeded his brother Sigismund 41 years: he gains much from Basil Duke of Muscovia; he beats the Tartars and Valachians. Christiern of Denmark subdueth the rebellious Norwegians: He makes peace with Lubec; they make War against him, for not performing Articles. The Queen of Sweden taken in the Castle of Stockholm, and freed by the Popes means. The Venetians take divers ships and places from the Turks. The French take divers places in Italy, and lose them again to the Pope and Spaniard. Philip and Ione of Flanders go into Spain; he dyeth at Bourges, his heart buried at Ierusalem. Guelders invadeth Brabant. The Emperour becomes Guar∣dian to Charles, and his other Nephews. Margaret of Saxony named Regent of the Low-Countries. King Philip of Spain, and his Queen, cast by stormes on the English coast, land at Falmouth, they are Royally entertained. The Earl of Suffolk practiseth with the Dutchess of Burgundy against the King; he is sent by King Philip into England, and is committed to the Tower. Henry 7. his Chappel finished, and so is the Savoy; the King dyeth: to him succeeds his son Henry 8. 37 years. Empson and Dudley, who were imployed in the former Kings time about the Penal-Laws, are now executed: He makes a League with the Emperour and Spaniard. The King of Denmark having fallen out with his Lords, cometh into Scotland, and is restored by the Scots. The Hollanders for robbing the Kings Merchants, are taken, and their heads cut off, and sent to the King in barrels. The King is declared Protector of the Faith, by the Pope. In the Church, Pope Alexander sits yet. Sforza regains Milan from the Pope. Borgias ta∣keth the Dutchy of Urbin and Camerinum. The Pope, by the Butlers mistake, is poy∣soned, with that cup which he had provided for some Cardinals. Pius 3. succeeded 26 dayes, then Iulius 2. 10 years; he was a better Souldier then Scholar; he is as∣sisted by the French against Bentivolo an usurper in Bonónia, who resignes it to the Pope. Borgia escapeth prison in Spain; he is slain after he was made General by the King of Navar. The Pope, by the Emperors and French help, recovereth divers places from the Venetians. In Germany appeared bloody Crosses upon peoples garments. The Boors of Spire rise against the Monasteries and Clergy, refusing to pay Tythes. The Kingdom of Congo converted to Christianity. In the East, Bajazet intended to make Achmet his eldest son successor; but the Bassas set up —1510 Selymus: Bajazet retireth himself, and is poysoned by Selymus; he slew two Pages for lamenting the death of Bajazet their Lord, and his father. Selymus reigned 8 years: he murthered five of Achmets children, and strangleth his brother. The Plague at Constan∣tinople sweeps away 160000 people. Selymus takes divers places from the Persian, and makes War upon Hungary, and Egypt also, because Campson Gaure the Sultan, took part with the Persian: In the taking of Aleppo, the Sultan is trodden to death. Syria sub∣mitteth. Selymus with reverence enters Ierusalem, and gives to the Christian Priests 6 moneths allowance. Tonembeius the Sultan is overthrown at Cayre, and hanged. Ga∣zelles made Lieutenant of Syria. As Selymus was preparing against the Christians, he is struck with a Canker in his back, which rots his flesh, and so he died. In the West, there are troubles between the Duke of Saxony and Bishop of Mentz. Germany divided into 10 Provinces in a Dyet at Triers. The Synods of Pisa and Toures called against the Pope, are nullified by the Emperor in a Dyet at Colen. The Emperor expels the Vene∣tians out of Lombardy: the Emperour meets the Kings of Poland and Bohemia at Vienna, about the succession of these Kingdoms, if Ladislaus should die without issue. The Emperors Army for want of pay forsake him: he therefore makes peace with France. Upon Maximilians death, Charles of Spain carrieth the Empire from Francis of France. He reigned 38 years. The French besiege the Pope and Cardinals in Bologna, but are forced to give off for want of food. The French kill the Switzers Ambassador going for Rome; therefore they denounce War against them: they refuse to compound, and invade Milan. The French lose all in Italy, by withdrawing their forces thence against the English. Lewis cannot recover Milan. He makes peace with the Pope, and with England, and then dyeth. The Switzers invade Burgundy. To Lewis succeedeth Francis the first 33 years. He regains Milan, and meets the Pope at Bologna. The
French and Swit∣zers  League against the Spaniards, take Tripolis. Ferdinand uniteth Navar to Castile by expelling Iohn Albert. The Moluccos taken by the Portugals, and the river Plata dis∣covered. Ferdinand languisheth and dyeth of a Love-potion: Charles son to Philip succeedeth 43 years. Ioan and her husband die, having attempted in vain to recover Navar. The Tartars invade Russia, and are beaten back. Smolensco taken by the Mus∣covites; they are defeated by the Polander at Borysthenes. The King of Poland makes War against the Marquis of Brandeburg Master of the Teutonicks, for not swearing ho∣mage to him. The Hungarians and Turks invade each others Lands. The King of Hun∣gary dyeth, his son a childe succeeds 11 years. The Lubeckers spoil Denmark and assist the Swedes: the Hollander helps the King: a peace at last with him is concluded, and the Swedes excluded. The King dyeth; his son Christiern succeeds 10 years: He with the Bishop of Upsale plot to reduce the Swedes, therefore he besiegeth Stockholm, but gives off, for want of necessaries; He takes the Town at last, spoils it, exerciseth strange cruelties, and returns to Denmark. Steno Sture the younger made Governor of Swedeland; he deposeth the Bishop of Upsale, who was restored upon the death of Steno, and taking of Stockholm. In Bohemia, Lewis an Infant-King is brought up by George Marquis of Brandeburg. The Venetians league with the Pope and Aragon against France. Venice recovereth Brixia. The Switzers joyn with them against the French: The Em∣perour beats them at Vicenza: they league with the French, and quarrel with the Pope, and relieve Vicenza. The French restore Verona to them. The Duke of Guelders takes divers places from the Burgundians, and makes War against Utricht: by the quarrelling of Saxony with the Earls of Embden, for Groning, Frisia is wasted. The Duke of Saxony resigneth Frisland for money. Charles takes possession of Belgium, and goeth into Spain. Peter a notable Pyrate, surpriseth Horne. King Henry sits down before Tur∣wyn; the Emperour taketh pay of him. The Lord Darcy sent with forces to Fer∣dinand the Kings Father in Law, against the Moors. Marquis Dorset invadeth Aquitaine, but the Flux in his Army drives him back again. Turwyn and Tournay taken; the French defeated in the battel of Spurs, which were then much employed in the horses sides when they fled. King Iames of Scotland defeated and slain at Flow∣den. The French by the Rhodians invade Sussex, and Sir Iohn Wallop Normandy: peace with France. Mary the Kings sister, and Queen of France, upon the death of King Lewis, returneth, and marrieth Charles Brandon. Peace for 3 years with Scotland. Cardinal Wolsey erecteth the Star-Chamber, and Court of Requests: the Appren∣tices rise against Strangers: the Sweating sickness. Tournay restored to the French. The Emperour, and Cardinal Campeius arrive in England. Barton the Scots Pyrate taketh 13 English Ships. Iames 5. reigneth in Scotland 30 years: the Queen wi∣dow is Regent whilest a widow, and the Duke of Albany Tutor: by marrying Archibald Douglas, she loseth her Regency; she is delivered of a daughter in England, afterward married to the Earl of Lenox: Douglas and Hume disturb the Kingdom: Arran and Hume committed. Dunbar burnt by the Humes; the Rebels are pardoned: The Regent leaveth seven Deputies, and saileth into France. Angus and Arran differ. In the Church, Pope Iulius sits yet: He Excommunicates the Kings of France and Navar: In a Battell on Easter day, he loseth 16000 men, and Ravenna to the French. He begins St. Peters Church in the Vatican. Leo the 10. succeedeth 8 years: he continues the Lateran Councel: He bought Mutina of the Emperour for 30000 crowns. He helpeth Sforza against France; He gives Urbin to his Nephew, who the next year lost it. He made 31 Cardinals; he strangled Cardinal Petrucci for conspiring: He recovers Parma and Placentia: The Councel at Tours decreeth, that the Pope should be forced to call a General Councel, if he will not hearken to Peace. The Lateran Councel rejecteth that of Pisa, called by the Emperour and French against the Pope. The Pisan removed to Millan. Luther disputes against Indulgences, sent abroad by the Archbishop of Mentz to pay for his Pall. The Pope and French King strive to abolish the Pragmatical Sanction. The Complutensian Bible set out by Cardinal Ximenes, containing the Hebrew, Chaldee, Greek and Latine. Luther sets abroad Theses against Indulgences. Luther confers with Cajetan at Auspurg. Eccius disputes with Carolostadius at Lipsic about Free-Will; and with Luther, about the Popes Supremacy, and Purgatory.
In the East, Solyman the Magnificent reigns 47 years: Gazelles the Rebel is killed in bat∣tel. Solyman takes divers Towns from the Hungarians: he attempteth Chior in vain: af∣ter 6 moneths assault, he takes Rhodes, and dismisseth with honour Viliers the Gover∣nour: —1520 A mutiny at Constantinople among the Janisaries. Als Beg a King in Armenia, with his four sons are killed by Solyman, who possessed his Kingdom: He beats Lewis of Hun∣gary, and takes Buda: he denounceth war against Ferdinando King of Bohemia, and pro∣tects Iohn Sepusius: he kills the cowardly Souldiers in the Castle of Buda, but freed the Captain for his valour: He gives off the siege of Vienna, having lost 80000 men. In the West, the Emperor invadeth Picardy. The Pope, Emperour, English, Italy and Au∣stria league against France: The Imperialists beat the French and Switzers neer Milan. The Boors of Germany, whereof 50000 were slain, rose against the Nobility. Marseiles besieged by Bourbon, who sided with Charles. Mantua made a Dutchy. King Francis taken at the siege of Papia. The French King released. The Emperour abrogates the Popes power in Spain, and takes Milan from Sforza. Rome taken and plundred by Bourbon. Naples besieged by the French. The Bishop of Utricht resignes his temporalities to Charles. War made on the Papists by Saxony and Hesse. Sforza recovers Milan for 50000 Crowns: He makes peace with Venice. The French take some places from Charles: the Castle of Milan yeelds to the French, and a great part of Lombardy. Bourbon raised from Marseiles by the French: The King is forced to promise that he will renounce his right in Naples, Milan and other places, to restore Burgundy, and to pay 200000 crowns. The holy League between France, England, Venice, Milan and the Pope against Charles. Lasca∣ris and Budaeus cause the Library at Fountainbleau to be set up. The Kings ransome paid at Cambray and the hostages restored. The Spaniards take Mexico. Henry of Navar who sided with the French, beaten by the Castilians. Brandeburg swears fealty to the Polan∣der, and is made Duke of Russia. Massovia escheated to the Crown of Poland. The Po∣landers beat the Tartars, and take their Prince, Dansk rebelleth. The King of Hun∣gary drowned in a ditch, and his Nobility slain in the battel at Mohats. Sepusius Vayvod of Dacia expelled by Ferdinand: Solyman protects him, and invadeth Hungary with 150000 Turks. The King of Denmark expelled, and flyeth into Germany and Eng∣land: Frederick Duke of Holst, Christiern's Uncle, is chosen King; he leagueth with the Swedes: their Governor Gustavus, Nephew to Steno the elder, embraceth Lutheranism, and is crowned King. Ferdinand of Austria chosen King of Bohemia. Venice helps Hun∣gary wich money against the Turk: A peace concluded at Cambray between the Empe∣rour, Venetians, French, and Milanois. The Gueldrois take Newport, and oppress Frisia: Charles sendth forces against them. The Gueldrois spoil Holland; they force Bosleduc to pay Taxes: The women of Hague mutiny against the Customers. The Duke of Gueldres makes a League with the Burgundian. Utricht expels the Bishop, and calls in the Duke of Gueldres: the Hague taken by his forces: they are expelled by the Em∣perour, who re-established the Bishop: the Mutineers executed, and peace between the Duke and Bishop. In England, Buckingham beheaded for Treason: the French are imprisoned in England, for some wrongs done by them to the English. The Pope stiles the King, Defender of the Faith. The Lord Admiral taketh Morlays in Britany. The Em∣peror is in England affianced to the Lady Mary. Scotland is invaded by the English, and France by the Duke of Suffolk: Surry burneth divers Towns in Scotland: the King re∣ceiveth from the Pope a Rose of gold. Greenwich-Castle built. Truce with France and Scotland: The king quarrels with the Emperour, for not marrying his daughter. Kil∣dare accused and acquitted. The Pope dispenseth with Wolsey to dissolve 4 Monasteries. The sedition in Suffolk appeased: Cardinal Campeius comes into England about the Kings divorce; Commissioners chosen for the Queen, who appealeth to the Pope; the mar∣riage made unlawfull by some Universities. In Scotland, the Earl of Angus, and his bro∣ther are banished by the Regent, who goeth again into France for aid against the Eng∣lish: He resigneth; the Queen, and some others made Regents: the Queen casts off An∣gus, and marrieth Henry Stuart Earl of Metbwen; who are both committed by the King, who now assumes the Government; Angus flyeth into England; Bothwel convicted, and Archibald Douglas banished. In the Church, Leo sits yet: he executeth the Tyrant of Perugia, for aiding the Duke of Urbin. To him succeeded the Emperors Tutor Hadrian 6. 8 moneths: he took Parma and Placentia. Clement 7. succeeds 10 years; he had been a Knight of St. Iohn of Ierusalem: he is besieged in the Castle of St. Angelo by the Columnii, who waste Rome and the Vatican. He warreth against Sema and Naples, and is reconciled to Charles. Luther is Excommunicate, and his Books burnt, who in requital burns the Popes Bull, and Canon-Law, and writes the Babylonian-Captivity.: He justifies his Doctrine before the Emperour at Wormes. King Henry writes against him, and is
answered by him: Zuinglius and Oecolampadius preach at Tigurum: Carolostadius joyns with Luther; the Pope complained against in the Diet of Norinberg: two Monks suffer at Bruxels for changing their Religion. Lutheranism received in divers places. The Capuchins Order instituted by Balscay of Ancona. Anabaptists spread. Oecolam∣padius and Zuinglius differ from Luther about the Sacrament: at Berne and there about, and at Strasburg, and Basil, the Masse is abolished: the Elector and Landsgrave pro∣testing against the Edict, brought in the name of Protestants: Disputations held in divers places. In the East, Solyman setleth Iohn in Hungary as his Tributary; he assaults Gunsium 13 times, and is repuised; at last upon the comming of the Imperialists, he raiseth the siege: He 1530— invades Hungary again with a vast Army; his General is slain; he carrieth away 30000 Captives: he makes Barbarussa the Pyrat his Admiral: he takes Tunis, and loseth it to Charls: He takes many places from the Persian: upon the instigation of Roxalana his mother, he cuts the throat of Ibrahim. The French King draws the Turks into Apulia, who spoil it, and take divers places: Auria takes a part of their Fleet. Barbarussa's Fleet beaten at Crete by the Venetians; in a storm he loseth many Gallies and 20000 men: He recovers Castro Novum. 700 prisoners burnt at Constantinople by a casual fire. In the West, the Emperour is crowned King of Lombardy at Bononia, and takes Florence. Ferdi∣dinand the Emperours brother is crowned King of the Romans. In the war between Tigurum and the Cantons, Zuinglius was killed. Charls restoreth Muleasses to Tunis. Sforza dying without issue, Millan is escheated to the Emperor; the French claim it, and so a war is occasioned. Truce between the Emperour and French for 10 years. The war between Brandeburg and the Norinbergers taken up. The Dutchy of Britany united to the Crown of France. The French Kings Ambassadour put to death at Millan, be∣cause one of his company slew a Citizen. The French was with Savoy: Francis the Dolphin poisoned by the Earl of Mounte-Cucullo, who was therefore torn by wilde horses: At Lisbon, an Earthquake lasted 8 dayes, which overthrew 1500 houses and many Churches. Beru is now found out. The King of Cambaia killed by the Portugals. The Turks and Portugals have wars in the Indies. The Muscovites waste Lituania, and are driven out. Grittus Solymans favourite setleth Hungary; he kils the Bishop of Var∣radinum, and for this is killed himself by the Transilvanians. It is agreed that in Hungary Ferdinand should succeed to Iohn. Solyman subdueth Moldavia, and restores the Vayvod; the King dieth with too much joy that his Queen was delivered of a sonne. Cristiern striving to recover Denmark, is imprisoned 27 years at Sunderberg. Fre∣dericl dieth, who leaves a young son. Count Oldenburg undertakes the Regency, be∣cause Christiern Duke of Holst refused it; but at last accepteth it, takes Copenhagen, and setleth the Kingdome; he is crowned, and calld Christiern 3. he changeth Bishops into Superintendents. Smolard rebels against the Swedes; but is reduced by the Danes help. The Venetlans are Neuters in the Turkish war against Hungary: they beat the Turks at Sea, and take Assam Beg the Pyrate. Barbarussa takes from Corcyra 16000 Captives, who are sold at Constantinople. Two Turkish Gallies burnt by Contarenus in the Gulph, for not striking their Top-saile. They made peace with Solyman, because the Spaniard refused to deliver Castro novum; they are forced to give up Nauplum, and some other places to the Turk. By an inundation in the Netherlands, 404 Parishes are drowned: Mary of Austria is Regent of Flanders: Anabaptists executed at Amsterdam: Lubeck quar∣rels with Holland, for assisting Christiern King of Denmark: At Delft 3300 houses, with two Churches, and divers Monasteries burnt. The Regent will not suffer the Emperour to resign Flanders and Artois to the French. The Duke of Cleve succeedeth in Guelders. The Gantois behead their Magistrates. In England, Wolsey is out of favour, and dieth. Saint Iames built. The Clergy condemned in a Premunire, and pay 100000 l. to the King. Cromwell great with the King. Katherine divorced; the King marrieth Anne Bullen: Peace with France: the holy Maid of Kent executed. The Popes power abro∣gated: The King seiseth on the First-fruits and Tenths, and called, Head of the Church; for denying this, Sir Thomas Moore, and Fisher Bishop of Rochester beheaded; Religious Houses under 300 l. value, given to the King; Queen Anne beheaded; and Iane Seymor married to the King; Rebellions in Lincolnshire, and in the North. Kildare and his 5 Unles executed; the Bible read in English; Oneale repulsed by the Lord Grey; Anne of Cleve married to the King, and divorced shortly after; The order of S. Iohn of Ieru∣salem suppressed. In Scotland, the Court of Sessions is instituted; Iohn Scot fasteth 50 daies together; The Earl Bothwel committed for
going into England; The King goeth into France, and marrieth Magdalen the Kings daughter; divers executed for treason; The King marrieth the Duke of Guize's daughter. In the Church, Clement 7. yet sits; he excommunicated King Henry of England: Paul 3 succeedeth 15 years; he appoints a Synod at Mantua, and transfers it to Vicenza; it came to nothing: the Protestant Confession made by Melancthon, is presented to Charls in the Diet of Auspurg; therefore called Confessio Augustana. Peace granted to the Protestants in Germany, upon news of the Turks preparation: the Prote∣stants are persecuted in Misna and France; the Anabaptists raise seditions in Mun∣ster, who are taken and executed: Geneva becomes Protestant and expels the Bi∣shop. Ignatius Layola instituteth the Jesuites order; the League of Smalcald for the Protestants: A Councel at Colen for Reformation. The Augustan Faith received in Denmark. Luther exhibites Articles at Smalcald. At Norimberg is made an Anti-league; Antinomians now appear. In the East, Solyman takes divers towns in Hungary; subdueth Transilvania, and gives it to Iohn: Barbarussa is sent to help the French; he takes Rhegium in Italy, and Nice in Pro∣vince, —1540 with some places in Tuscany, Ischia and Lippari. Solyman at the French Kings re∣quest, breaks the 5 years Peace with Charls; he fails in his expedition against the Per∣sian. Charls his expedition into Algiers, unfortunate; his forces sent to relieve Buda, are beaten by the Turks. The French Ambassadors going to the Turk, are killed by the Imperialists, which makes a war. Charls leagueth with England against France; Saxony and the Lantgrave are proscribed. Henry of Brunswick taken by the Duke of Saxony. Lipsick besieged, and Breme taken: the Lantgrave is imprisoned. Muleasses be∣ing exoculated by his son, comes to the Emperour. Magdeburg proscribed; and Con∣stance taken by the Imperialists. In France, the Rochellers rebell against the King; the Admiral is condemned: the Imperialists beaten by the French in Piedmont: the French invade England, they lose Bolen. The King dieth; his son Henry 2. succeeds 13 years; Bourdeaux rebelleth, they are forced to burn their Priviledges, by the Constable, who appeaseth the Rebellion in Aquitain, raised upon the custome of Salt. The Lt. Vevain executed for surrendring Bolen. The Duke of Lituania translates the Bible into the Polanders tongue. Wars between Ferdinand of Bohemia, and Iohn of Hungary; that Country is plagued with Locusts. Gustaphus of Suevia obtains that the succession may be established on his heirs. Ferdinand unpriviledgeth Prague, for not helping him against the Elector. Gaunt for rebellion loseth her priviledges and Castle: The Emperour sets a Garrison there; he claimeth the Dukedome of Cleve: the Duke leagueth with the French, they invade Brabant; the Prince of Orange is beaten: Antwerp attempted by the Geldrians, in vain; they are beaten by the Schollars of Lovain. Iuliers won by Charls. The Hollanders spoil and carry away the Kings ships out of the river of Burdeaux. The Belgians present Charls with 15000 Florens of Gold, at his return from Afric. The French Queen entertained by Charls at Brussels: Cleve is reconciled to him: Mechlin burnt by lightning, which fell among Powder. Some places recovered out of the Sea. In England, Cromwel is beheaded: The Court of Wards and First-fruits erected: The Lady Katherine Howard married to the King, and beheaded: The Act passed for Supre∣macy: The six bloody Articles: The King marrieth Katherine Par, and cals himself King of Ireland. The Scots defeated by the Duke of Norfolk; the Scots prisoners retur∣ned without ransome, upon the death of King Iames. A match proposed between Mary Queen of Scotland and Prince Edward; but crossed by the French. The English enter Scotland, burn Edenburg and Leith. The French invade Sussex and the Isle of Wight. Peace with France. Bolen restored for 800000 crowns; The Earl of Surry beheaded. To King Henry succeeds his son Edward 6 years; The Duke of Sommerset Protector; The Scots are defeated at Musselburgh; Chantries suppressed; The Protector and his bro∣ther the Admiral, fall out about their wives; The Admiral executed, and the Prote∣ctor committed; Rebellions in Cornwal, Norfolk, and in the North; the French at∣tempt Iersey and Garnesey. In Scotland, the King dieth of grief; His daughter Mary was five dayes old; The Earls of Huntly, Murrey, and Argile made Regents by Cardinal Be∣ton; but the Earl of Arran by the Protestants: The Cardinal of St. Andrews murthered for burning George Wischart; Civill wars about Religion; The French besiege St. An∣drews; Cadinal Beton burneth Sophocardin a Minister, and is killed shortly after: the English expelled Scotland; the Scots refuse offers of Peace from England.
In the Church, Paul sits yet: his son Petrus Aloysius murthered at Placentia. The City is taken by Gouzaga Governor of Millan. Eccius and Melancthon confer about Ori∣ginal sinne, at Wormes and Ratisbone. Xaverius the Jesuite sent to convert the Indians. The Palatinate becomes Protestant. Herman Archbishop of Colen strives to reform Religion, but is crossed by the Clergy and deprived. David George stiles himselfe Christ: he flieth from Delf to Basil. The Councel of Trent begins. The French King slaughtereth the Waldenses. The Protestants assembled at Frankfort against the Councel of Trent. The Inquisition causeth a sedition in Naples. Councels held at Auspurg, Colen, Mentz, and Trevers. A Schisme among the Protestants, by pub∣lishing the Emperors Interim concerning observation of Indifferent matters, during the Councel of Trent. Spira died despairing. In France; the Protestants are per∣secuted. Divers Conferences held. In the East, the Turkish Pyrats do much mischief; they take Tripolis in Barbary. Solyman 1550— strangles his son Mustapha, by Roxalano's instigation, that her son Bajazet might suc∣ceed. Haly Bassa attempteth Agria in vain. The Venetians sack Dyrrachium, a Harbor of the Tunks. The Duke of Florence his lands spoiled by the Turks; so is Corsica. Haly Bassa beaten from Zigeth. Bajazet sets up a false Mustapha against his faher; he is pardoned at the request of Roxalana. Bajazt aspireth again, and flieth to the Persian, who strangled him and his four sons, Solyman consenting to it. In the West, Mag∣deburg is besieged by Saxony, Brunswick, and Brandeburg. Charles and Ferdinand differ a∣bout the succession of the Empire. Saxony and the Landsgrave released. The French take Metz. Maurice killed by Brandeburg in battel. The French spoil Artois and Henault. The Emperor resigns his kingdom to Philip his son, and enters into a Monastery, where he died: In the Empire his brother Ferdinand succeedeth 6 years; the Pope refuseth to confirm him, because he gave peace to the Protestants. The French king takes 22 ships of Zealand, with some places: the Emperor and French king spoile each others territories; Casal taken by the French; they are beaten at sea by the Flemings; S. Quintin taken. France makes peace with Spain, and restores Savoy and Piemont to the Duke: the King killed at Tilt by Montgomery; his sonne Francis 2. succeeded: great factions between the Guises and the Constable: the King dieth; to him Charles 9. his brother succeeded 13 years; his mother made Regent. Iapan about this time discovered. In Spain, King Philip causeth 28 Gentlemen to be burned for Religion. The Polander forceth the Master of the Teutonicks to swear fealty to him. The Mus∣covites invad Livonia. The Queen of Hungary resigneth Transilvania to Ferdinand, who giveth her Cassovia and 100000 Ducats yearly. Dobus for his service against the Turks at Agria, is made Vayvod of Transilvania. To Christiern 3. of Denmark succeeded his son Frederick 2. 29 years; he forced the Diethmarsians (who made themselves members of the Church of Breme) to submit to him. In an Assembly at Brussels, the Emperor re∣signeth the Collar of the Golden-fleece to Philip, with the Low-Countries, who makes the Duke of Savoy Generall there; He is opposed in his Taxes. At Brussels there died of Famine and Cold, 19000. The French take Calice, Dunkirk, and Guines; Dunkirk recovered by Count Egmont, with the losse of 15000 French. In England, the Duke of Somerset beheaded; Christs-Hospital in London founded: the King dieth; by his Will Iane daughter to the Duke of Suffolk should have succeeded, she is proclaimed by Northumberland and others, who suffered for it; but Mary succeeded 5 yeares, who put to death the Lady Iane, with her husband and father; Wyat rebelleth; Car∣dinal Poole made Archbishop of Canterbury; the Queen marrieth with King Philip; S. Quintins taken by the English. To Q. Mary succeeded Elizabeth 44 years; Calice is demanded; the French aid the Scots against the English; the Queen aideth the Scots Lords, Lieth besieged by the Lord Gray; the Queen-Dowager of Scotland entertained in England, she is made Regent of Scotland, the old Regent Duke of Chastelrault; Htly is committed: the Scots invade England, and are repelled; Knox with the o∣ther Protestants put to the Horn; they take Glascow and Blacknesse. In the Church, Iulius 3. sits 5 years: He keepeth the Jubile, and continueth the Councel of Trent; he betrayeth Sena to the Emperor. To him succeeded Marcellus 2. 21 dayes: then Paul 4. 4 years; to him the Romans erected a Marble-statue, for enlarging their priviledges; He refuseth to confirm King Philip of Naples: He dieth, and the Romans cut off the head and right-hand of his statue, and fling it into Tyber. The Protestant-Ministers are expelled Auspurg; Osiander and the Professors of Wittenberg differ a∣bout Justification. Mary the Regent opposeth the Inquisition in the Low-Countries. The Protestants differ about the Necessity
of Good works. Servetus the Arian burnt at  Geneva. Protestants persecuted in England; Latimer, Ridley, and Cranmer burnt. The Agreement at Passau confirmed. The body of David George taken out of his grave, and burnt, 3 years after his burial. The Catholiques and Protestants confer at Wormes, and so at Westminster: At Auspurg, peace confirmed to the Protestants. Hugonots in France, so called from S. Hugo's Gate, where they used to assemble in Tours. In the East, Solyman yet reigneth: some Christian Princes attempt Tripolis, but Pial Bassa —1560 defeateth them: Malta besieged by the Turks in vain; they are forced to be gone after 5 moneths, and the losse of 24000 men: Solyman makes peace with the Emperor: Pial Bassa subdueth Chios for aiding Malta, after it had been possessed by Genua 200 years. Zigeth is taken; at the siege thereof Solyman died: His son Selymus 2. succeeded 8 years; he makes peace with Persia, Hungary and Venice; he invadeth Scythia with losse; he de∣mandeth Cyprus from the Venetians, who refuse to part with it, so the peace is broken. In the West, Ferdinand the Emperor dieth: His son Maximilian 2. succeedeth 12 years; he makes 8 years peace with the Turk. In France, Conde who was condemned to die, is released; the King of Navar forsakes the Protestants. The battel of Dreux in Nor∣mandy, where the King of Navar is slain, with 9000 on both sides, and Conde taken; the Duke of Guise slain at the siege of Orleans. The Holy-League with Spain against the Protestants. Within this Decad were 3 Civil-wars for Religion in France: The Prince of Conde is aided by Casimir with 3000 men; the King with as many by the Duke of Saxony; After a battel, Liberty of Conscience is granted: The Prince of Conde is taken, and slain with a pistol: The King taketh S. Iohn de Angelo. King Philip of Spain giveth 30000 Ducats towards the Printing of the Complutens. Bible at Antwerp. In the Councel of Trent, France and Spain strive for precedencie. The Philippina's are discovered. The Inquisitors question the Archbishop of Toledo. The Duke of Alva commeth into Flanders. Prince Charles accused by the Inquisitors, dieth in prison. The spaniards and Moors of Granado at war 2 years. The King of Poland leagueth with Denmark against the Swedes. The Teutonick-Master submits to the Polander, and is made Duke of Curland. The Muscovite is beaten by the Polacs and Livonians, and loseth 5000 laden wagons. The King recovereth Parnovia in Swedeland; he overthrows the Swedes in Livonia, and abridgeth Dansk of divers priviledges. Maxi∣milian and Mary are crowned King and Queen of Hungary: the Tartars waste the Country: the Turk besiegeth Zigeth, and takes divers Towns there. Breme adjudged by the Emperor to be under the government of Denmark and Holst. The Hamburgers take some of the Kings ships in the Elve, for which they are forc'd to pay 12000 crowns The King and Lubekers take the Castle, Town and Harbor of Elsenburg in Swedeland. The Polander intercepteth some Danish ships; the King hindreth the Trade at Dansk, till they were fain to redeem it with 100000 Crowns. Ericus of Swedland fortifieth Revalia, and hinders the Lubekers trade, by which he made the Polander and Dane his enemies; He is beaten off from the siege of Helmestadt in Denmark; he taketh Drentham in Norway, and loseth it again; He imprisoneth his brother Iohn and his son, upon suspition that they fomented these wars, by lending mony to the Dane; he kills also many of his best friends upon jealousie; he releaseth his brother, and is deposed and imprisoned: His brother Iohn 3. succeedeth 23 years. Venice will not admit the Popes Inquisition. The Arsenal burnt; whereupon Selymus invadeth Cyprus. 14 Bishopricks erected in the Low-Countries, at which the people repine, for so the Inqui∣sition was brought in; Count Egmont sent with complaints to the King, but no satis∣factory answer; the King commandeth obedience to the Councel of Trent, aid to the Inquisition, and execution of former Edicts: The Nobles, upon the execution of the Kings Letters, begin to stand upon their guard; Images are defaced, and Protestants permitted at Antwerp to build Churches: Protestantisme is again inhibited: the Re∣gent taketh arms. Valenciens taken, for favouring Protestants. Alva commits the Earls of Egmont and Horn, and builds Antwerp-Castle: Horn and Egmont, with others, exe∣cuted. The Prince of Orange his eldest son is sent into Spain: The Prince of Orange and his brother take arms, and are driven into France by the Duke, who brings in the new Bishops, and setleth the Inquisition: Multitudes of people forsake the Netherlands: Traffique with England ceaseth. The Scots Queen quartereth the English Arms, and assumeth the Titles of England and Ireland, by the advice of the Guises. The Queen of England seeketh to reconcile the factions in France, and sends the Earl of Bedford thither; she helpeth the Protestants, takes New-haven, Rohan, and Deep, which were lost again. Shan-Oneal the Rebel is pardoned by the Queen; but he returns and rebelleth again. Leicester designed by Queen Elizabeth, for Queen Maries Husband of Scotland. Oneal de∣feated by Sidney the Lord Deputy, and slain by the wilde Scots.
Thornton committed,  for making doubts about Queen Maries Title. Queen Elizabeth Godmother to the Prince of Scotland; Bedford is the Deputy. She demands Calice, and is refused. Queen Mary cast upon the Coast of England in her flight. Northumberland and Westmerland re∣bell, and are driven into Scotland. The Duke of Norfolk committed, for intending to marry Queen Mary. The French expelled Scotland. Queen Elizabeth refuseth to declare Queen Mary Heire. The Queens base-brother made Earl of Murray: Earl Huntly slain, and his Son beheaded: Bothwel escapeth: Archbishop of S. Andrews committed for keeping Masse: The Queen falls in love with the Lord Dernly, and makes him Earle of Rosse and Duke of Albany; He marrieth the Queen, and is proclaimed King: divers Lords flie into England, return, and are reconciled: Rizius the Queens favourite mur∣thered, whereupon Morton and others flie into England. The King murthered by Bothwel, who marrieth the Queen; she is taken, and resigneth; he flieth into Denmark, and there dieth in prison: Murray made Regent. Iames 6. reigneth 57 years. The Queens forces defeated; she flieth towards France, but is stopped in England. In the Church, Pius 4. sitteth 5 years: he strangled Cardinal Caraffa with some others for opposing him in the Conclave: He comes to the Councel of Trent, and dissol∣veth it: He citeth the Queen of Navar, being a Protestant, to Rome; the French king protecteth her. Pius 5. succeeded 6 years: He supplies the Emperor with money towards the Turkish war: He sends to the Duke of Alva for his service against the Protestants, a Consecrated Helmet, and a Pair of Gantlets. The King of Mauritania is baptised. At Passau in France, is a Conference between the Cardinal of Lorain and the Bishops, and Peter Martyr, Marlorat, and Beza. The Protestants are murthered in a Church at Paris. The Councel of Trent endeth. Religion in France is tolerated by the Kings Proclamation. The Pope dispenseth with the Bavarlans and Austrians to receive in both kinds. At Antwerp, Lutherans and Catholiques joyn against the Calvinists. A Councel is held at Milan; divers Conferences in Germany between the Lutherans and Zuinglians. In the East, Pial Bassa takes Nicosia in Cyprus, with 250 Field-peeces, and many Captives, 1570— which as he was conveying to Constantinople, the ship was fired by a Lady, and they all were blown up. Famagusta is taken by Mustapha, who falsified his promise to Bragadinus the Governor, whom he flea'd alive. At Lepanto the Turks lost 32000 men, 3200 prisoners, 161 gallies, with much wealth. Selymus by treason takes Moldavia, and annexeth it to Valachia, he kills also the Vayvod; He makes peace with Venice. To him succeedeth his son Amurath 3. 21 years: He looks upon the strangling of his five brothers: he invadeth Polonia, and burnt 200 Gentlemens houses, with some Towns and Villages; then he makes a league with the Polander: Hearing there were Civil wars in Persia, he invades the Country with 110000 men, of which the Persian cut off 70000. Syrvan taken by Mustapha, who loseth 10000 of his forragers, and so returns disgracefully, and dieth. In the West, the Emperor appointeth his son Rodolph to be King of Hungary; he makes the Marquis of Montferrat Duke. Ro∣dolphus is chosen King of the Romans and of Bohemia, and succeedeth in the Empire to his father Maximilian 37 years. Salentinus Archbishop of Colen resigneth, and mar∣rieth Count Arnebergs daughter. In France, the Queen of Navar secures her selfe with her son in Rochel; she dieth, and her son marrieth the Kings sister, upon which followed the 4. Civil war, the Massacre of Paris, and war with Rochel. Navar and Conde renounce Protestanism: with Rochel and Mont-Alban a peace is concluded. Henry the Kings brother elected King of Poland: Montgomery executed: The King dieth; to whom succeeded his brother Henry 3. 16 years, the Queen-mother is Regent; Conde removeth into Germany; the 5. Civil war followed, D' Auvile takes the Protestants part; The Germans invade France by Condes means; Navar escapes into Picardy; The Guises aim at the Crown; the Duke of Alenson the Kings brother, head of the Pro∣testants, is reconciled to the King. A 6. Civil war was begining, but the King was 100 millions in debt: Navar takes arms; D'Auvile leaveth the Protestants; peace is made with Conde. The Order of the Holy-Ghost was now instituted. Don Requiescens sent Governor into Belgium, and after him Don Iohn of Austria. Antwerp is taken by the Spaniard. Sebastian of Portugal in his Africk expedition is killed, to whom suc∣ceeded Henry the Cardinal. Sigismund King of Poland, and last of Iagello's line, dieth; the French kings brother Henry Duke of Bourbon is elected; He understanding his brother was dead, gets away in the dark out of Cracovia. Maximilian the Emperor is chosen-by the greater part, but at the Turks intreaty Steven Prince of Transilvania is made King; he reigned 11 years: He takes Dansk, and useth it
hardly. Livonia  spoiled by the Muscovite; the Dane and Swede make peace at Stetin: six years war between the Danes and hamburgers, upon taking of one of the Kings Ships by them; but upon the payment of a great sum they are reconciled to the King. Venice makes a perpetual League with the Pope and Spaniard. A Plague at Venice, which killed 70000. upon the ceasing whereof a Church is built to the Redeemer, as the Senate and Duke had vowed before. The Flemings refuse to pay new Taxes; a great destruction among them by an inundation. Bergen taken by the Spaniard. Alva called home, and Medina Caeli sent Governour; the Zelanders take much booty from him; he taketh divers Towns, and returns to Spain; his successor Requiescens besiegeth Leyden twice, to no purpose; he takes divers Towns, and dieth. The Spaniards mutiny for pay, and are expelled the Country; Iohn of Austria is made Governour; Antwerp is plundred, and the Castle dismantled; Iohn retireth to Luxenburg, being proclaimed enemy to Bel∣gium; a pacification is made, and Matthias Arch-Duke of Austria becomes Governour; upon the death of Don Iohn, Alexander Farneses Prince of Parma is made Governour; he takes Mastricht, and other places; the Antwerpians drive out their Catholique Clergy; the Holland-Company, called the Gueux, take the Brill: the Hollanders make William of Nassaw Prince of Orange their Governour; he relieveth Leyden, and takes divers Towns: A general pardon to all the Belgians, except Nassaw and some others. Queen Elizabeth lendeth the Hollanders 20000 pounds; they take Gaunt, Utricht, and many other Towns; Matthias Arch-Duke is Governour a while, and resigneth to Anjou; Amsterdam and other Towns yield to the Hollanders. In England, Dacres that renewed the Rebellion, is defeated by the Lord Hunsdon; Westmerland fleeth into Flan∣ders, Northumberland beheaded at York; The Royal Exchange built; Story executed for Treason; the Duke of Norfolk beheaded; Sir Francis Drake saileth to the Indies; the Queen is Godmother to the French Kings Daughter, her Deputy was the Earl of Wor∣cester; Alenson a suiter to the Queen; she refuseth the protection of Holland, but strives to make peace there; a Rebellion in Ireland; Frobishers Voyage; Trade with Turky and Muscovy; Alenson now Duke of Anjou comes over hither; Desmond rebelleth. In Scotland, the Regent is slain; Matthew Earl of Lenox succeeds; Huntley raiseth For∣ces in the North for the Queen; the Regent takes Dunbritton Castle, and the Arch-Bishop of Saint Andrews in it, whom he hangeth for consenting to the Kings murther; The Regent is killed, and the Earl of Mar succeeds; Commissioners sent by Queen Elizabeth to examine Queen Mary upon some Articles; Queen Elizabeth gets Earle Morton to be Regent; she helpeth him; the Bishop of Rosse, Queen Maries diligent Agent, is banished England; Edenburg taken by the Protestants; Iohn of Austria practi∣seth to marry Queen Mary; the French King strives to get the young King into his custody; Morton displaced, and 12 Peers ned to the King, whereof Morton was one; difference betweene him and the re, the Lord Aubigney made a Duke by the King. In the Church sits Gregory 13. 13 years, he makes Cosmo di Medices Great-Duke of Tus∣cany; he grants to the Portugals against the Moors a Croysado; his Chappel in the Vatican which he built, stood him in 100000 Ducats. Pope Pius his Bull against Queen Elizabeth is fastned to the Bishop of Londons gate. A pacification in France pub∣lished and revoked. The Palatine Divines and Anabaptists have a Conference; the Duke of Batlen turns Protestant; Henault and Artois exclude themselves from the peace of Gaunt, and are called the Male-contents; a form of Concord drawn up by the Divines of Auspurg. Three Councels held this Decad at Milan. In the East, Sinan Bassa goeth General against the Persian, and loseth his men: the like —1580 success had Mustapha: Ferat is made General, who returneth without success. The League with the Emperour renewed for 8 years, but the Turks brake the League by invading Hungary, for which the Bassa of Buda is strangled: Sinan recalled from his banishment, and made Bassa there. Amurath is troubled with the Falling-sickness. Os∣man taketh Tauris: Cicala his Successor loseth 80000 Turks. Peace is made with the Polander and Persian. The Janisaries mutiny, and 15000 houses burnt in Constanti∣nople. Sinan displaced, and Ferat sent in his room. In the West, the Emperour sends Commissioners to Colen for setling peace in the Low-Countries, but in vain. The Ger∣mans that invaded France, are defeated by the Guises: The Polander defeats Maximi∣lian the Archduke, and takes him: A peace is made, and he set free. In France, a league is made against the King, for favouring the Protestants: upon which followeth the 7. Civil War. Divers places taken by the Guises, who oppose the King, desirous of peace. Navar and Conde excommunitated by the Pope; they prevail in Poictou: Navar gets the day at Courtray, wherein Ioyeuse is slain. Navar excluded from succession, and Conde poysoned. The Duke of Guise and the Cardinall his brother are slaine for
aspiring. Navar helpeth the King, whom the Duke de Mayne was like to surprise. Cle∣ment a Iacobin stabbeth the King. Philip of Spain expels Antony Prior of Crato, whom the Portugals had made their King; he beats the French who aided Antony. The Ter∣ceras taken by the Spaniard. The English and their ods arrested in Spain: the Eng∣lish lose some Ships in Cadiz: the Armado defeated by the English, who strive in vain to restore Antony. The Spaniard aideth the Savoyen against Geneva. The Polander beats the Muscovite, who at last surrenders Riga, and all Livonia to the Polander, and makes peace, and withall kils his son for his bad success. Dansk is reconciled to the Queen. King Steven dyeth: Maximilian Duke of Austria, is chosen by some, and Sigismund the King of Swedes son by others. In Denmark, Christiern the 4. reigneth. The Swedes take divers places from the Muscovite. The Persian sendeth to the State of Venice to league with them against the Turk. The Malteses trouble the Turks in the Venetian seas, for which Venice and the Knights fall out. Venice sends to Amurath 400 slaves with 800000 Ducats, who was angry for the wrong done to the Vice-roys wife of Algiere, by Gabriel Heme, in her passage to Constantinople, which Heme also they execu∣ted. The States totally reject King Philip's Government. Anjou made Duke of Brabant, Marquiss of the holy Empire, and Earl of Flanders. The Prince of Orange shot. Divers Towns taken by the States. The Duke resignes the places he had taken, and returns to France. Orange is murthered by one Gerard: Maurice his second son chosen Governour; the elder was a prisoner in Spain. Queen Elizabeth becomes Protector of the Low-Countries; who for her money lent, receiveth some cautionary Towns. Leicester sent Lieutenant-Governor; he takes some places, and returns: the States dislike him. The Hollanders take divers places. Tournay taken by the Duke of Parma. The Spani∣ards take divers Towns, and recover Dunkirk, Gaunt, Brussels, Antwerp, Grave and Venlo. Divers Forts betrayed to the Duke, he is driven from the siege of Bergen-up-Zoom. The Spaniards assist Desmond, and are driven out of Ireland. The Lord Grey suppresseth the Rebels. A Proclamation in England against Seminaries and Jesuites. Antonio of Portugal cometh into England. Campian put to death. The King of Denmark made Knight of the Garter. Guise plotteth Queen Maries delivery. Throgmorton executed. Desmond slain: Northumberland confined; Arundel sent to the Tower: Northumberland found dead in the Tower, being shot: 14 executed for Treason. Drake takes some places from the Spaniard: Drake, Norris and Essex sent to aide Antonio of Portugal: the Queen supplyeth Navar with men and money. In Scotland, Morton is imprisoned be∣ing accused of Treason: the Duke of Lenox unjustly accused by the Ministers: Morton beheaded for being accessary to the Kings death. The Ruthens imprison the King, and force him to recall Angus: the King is set free, confineth Angus: Gowry executed for Treason. Arran and Fernihurst invade Ireland; Bingham subdueth their forces. Queen Mary beheaded. The King marryeth the King of Denmarks daughter, and goeth thi∣ther himself. In the Church, Gregory yet sits: He sets free the Master of Malta, whom the King had imprisoned, and reformeth the Calendar; which occasioned some troubles in Poland. To him succeedeth Sixtus 5. 5 years, his father was a Swine-herd: He removed the Obelisk into the Vatican, and there erected a new Library: he made his young Ne∣phew a Cardinal, and gives him 10000 crowns revenue: He left behinde him 10 Millions; he had a Statue erected to him. The new Calendar rejected by the Duke of Saxony: it occasioneth troubles at Auspurg, and Riga in Livonia: The Pro∣testant Princes meet at Luneburg; the Churches of Poland, Russia and Lituania agree in the points of Religion, wherein they had heretofore disagreed. In the East, The Turks break the league in Hungary; the Emperour complains: Amu∣rath pretends ignorance: The Bassa of Bosna taketh Whitz, the chief City of Croatia, 1590— and murthereth 65000 Christians in the hills. He intercepteth 150 Waggons and money sent to relieve Croatia; at Siseg he is slain with 18000 Turks by the Imperia∣lists: the Turks take and lose many Towns, and villages. 30000 Tartars taken by Christians, with many places: Valachia, and other places revolt from the Turk. To Amurath succeeded his son Mahomet 3. 9 years: He strangleth 18 of his brothers, and Ferat Bassa, for the loss of Strigon: he wins and loseth divers places and men: the Turks kill 20000 Christians, being too eager in loading themselves with the plunder of Karesta, where 60000 Turks were slain. The Vayvod of Valachia having revolt∣ed from the Turk, burneth Nicopolis. Varadin in Transilvania relieved by Basta the Em∣perours Lieutenant. The Turks and Valachians infest each others Territories. The
Cardinal of Transylvania leagueth with the Turk; the Bassa of Agria beaten, and of Buda taken. In the West, the Germans league with Transylvania against the Turk; the Prince of Transylvania resigneth to the Emperour for Silesia, but repents, and returns home, where he resignes to his Uncle, the Cardinal, whom the Vayvod of Valachia kil∣led in fight, for leaguing with the Turk, and recovers Transylvania to the Empire, and is made Governour thereof. In France, Henry 4. of Navar reigneth 21 years, he defeats De Mayne; it is held Treason by the Parliament of Rohan to side with the King, who takes Chartres and Noyon, defeats the Savoyen, and besiegeth Rohan; the President of Paris strangled by the Tribunes; Duke Ioyeuse drowned, and 300 of the League slaine in Languidoc; the King becomes Catholique, upon which many Leaguers fall off to him; he is Crowned, and most places submit; Guise is reconciled to him; the Jesuits banished, for a stroke given to the King by one of them; the King defeats the Spaniards in Picardy; De Mayne and Nemours reconciled to him; Ioyeuse made Admiral; Marselles prised for him; Amiens recovered; a League with England and Holland; Callais resto∣red upon peace with the Spaniard; Britain submits, and so the Civil War ends. At Nante, the Edict of Pacification for exercise of the Protestant Religion; the King is divorced from Queen Margaret, and marrieth Katherine de Medices; Duke Ioyeuse be∣comes a Capuchin: Cardinal Albertus, the Emperours youngest son, is made Gover∣nour o Portugal, and Archbishop of Toledo: Another Spanish Fleet miscarrieth at the Cape of Saint Vincent: To King Philip succeeded his son Philip 3. 24 years. Amiens taken by the Cardinal Albert, who married Isabella the Infanta: Sigismund King of Po∣land swears to receive the Confession of Auspurg, before he is admitted to the Swedish Crown; he conquereth Moldavia, and is deposed in Swevia. In Hungary many Turks slain; At Alba Regalis, the Governour of Rab executed for surrendring it to the Turk; many Towns lost and won; Rab recovered, with some other Townes. The Swedes and Tartars beaten by the Muscovite; peace made with him. Charles the King of Swedes Uncle is Governour of Suevia. Sigismund cometh with an Army against Charles, who taketh Calmaria, and subdueth Finland: The Usoques out of Dalmatia and Hungary notable Pyrats. To Parma in Flanders succeeded Peter Ernest Duke of Austria, brother to Rodulph the Emperour; the States refuse his proffer of peace; to him succeedeth Arch-Duke Albert, he takes Calais and Hulst, with Amiens; Grave Maurice defeats him; the King bestowes Belgium and Burgoin on Albert, with the Infanta his wife; the Spa∣niard takes divers places in Frisland and Cleve; Maurice made Lieutenant-Generall of the united Provinces; he takes Breda, and other places; A Councel of Estate set up, where∣in the Queen was to have two Councellors; Prince of Orange released in Spain; the Grave taketh 11 Towns in 3 months; one Panne is executed for attempting to kill the Grave; the States prohibited from trading in Spain; they trade into the East-Indies. Queen Elizabeth furnisheth the French King with money, and procureth peace of the Turk to Poland; Grevil fighteth the Spanish Fleet: The Voyages of Cavendish to the Straits of Magellain, and of Lancaster to the East-Indies; Raleigh's Expedition into America and Guiana; Tyr-Oens Rebellion; the Thames dry; Farnanbuc taken by Lancaster; Cadiz taken by Essex; Mac Hugh the Irish-Rebel slain; the French King made Knight of the Garter; the English Expedition to the Azores at Black-water; the English defeated by Tyr-Oen; Essex parlieth with him; he is committed to the Lord Keeper. In Scot∣land, Bothwel attempteth the Kings chamber, he is proclaimed Traytor, and some of his Pages hanged; Huntley kills Murry, for harbouring Bothwel; he fleeth into England, returns and rebelleth again. In the Church sits Urban 7. 12 dayes, then Gregory 14. 10 moneths; he excommuni∣cates the French King; succeeded Innocent 9. 2 moneths, then Clement 8. 13 years; he absolves the French King: Ferrara being escheated to the Pope for want of Heirs, a war ensueth with Caesar Estensis about it, which shortly after was taken up. Pro∣testanism in Saxony is forsaken; the Protestants are persecuted in Styria and Carin∣thia, but permitted in France. Hacket, for blasphemy, is hanged. In the East, the Turk and Persian quarrel; Alba Regalis lost; Hassan Bassa, and his Army —1600 of 60000 overthrown; the Wines in Constantinople staved upon a sedition of the Janisa∣saries, but some wine was allowed to the Christian Ambassadors: Basta defeats the Va∣lachians, and 2 Bassa's; Ali Bassa surprised with 200 Waggons and 70000 Ducats by the Heyducks; Alba recovered, and Pest lost; Mahomet strangleth his son, and drowneth his mother for treason; his son Achmat succeedeth 13 years; the Turks defeated twice in Asia by their Rebels; Pest and Hatwan lost to the
Turk; Tauris recovered by  the Persian; some Towns taken in Hungary: the Persian defeats two Bassa's: the Bassa of Aleppo rebelleth, he defeats two Bassa's, takes Tripolis and Damascus, and leagueth with the Persian: The Turk makes peace with the Emperor for 20 years: The Bassa's of Agria and Buda are put to death, for striving to break the peace; the Turks are spoiled at Sea by the Duke of Florence. In the West, Basta beats the Transylvanian, and kills the Vayvod of Valachia, for intending to call in the Turk. Basta is thrust out by the Prince, who at last submits to Basta, and swears fealty to the Emperour; Basta subdueth the rebellious Transylvanians: The Emperour and Persian league against the Turk. Botscay winneth some part of Transylvania; he makes his peace with the Emperour, and obtaineth Transylvania to him and his Heirs: The Catholike Clergy wronged by Donaward a free City, therefore it is proscribed and taken by the Duke of Bavaria. The Jesuites Colledge and Library burnt at Vienna. Transylvania rebelleth again, and makes Gabriel Battori their Governour; upon the Duke of Iuliers death without Heirs, Brandeburg and Newburg lay claim to it: The Bishop of Strasburg is sent thither by the Emperour, and expels their Governours: The French subdue Savoy, because the Mar∣quisat of Salusses is not, according to promise, restored: The Dukes peace is made by Cardinal Aldobrandin. The French Embassadours doors broken open in Spain, and his Nephew imprisoned, but he is released again. Byron executed for Treason: League renewed with the Switzers: Traffique forbidden into Spain and Flanders, upon a new Impost there. Father Cotton gets the Jesuites to be restored. Count Avergne once pardoned, falls to new practises, and is imprisoned. Marselles like to be betrayed to the Spaniard, whereupon the Governour of Provence is execu∣ted. The revenues of Navar united to the Crown of France. At Bolloign the Treaty of peace between France and Spain is broken off, for precedency: Spain makes peace with England. Nottingham arriveth in Spain, to take the Kings Oath to the peace: A peace also is made with the Hollander for 12 years. In Poland, about some troubles raised by the Jesuites, the Lords meet at Lublyn about Toleration of Religion, who are suddenly surprised by the King, and many of them slain. Hungary is wasted by the Tartars; di∣vers Towns lost. The Turk sendeth Botscay the Crown of Hungary, taken from La∣dislaus. Botscay repents his league with the Turk, and dieth. The Turk takes divers Townes in Hungary; the Emperour resigneth Hungary to his brother Matthias. Ex∣ercise of Protestantism granted to Austria. In Swethland, Charles is declared King, he attempteth Livonia in vain; His Bastard-son is taken by the Polander; He besiegeth Riga in vain, and loseth 9000 men; he loseth the Castle of Wessenstein, and recovers it again. The King of Denmark commeth to Hamburg, and taketh the Oath of Allegiance of them. Matthias is chosen King of Bohemia by the Lords: Liberty of Conscience granted to the Bohemians and Silesians. The Venetians league with the Grisons, and forbid building of more Monasteries and giving Lands to the Clergy, which Act had been made An. 1337. and now revived; they are hated by the Pope for this Act, and by the Spaniard for their League with the Grisons: They make an Edict against the Jesuites, and are excommunicated, which they slight, and raise an Army for their de∣fence. Cardinal Ioyeuse is sent from France to compose the difference, at last the pri∣soners are set free, and they absolved; they protect and enrich such as had written in their defence: The Arch-Duke is defeated neer to Newport: The Admiral of Arragon being taken, is exchanged for the Hollanders imprisoned in Spain: Ostend besieged by Albert. 6 Gallies of Spinola sunk by the Hollanders and English; he is slain, and his 8 Gallies defeated: Ambrose Spinola, to revenge his brothers death, aideth Albert at Ostend; after almost 4 years siege, and the loss of 72900 men in the Town, and great numbers in the field, Ostend yieldeth on composition: Spinola takes divers Towns, but faileth of Bergen and Grave: The Netherlanders acknowledged free States by Albert: Many Towns taken by the Hollander and Spaniard; The States aide Embden against their Earle: Hertogenbush besieged by Maurice in vain; Sluce taken from the Arch-Duke; some Spaniards fall off to the States; Maurice faileth of his design against Ant∣werp; Embden and the Earle reconciled; The Hollander beats the Spaniard in the Straits, and the Portugals in the Indies. The Lord Montjoy doth good service in Ire∣land; Essex beheaded; difference between English and Danes about Trade; Commissi∣oners sent into Denmark; the Spaniards land in Ireland; Tyr-Oen submitteth: Queen Elizabeth dieth; King Iames succeedeth 22 years: Tyr-Oen is restored by him; Ra∣leigh, Grey, and Cobham attainted for Treason; some Priests put to death; the Gun∣powder-Treason; the King of Denmark cometh into England; an Insurrection upon Inclosures; Virginia planted; the New-Exchange built.
In the Church, Leo 11. sits 26 dayes: then Paul 5. 16 years; He quarrels with the Venetians. Du-Plessis disputeth with the Bishop of Eureux. At Ratisbone the Jesu∣ites dispute with the Lutherans. The Duke of Savoy expels the Protestants: the Poland-Jesuites burn a Protestant-Church. Marpurg reformed. Liberty of Con∣science in Hungary. An Archbishoprick erected in the Philippina's. In the East, the Persian invadeth Babylon, defeateth Nassus Bassa, and kills 20000 Turks. —1610 Achmats Fleet sent against Florence and Malta. 200000 die at Constantinople in one year of the plague. 42 Turkish Gallies defeated by the Florentine, who took one Gally with 300 slaves. A Dervisar flingeth a stone at the Turk, and is executed. The Tartar invadeth Moldavia. Peace between the Turk and Persian. The Jewes expelled Pera. Holland trades with the Turk. The Florentine and Sicilian takes some places and Gallies from the Turks. The Bassa of Sidn flieth to Florence with 14000. l. weight of gold. A Rebellion in Asia and Arabia. Nassuffe the Bassa executed for intelligence with Persia. Two rich Turkish Gallies taken by the Florentine. Iacaia, Mahomet 3. his supposed son, joyns with the Asian Rebels. Mustapha, Achmets brother, ruleth two moneths; he sets free the Persian Ambassador, and imprisoneth the French, upon the escape of Coresky the Moldavian; he is thrust into a Cel, and Achmet his son ruleth; he sets free the French Ambassador, and makes peace with Persia. Manfredonia in Sicily lost to the Turk, with the Isle of Ivisa. In the West, Iuliers is given by the Emperor to the Duke of Saxony; Iuliers taken by Grave-Maurice. To Rodulph succeeded in the Empire his brother Matthias 8 years. Spinola takes Aken and Wesel, and beats down the Fort of Mulheim. The Hollanders invade Munster and Paderborn. The Jewes expelled Wormes, and their Synagogue burnt. Francfort rebelleth against their Magistrates. A Luthran-Jubile kept. The Emperor dieth, to whom succeeds Ferdinand his brother. K. Henry of France slain by Ravilliac; his son Lewis 13. succeedeth, his mother Regent; the Kings heart is interred by the Jesuites: Rohan seiseth on S. Iohn de Angeli; Conde leaveth the Court; Vendosme imprisoned, and escapeth; The Jewes banished France; Rohan and the Protestants take arms; Anchore made Master of the Horse, and Gover∣nor of Normandy; Conde imprisoned; Anchore's house spoiled, and his treasure seised on by the people; he is slain, and his wife executed. France helpeth Savoy against Spain; Espernon joyneth forces with the Queen, they are reconciled to the King, and Conde released. Peace between Spain and Savoy. 900000 Moors expelled Spain, after 900 years possession. The Spaniard helps the Duke of Mantua against Savoy, for the Mar∣quisat of Montferrat. The Polander beats the Muscovite, and takes Smolensco. The Dukedome of Borussia confirmed by the Polander on Brandeburg and his heirs-male. The Polander beaten in Valachia and Muscovy; Smolensco recovered by the Muscovite. A Rebellion in Poland. Podolia wasted by the Tartars; who upon the outrages of the Cossakes, burn 4 Cities, 400 Villages in Podolia, and carry away much plunder. In Hungary, the Traitors that conspired against Battori, are executed. Sigismund Battori dieth, and the Empresse crowned Queen; Gabr. Battori slain, and Bethlem Gabor made Prince by the Turk. Steven Vayvod of Moldavia tyranniseth, is taken and sent with Prince Alexander, his mother and brother, to Constantinople, who for feare re∣nounced Christ. The Heyducks beat the Turks. Ferdinand is crowned King of Hungary, and then Bethlem Gabor. The Dane takes Calmaria from the Swedes; they waste Norway. The Lubekers beat the Danes at sea. Calmaria is restored, and peace with the Swedes is made. New Impositions raised in the Sound. The Hollanders help Lubec. The Swede leagueth with the Dane against Poland. To Charles of Swedeland succeeded his son Gustavus Adolphus: He gaineth upon the Dane and Muscovite. King Iames makes peace between the Swede and Muscovite. Great troubles in Bohemia. A Protestant Church built in Prague. The Emperor and Archduke of Austria crowned at Prague. The Protestants cast three of the Emperors Councellors out of a window, and league with Moravia, Silesia, and Lusatia. Bucquoy invadeth Bohemia. Frederick the Palsgrave chosen King. Venice aideth Mantua against Savoy; they have war with Ferdinand of Austria, they are aided by the Hollanders; they make peace with Ferdinand; Treason against them discovered, and the Traitors executed. The Archduke stayes the Turkish Ambassador going to the States; and they arrest his mony, sent to pay his garrisons. The Spaniard and Hollander fight at the Cape of S. Vincent; the Hollander lost their Admiral, and the Spaniard 3 ships and 1500 men. Grave-Maurice made Knight of the Garter. 27 Spanish ships going to the Indies, defeated by the Hollanders; they take the Castle of Mina in the South-sea; they secure the passage on the River Ems, by building two Forts. Spilberg beats the Spaniard and Portugal. The Cautionary Towns redeemed. Maurice succeedeth to
Philip in the principality of Orange. A Synod at Dort. Bernevelt executed. King Iames is visited by the Lantgrave of Hesse. The Lord Zanchir hanged. Queen Mary's body removed from Peterburgh to Westminster. The Palsgrave married to the Lady Elizabeth. The Londoners make a Plantation in Ireland. The English plant in Bermudas. The King of Denmark's second coming hither. Middle∣ton's-Water brought into London. Sutton's-Hospital founded. Overbury poysoned. Spalato cometh hither. King Iames goeth into Scotland. Raleigh executed. Queen Anne dieth. In the Church, Paul sitteth yet: He sends the Emperor a golden Rose beset with rich Gems. Bellarmine's and Marian's Books of the Popes power condemned at Paris. Mulheim built by the Protestants, who were expelled Colen. Newburg becomes a Papist. The Protestant Princes meet at Norimberg. Silesia petitioneth the Emperor for continuance of Protestantism; the Bishop of Uratislavia persecutes them; the Emperor intercedes for them. Arminius and Vorstius make troubles in Holland. A Synod called at Dort. In the East, the Turks take Vatz in Hungary, against the peace; Osman is strangled by the 1620— Janisaries, whom he meant to extirpate; Prince Coresky strangled in prison; Mustapha advanced again; peace with Poland; At Babylon a rebellion, and at Arzirum, and in Mesopotamia: The Bassa of Arzirum threateneth Constantinople; the Janisaries refuse to oppose him: Mustapha is removed, and Amurath 4. Osmans son advanced: Babylon taken by the Persian: the Cossacks trouble the Black-sea and Bosphorus: Abassa is pacified, having threatned Constantinople, and defeats the Persians: 20000 Turks de∣feated at Babylon: the King of Tartaria expelled by his brother: the Janisaries quar∣rel with the Grand-Signior. In the West, the Duke of Bavaria defeateth the Bohe∣mians; the Emperor nullifieth the election of the Palatine to Bohemia; the Palatine with Brandeburg and others proscribed; Spire wasted by Mansfield, and the Palatinate by Bavaria and the Spaniards; Bucquoi killed; Mansfield proscribed; Westphalia, Pe∣derborn, and Strasburg wasted by the Duke of Brunswick, who loseth an arm in battel; Manheim and Heidelberg taken; Bavaria made Elector; Gabor invadeth Austria; Bruns∣wick beaten by Tilly; Frankendale submitteth; Saxon-Wymar and Anhalt made friends with the Emperor; Tilly spoileth Brunswick; Mansfield defeated; the Boors of Austria rebell; the Imperialists take many places; A Church and Monastery neer Prague be∣gun by the Emperor; the Palsgraves eldest son drowned. In France, the King takes many Towns from the Protestants, and makes war for the Valtoline; 250 houses burnt in Paris; Soubize defeated at sea by Montmorency; Vendosme and the Great Prior of France, (Henry 4. his bastards) are imprisoned; Forts built by the King against Rochel; the Isle of Ree lost, and regained; Nevers claimeth the Dutchy of Mantua, he is assisted by the French against the Spaniard; the King takes Rochel, and sends his Army for Mantua. In Spain, Philip 4. reigneth: Troubles in Mexico setled; Brasil recovered by the Spaniard from the Hollander: the Tartars do much hurt in Podolia: the Swedes beat the Polanders in Livonia, but the Polanders defeat the Tartars in Borussia; peace be∣tween Poland and Swethland: much of Hungary subdued by Gabor; he disclaimeth it, and makes peace: The Cossacks take Newstadt: Buda almost burnt to the ground: Ferdinand 3. the Emperors son, crowned King of Hungary: Bergen in Norway almost consumed with fire. The King of Denmark is Generall of the united Princes against the Emperor; he is endangered by a fall from his horse; he defeateth, and is defeated. Iutland and most of Holst subdued by the Duke of Fridland; Stralsnd besieged by the Caesarians; Newstadt attempted in vain by the Danes; Livonia and Curland submit to the Swede; the King of Swedes takes divers Towns; Swedeland setled on the Kings Daughter; he takes Strasburg, and besiegeth Thorn, and makes peace with Poland. In Bohemia, the Jesuites are restored; many of the Lords executed. Silesia submits to the Emperor; Ferdinand 3. is crowned King of Bohemia; The Nobility commanded to forsake Religion, by a certain day. The Venetians make a League offensive and de∣fensive with the Turks. The Spaniards besiege Sluce and Bergen. Breda taken, and divers other Towns: the Dunkirkers take many Holland and English ships; the Hollanders take Hertogenbush; Bernevets sons in Holland degraded; Grotius escapeth in a Trunk; Bergen relieved; Antwerp attempted by Orange in vaine; Mansfield taketh Embden. Prince Maurice dieth; his brother Henric succcedeth. Baiae in Brasil lost and taken. In Leyden and Amsterdam, a sedition by the Arminians and Calvinists. The Hollanders rob the Spaniards in America, and take divers of their ships. Peace between England and France: The Bishop of Spalato returns: Prince Charles goeth into Spaine: Mansfield commeth into England. King Iames
dieth; His  sonne Charles succeedeth: An Expedition to Cadiz: English ships arrested in France: The Duke of Buckingham murthered: peace with France: New-England planted. In the Church, Gregory 15. sits 2 years. To him succeeded Urban 8. The Archbishop of Spalato's Body burnt at Rome. At Tiran in the Valtolin, the Protestants are mas∣sacred in the Church; they are banished Bohemia. The Jesuites restored to Prague; The Protestant-Church there given to the Carmelites. The Protestants driven out of Austria, and the Country of Henault punished for receiving them. Amsterdam and Leyden persecute the Arminians. At Vienna is instituted the Order of She-Jesuits. The Protestants banished out of Iuliers. Heidelburg and Glogovia become Popish. In the East, the Turks defeat the Christian Fleet at Neapolis, and carry away 800 captives: At Babylon they are beaten by the Persians, but shortly after recover their losses: —1630 peace made between the Turk and Persian. At Constantinople, the Turk draweth a great summe of mony from the Christians: the French Ambassador troubled about his Chappel: A Venetian Merchant, for looking on the Seraglio through his Per∣spective, is hanged. The Bassa of Aleppo beheaded; and war denounced against Poland. The Turks take Babylon, with the losse of 40000 Persian horse. The Sultan removes to Aleppo, because of the plague. A Fleet is sent against the Cossacks. Sias Abas the Parthian King, husband to 800 wives, dieth. A third part of Constantinople burnt. The Turks waste Illyria: The Beglerbeg of Greece rebelleth. In the West, Hanovia besieged by the Caesarians, and relieved: The Swede invadeth the Isle Rugia: Magdeburg besieged: The Empresse crowned at Ratisbone: Tilly wastes Thuringia, and fights the Swedish King at Lipsic, where 9000 Caesarians were slain; Tilly being wounded, flieth to Hall. Frederick loseth Bohemia. Wolstein Duke of Fridland taketh Prague. The Swedes march into Bavaria. Ratisbone besieged, and after 465 sallies is taken by Ferdinand 3. At the Pacification of Prague, the Saxon, Brandeburg, Luneburg, and Vinarien joyn with the Emperor. Ferdinand 3. chosen King of the Romans, and the yeare following Emperor. Ramsey is taken by Count Nassau. At Hanovia divers encounters between the Imperialists and Swedes, and divers Towns taken by both parties. The French King and his brother the Duke of Orleans reconciled. A League between France and Swethland. The French invade the Grisons; the French aid the States: France is invaded; the Queen-mother flieth to Amsterdam. Isabella the Infanta dieth at Brussels: The Spaniards have a great losse in America: Ferdinand the Cardinal, Infant of Spaine, prevailes at Norlingen; He is made Governor of Brabant. The Spaniards beaten by the Hollanders. The French cut off at Fontaralie. The Spanish Fleet on the English shore, overthrown by the Hollanders. Poland makes peace with the Turk: in the kingdome, Ladislaus 4. succeedeth to his father Sigismund. The Polanders and Muscovits defeated: peace between Poland and Swethland. The King of Poland comes to Vienna; The Queen of Swethland comes to Frankfort. Wars in Hungary. The Swedish King killed, having left one Daughter Christina to succeed him. Spinola the Spanish Generall dieth. The Prince of Orange makes an Expedition into Flanders. Horn takes Colberg; and the Swedish King, not long before his death, Francfort upon the Oder. Tilly, after many Victories, dieth at Ingolstadt. Fridland is murthered. Germany wasted with the sword, plague and famine. The Hollanders take some places in Brasil. Skenk-Sconce retaken by the States. Breda taken by Orange. The Hollanders beaten neer Antwerp. 60000 de∣stroyed by an Earthquake in Calabria. At Messina, 300 perished in a Church over∣thrown by an Earthquake. In England, a peace is made with Spain: King Charles sends to the Emperor for restitution of the Palatinate: Three Nuncio's sent by the Pope, are received into the Queens Court honorably. The English Lyturgie sent into Scotland, occasioned much mischiefe: The Scots Presbyterians enter into a Covenant, and raise Arms: Preparation in England and Ireland against them, both by Sea and Land. In the Church, Pope Urban sitteth yet: He exhorteth the Christian Princes to peace, and falls out with the Venetians about their dominion in the Adriatick sea. The Jesuites at Vienna keep a Jubile. In Scotland, a Synod is held at Glascow. At Rome, such a Storm brake out with Darknesse, that at mid day they were forced to light candles. Divers meetings and Synods held this Decad in Germany among the Pro∣testants: But whilst the Princes were consulting at Lipsic, Magdeburg is taken and destroyed by Tilly.
AND thus (Good Reader) in this History and Chronologie, as in two small Maps, thou mayest behold the Microcosme of Mankinde, in so many Hundred years, acting over & over again the same Tragi-Comedies: Thou seest new Persons and Visards, but the same Scene, and the same Things acted: Thou mayest behold from hence, as Charon did from the top of Parnassus in Lucian, a Clod of Earth full of Bee-hives, an Ant-hill full of Emmets, or a Pool full of Bubbles, some bigger, some lesser, puff'd with aire, and tossed up and down with winds, till they all break, and turn into their original Vapours. And what is it thou seest acted here? Nothing almost but Treacheries, Murthers, Incests, Adulteries, Thefts, Perjuries, Oppressions, Imprisonments, Cares, Watchings, Travellings, Underminings of one another; Princes tyrannizing over their People, Subjects rebelling against their Princes; one Prince thrusting out another, and People quarrelling one with another: Thou seest here Perigrinations, Navigations, Toylings, Battels, Law-suits, and a thou∣sand such Vexations, all for an Handfull of Earth: In a word; we see here in∣numerable Nests of Wasps and Hornets, destroying one another with their stings. And what is the cause of all this mischief? Truly, Pride, Ambition, Covetousnesse, Sacrilege, Tyrannie, Drunkennesse, Whoredoms, Whimsical opinions in Religion, Self-love, every one thinking his own dreams to be oracles, and his conceited fancies to be Inspirations; And above all things, Injustice, for which the World hath suffered so many changes: Iustice is the Pillar on which States and Kingdoms stand; Re∣move that, and down falls the Temple of all Government: Iustice is the Sun that illuminates all Societies; Extinguish that, and what will follow but storms, clouds, and darknesse? Iustice is the Band that ties People to their Governours, and every man to another; when this Band is broken, nothing follows but Confusion: Iustice is the Life of all States and Dominions, which live no longer then they are just; Nothing discriminates Kingdomes and States from Conventicles of Thieves and Robbers, but Iustice; Remota Justicia, quid aliud sunt Regna quàm magna Latrocinia? Lastly, In this Chronologie, a in an Epitomie, you shall see all the Heretical Opinions which have been spued o in so many Ages, now greedily lick'd up by the Fanatical spirits of this Age. GOD open our eyes, that we may at length see the Truth, and may with one heart and one mind embrace it; and that the Spirit of Truth, which our blessed Saviour promised to his Church, may lead us into all Truth. Amen.
A Catalogue of the Universities of Christendom, and of the Time of their Foundations. Ann. Christ. 636 OF Cambridge, enlarged by Sigibert King of the East-Angles but erected long before. 640 Of Lindaffern in Northumberland, founded by Oswald. 792 Of Paris, founded by Charles the Great, at the desire of Alcuin and Bede; and shortly after, he founded the Uni∣versity of Papia. 809 Of Tholouse, having the same priviledges with the Univer∣sity of Paris. 830 Of Lyons, founded by the Greeks. 895 Of Oxford, founded by Elfred. 926 Of Lovain in Brabant, founded by Iohn Duke of Brabant. 1145 Of Rhemes, founded in the Councel there; it was enlarged afterward by Charls Guise Cardinal of Lorain, in the year 1560. 1196 Of Montpeler in France; It was first erected for the Law, now for Physick. 1209 Of Palenza, founded by Alphonsus of Castile, and removed to Salamanca by Ferdinand of Castile, 1240. 1216 Of Naples, founded by Frederick 2. 1221 Of Padua, by Frederick the Emperor, who removed that of Bononia thither. 1227 Of Bourges, by S. Lewis. 1236 Of Vienna, founded by Frederick the Emperor. 1290 Of Perusia, a City in Hetruria. 1306 Of Conimbria, by Dionysius King of Portugal. 1312 Of Orleans, founded by Philip the Fair, King of France. 1316 Of Ferara, by Albert Duke of that place. 1310 Of Cadurzis, or Quercy in France, by Iohn 22. 1339 Of Pisa, it was afterward enlarged an. 1487. by Laurence de Medices, and then by Cosino, 1543. 1346 Of Heidelberg, by Robert the Red, Palsgrave. 1349 Of Anjou, by Lewis Duke of Anjou and King of Sicily; it was afterward en∣larged by Charles 5. of France, an. 1364. 1360 Of Prague in Bohemia, by Charles 4. Emperor and King of Bohemia. 1364 Of Cracovia by Casimir; Iagello enlarged it, an. 1400. 1387 Of Sena in Etruria; Pope Pius 2. enlarged it. 1388 Of Colen, by the Senate; Urban 6. confirmed it. 1389 Of Avignon, by the Popes that resided there. 1390 Of Erford in Thuringia; it was founded before by Dagobert the French King, Boniface 9. enlarged it. 1403 Of Wiritzburg, by Iohn the Bishop; his successor Iulius enlarged it. 1404 Of Salamanca, where Pope Clement 5. appointed the Hebrew, Chaldee, and Arabick to be read. 1409 Of Leipsic in Misnia, by Frederick 1. Elector of Saxony. 1411 Of S. Andrews in Scotland, by King Alexander and his sister Isabel. 1412 Of Turin in Savoy, by Duke Lewis. 1415 Of Rostock, by Iohn and Albert Dukes of Meckelburg, and the Senate. 1418 Of Caen in Normandy, by king Henry 5. of England. 1426 Of Dola in Burgundy, by Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy. 1431 Of Poyctiers, by Charles 7. 1438 Of Florence, by Cosmo di Medices, who sent for learned men thither out of Greece and other places, and erected a famous Library. 1454 Of Glascow in Scotland. 1456 Of Grypswald in Pomeran. begun by D. Uratislaus, and finished by D. Philip, 1547. 1459 Of Basil, by Pope Pius 2.
1460 Of Friburg in Brisgovia, by Albert Archduke of Austria. 1472 Of Ingolstadt in Bavaria, by Lewis, and his son George Dukes of Bavare. 1475 Of Valenciens, by Lewis. 1477 Of Tubing in the Dukedome of Wittenberg, by D. Eberard. 1480 Of Aberden in Scotland, by W. Elphinston B. of Aberden, enlarged since by the E. Marshal of Scotland, and Senat of Aberden. 1482 Of Mentz, by the Archbishop Dietherus. 1491 Of Munster in Westphalia, by the Bishop there. 1498 Of Copenhagen in Denmark, by King Iohn there. 1500 Of Toledo, by the Archbishop. 1502 Of Wittenberg in Saxony, by Frederick the Elector. 1506 Of Francfort upon Oder, by Ioachim Elector of Brandeburg. 1517 Of Complutum, by Ximenes Archbishop of Toledo. 1517 Of Sevil, by Roderick of Sancta Aelia. 1518 Of Granado, by Ferdinand of Calabria. 1526 Of Marpurg in Hassia, by Philip the Lantgrave. 1538 Of Strasburg, by Iohn Sturmius. 1540 Of Bezancan in Burgundy, by Charls 5. 1541 Of Evera in Portugal, by Henry the Archbishop. 1544 Of Reimont in Borussia, by Albert Marquesse of Brandeburg. 1548 Of Iene in Thuring, by Iohn Elector of Saxony. 1562 Of Doway in Artois, founded, by King Philip 2. 1564 Of Dillengen in Swedeland, by Cardinal Otho Bishop of Auspurg. 1575 Of Leyden, by William Prince of Orange, and the States of Holland. 1576 Of Helmestadt or Iulia, by Iulius D. of Brunswick. 1581 Of Franequer, by the Estates of Frisia. 1581 Of Altorf in Bavaria, by the Norimbergers. 1591 Of Dublin in Ireland, by Queen Elizabeth. 1592 Of Venice, enriched with a Greek Library by Cardinal Bessarion, which cost 30000. crowns 5 yet I finde that before this time, there were famous Profes∣sors in Venice, as Emanuel Chrysolorus, Hermolaus Barbarus, Egnatius, Caelius Secundus, and divers others. 1607 Of Giessen, by Lewis Lantgrave of Hesse; it was united to Marpurg, Ann. 1626. 1614 Of Groning in Frisland. 1616 Of Paderburn, by Theodore the Bishop. 1620 Of Renthen in the Principality of Schaumberg, by Prince Ernest. 1629 Of Alba Iulia or Fayrwar in Transilvania, by Bethlem Gabor.
A List of the different sorts of Knights in Christendome, and the Times of their Institution. Ann. Christ. 738 OF Gennetae or Jennettae in France, instituted by Charls Martel, upon the driving out of the Moors, or in honour of his Wife Jean: The Moors they called Gennets or Wesels. 930 Of S. Andrew or the Thistle in Scotland. 1070 Of the Knights of the Dog in France, by Philip the First: 1090 Of S. John of Jerusalem, or Hospitallers for entertaining of Pilgrims. 1117 Of Knights Templars in Syria, to suppresse the robbing of Pilgrims. 1119 Of the Knights of our Saviour, by Alphonsus the First. 1134 Of Knights of the Lily in Navar, by Garciaz. 1161 Of the Knights of Calatrava, by Sancho the Brave of Castile. 1165 Of Montjoy, founded in Syria. 1170 Of S. James in Castile, by Ferdinand son to Peter Albert. 1192 Of Knights Teutonicks, as an addition to the Templars and Hospitallers, by Henry Walpot. 1203 Of Warfare of Christ, in Livonia, by Albert Bishop of Riga. 1213 Of Portglaive in Livonia, by Innocent 3. 1213 Of the Knights of Avis in Portugal, by Alphonsus King there. 1218 Of the Knights of Alcantara, by Ferdinand 3. King of Leon. 1233 Of the Knights of the Virgin Mary, by Bartholomew of Vicenry. 1279 Of the Knights of S. George in Carinthia, by Rodulph the Emperour. 1301 Of the Knights of the Annunciado in Savoy, by Amadeus 6. 1317 Of Warfare of Christ, in Portugal, by Dionysius King there; upon the destruction of the Templars. 1318 Of Monteca and S. George in Arragon, by James King there. 1321 Of Christ Jesus, in Portugal, by King Dionysius. 1322 Of Knights of La Calza in Venice. 1330 Of S. Mark in Venice, which seems to be the same with La Calza. 1332 Of Knights of the Band in Spain, by Alphonsus King of Castile. 1343 Of the Garter and Round-Table at Windsor, by King Edward. 1350 Of the Star, by King John of France. 1381 Of Knights of the Dove in Castile, by John 1. 1429 Of Knights De la Scama in Spain, by John 2. King of Castile. 1430 Of the Golden-fleece, by Philip D. of Burgundy. 1450 Of Knights of the Ear of Corne in Britain, by Francis 1. 1451 Of Knights of S. Maurice in Savoy, by Pope Faelix 5. and D. of Savoy. 1469 Of S. Michael in France, by Lewis 11. 1531 Of Knights of the Rhodes, transplanted to Malta by the Pope and Emperour. 1534 Of Knights of the Burgundian-Crosse, by Charls 5. 1561 Of Knights of S. Steven in Tuscany, by Cosmo di Medices. 1579 Of Knights of the Holy-Ghost in France, by King Henry 3. 1608 Of Knights of the Holy-Blood of Christ, by Vincent Gonzaga D. of Mantua. Besides these, I finde the Knights of Montesio in the Province of Valentia: Of Redemp∣tion in Arragon: Of S. Mary in Italy, called also there Fratri Gaudenti, be∣cause they lived at ease and pleasure: Of S. Lazaro, who pledd great Antiquity, Pope Pius 4. of late revived them, and the Dukes of Savoy do much respect them: The Knights of S. Steven, erected by Cosmo Duke of Florence, who is great master of this Order, have their chief residence in Pisa: to these may be added, Knights of the Sepul∣chre; but I think they be the same with S. John of Jerusalem, now of Malta: We have also in England Knights Banerets, Baronets, Batchilours, and of the Bath: The Knights of the Eare of Corne were abolished, upon the union of Britany with France, by the marriage of Charls 8. with Anne of Britany.
329 ANtony and Paul the Eremite begin the first Monks. 402 The Order of Regulars in∣stituted by S. Austin. 524 Of Benedictine Monks by S. Bennet. 910 Of Clugny by Bernon an Abbot; To this Order belong the Carthusians. 1009 Of Camaldulenses by S. Romnaldus. 1081 Of the shady Valley by S. Iohn Gualbert. 1106 Of the Cisterciens by S. Robert. 1118 Of the Canons Regular. 1143 Of the Praemonstratenses. 1180 Of the Carmelites, confirmed by Pope Alexander 3. 1197 Of the Crosse-bearers, confirmed by Caelestine the 3. 1209 Of the Minorites, confirmed by Inno∣cent the 3. 1216 Of the Redemption of Captives, confir∣med by Innocent the 3. 1227 Of the Praedicants, confirmed by Hono∣rius the 3. 1227 Of the Nuns of S. Clara, which ob∣serve the rule of the Minorites. 1241 Of the Eremites of S. Austin. 1248 Of the Sylvestrines, confirmed by In∣nocent the 4. 1294 Of the Caelestines. 1299 Of the Servants of S. Mary. 1362 Of the Iesuati by S. Iohn Columbine of Sene. 1373 Of Mount Olivet. 1410 Of S. Ierome: Of the Scopetini: Of S. George de Alga. 1480 Of the Minimes by S. Francis de Paula. 1530 Of the Capuchins, confirmed by Cle∣ment the 7. 1533 Of the Clerks of S. Paul, by the same Pope. 1540 Of the Society of Iesus, by Ignatius Loyola, and confirmed by Paul the 3. 1591 Of those that serve the sick, confirmed by Gregory the 14. A List of Heretiques, and such as have been so reputed since Christ. 39 SImon Magus. 71 Menander, Saturnius, Basilides, Si∣mons Disciples. 81 Nicholaus the Deacon, who allowed for∣nication. 103 Corinthus, and his scholar Ebion, denied Christs Divinity. 132 Papias Author of the Millinaries. 154 Carpocrates, and his Scholars the Gno∣sticks, denied Works. 195 Cajanites, deniers of the Resurrection. 203 Valentinians, Authors of many Fables. 213 Marcionites Authors of two Gods. 219 Germogines, who held the Eternity of the Matter. 220 Montanus the Paraclete, and his Cata∣phrygians. 224 Originists, who saved the Devils. 237 Helcheseits, dissemblers of their faith. 240 Donatists, who held Rebaptisation. 254 Novatians, who denied pardon to the lapsed. 261 Sabellians, disciples of Noetus, who de∣nied the Trinity. 269 Samosatenus who denied Christs divinity 278 Manes, father of the Manichees, who held two principles. 336 Arians, who denied Christs Divinity. 352 Photinus, who also denied Christs divinity 358 Macedonius, who denied the Divinity of the Holy Ghost. 361 Aetius and Eunomius his Scholar, who held the Father God only; denied Epis∣copacy, prayers, fsting, and good works. 375 Apollinarius, who denied Christs Soule. 395 Vadius, father of the Anthropomorphites. 398 Helvidius, who held that Mary had o∣ther children. 408 Priscilianus, who held the soules and God all one substance. 417 Iovinianus held all sins equal, and de∣spised Virginity. 425 Vigilantius, an enemy to Saints and Re∣liques. 432 Pelagius denied original sin, and slight∣ed Gods grace. 451 Nestorius held two persons in Christ. 467 Eutyches held but one nature in Christ. 475 Pacificants, who would reconcile the Catholiques and Eutychians. 542 Iulius Halicarnassaeus made Christs Bo∣dy impassible. 566 Agnoits, schollars to Temistius, held Christ ignorant of the last day. 607 Armenians in larged the Eutychian heresy. 630 Monothelites held but one wil and ope∣ration in Christ. 821 Michael Balbus Emperour, denied the Resurrection, &c. 1049 The Greeks denied the Procession of the Holy Ghost. 1058 Berengarius was condemned of Here∣sie, for denying Christs Body in the Euchar. 1087 Bogomiles held the world was made by Devils. 1119 Petrus de Bruis and Henry denied Baptism to Infants. 1144 Petrus Abailardus made the Divine persons unequal. 1153 Cathari or Patareni denied the Sacram. 1170 Waldenses were condemned for their doctrines. 1241 Albigenses also were condemned. 1276 Fratricelli held themselves the onely true Church. 1299 Begardi and Beghinae denied prayers, Fasting, &c. 1309 Lollardus taught that Lucifer was un∣justly condemned. 1352 The Whippers who denied Sacraments and good works, holding the Baptism of blood the onely Baptism. After these times sprung p some other Hetericks, as Servetus, David George, the Libertines, and some others, who were quickly suppressed.
An Alphabeticall Table, containing the Persons, Places, and Principall Matters in the Second Part of the History of the World. A ABassa Bassai the Revol∣ted Turk. 483. Abbatiscella its Hi∣story. 367. Abbot of S. Gall de∣feated. 362. raiseth a Civil War. 365. Abbots of S. Gall, who 369. Abdise, Patriarch of the East. 432. Aberdene, built. 142. Aberdene Divines, their Queries to the Covenanting Ministers. 642, &c. Abismarus Emperor. 114. 117. Acephali, who 95. Achaeans subdued by the Romans, 5. their insolencie. 4. Achmet the Turk, and his Actions, 480. makes Peace with Caesar. ib. Acho, King of Norway 243. Adalgisus, Prince of Salernum, 135. Adolphus, Emperor. 254. Aenobarb sends the Turks two Barks, which are taken by Garcias. 395. Aetius the Generall. 93, &c. Afric lost. 117. Agrippa, his Actions and death. 41. Agrippina. 42, &c. Aistalphus, King of Lombardie. 121. Aix turns out their Iesuits. 445. Aladolus, King of Armenia behead∣ed. 473. Alani, who 40. 90. 246. Alanson, the French Kings brother. 436. Alaricus. 88, 90, 91. Sacks Rome. 92. Duke of Albany, Regent of Scot∣land; and his Actions. 57, &c. Alberts Posteritie, Marquisses of Austria. 141. Albert of Austria, Emperor. 254, &c. his Lady. 255. Albert Emperor, his Title to Bohe∣mia, and short life, 406. Albert Arch Duke of Austria. 438. Albinus defeated by Severus. 62. Alboinus, King of Lombardy 104. Alexander, the supposed son of An∣tiochus. 3 Alexander, Ptolomies son in Law, 16. Alexander Zebina, King of Syria. 7. his sacriledge. ib. is slain. ib. Alexander Janneus succeeds Ari∣stobulus in Judaea, 10. he murthers his brother: his cruelties and death. 10, &c. Alexander Cleopatras son; and his Actions. 11. Alexandra Reignes in Palestin. 17. Alexander Aristobulus his son e∣scapes out of prison, 21. is defeated by Gabinius, 23. is beheaded, 29. Alexander Severus, a good Empe∣ror, 65, &c. his end. 66. Alexander, brother of Leo the Em∣peror. 140. Alexander, King of Scotland, 233, &c. his death. 44. Alexander King of Scotland his Actions. 74. Pope Alexander's Actions against Barbarossa, and his gift to Venice, 178. his Synod. ibid. Alexander, Lord of the Isles his Re∣bellion and submission. 537. Alexander, King James the third's brother, escapes out of prison, 565. made Regent. 566. Alexius, Greek Emperor, and his losses. 164. Strangled. 184. Alexius Angelus, Greek Emperor. 186. 188. Alphonsus King of Asturia. 125. Alphonsus King of Arragon. 235. Alphonsus the 11 of Spain. 276. Alphonsus leaves Naples to his ba∣stard son. 491. Amadeus Earl of Savoy, and his Actions. 283. Amadeus the 5 and 6. 284. &c. his Exploits. 285. Amedius the 7th 286.
Amadeus his Commendation of the privat Life, 347. bcomes a Monk. 348. Amadeus made Pope, and the Cere∣monies of his Inauguration, 350. he resignes it, 352. hath divers Honors and Priviledges given him by the Sy∣nod of Lausanna. 352. Amadeus 3d Duke of Savoy his Charity. 354. Amadeus the 8 of Savoy, and his Actions, 345, &c. made Duke. 346. Amalasunta, the Gothish Queen. 101. Ambassadors from France and Spain to the Electors, 420. and their Mes∣sage. ibid. Ambassadors questioned, and Mer∣chants imprisoned at Constantinople 485 Ambrose Bishop. 86. 89 America subdued by the Spaniard. 431 Americus Vespusius his Discovery. 503 Amurath the Turk, Invades Hun∣gary, and is defeated by Huniades. 406, &c. Amurath the second and his Acti∣ons. 463, &c. Amurath the third and his Actions. 479 Amurath, Osmans brother Sultan. 482 Amurath his life and death. 263 Anastasius Emperor, his good and bad Qualities. 98, &c. his end. 100. Arastasius second, Emperor. 117 Anastatius the Patriarch. 120 Ancre the French Favorit, and his end. 511 Andrew, King of Hungary. 224 Cardinall of Saint Andrews Vice∣roy, complies with the Queen Mother, 577. his Pride. 579. murthered. ib. his Castle taken and demolished: 580 Andronicus Greek Emperor, his Actions and miserable end 188 Androniucs the elder, Emperor. 247 &c. unhappie in his children. 249 Andronicus the younger. 249. vex eth his Grandfather. ib. his life and death. 250 Andronicus the blinde Emperor. 261 Angeli, their Dominion cease. 248 Anjou, Protector of France, 296. con∣tests with Burgundy, ib. tries all means to raise money. 297▪ his Coronati∣on and death. ib. Queen Ann beheaded, and Queen Jane dieth, 458▪ Ann of Cleve, and Catherin Howard. 559 Antiochus Epiphanes his wicked∣ness and Tyranny p▪ 1▪ his death▪ 2 Antiochus Soter, his kindness to Hyrcanus. 6. he beats the Pathians. ib. at last is slain by them. ibid. Antiochus Lyzicenus. 11 Antiochus Gryphus. ibid. Antiochus Eusebes. 11, &c. Antiochia overthrown by an Earth quake. 101. shaken again. 108. Antipater his Actions. 20. made Go∣vernor. 29 Antipopes. 258. 277. cause great troubles. 334. 352 Antonius hates Octavius, and is hated of the people; he flies into France. 29. is invited into Italy. 30. loseth two Legions, and is indangered▪ by the Par∣thians. 31. he crucifies and beheads An∣tigonus. 32. is defeated by Octavius, and kills himself. 33. Antonie's widow of Athens. 262 Antonius, why called Pius. 55. his Excellency and Government, and Phi∣losophy. 56. his excellent Government and Victories. 57 Antony of Portugall. 435 Don Antono of Portugall assisted by the French. 606. by the English. ibid. Apicius hanged himself. 37 Appius Claudius his Victory and Triumph. 8 Aquila Ponticus. 55. Aquileia. 67 Arbogastus. 89 Arcadius Emperor. 90, &c. Archelaus accused and banished. 35 Aristobulus wears a Diadem: his murthers and bloudie end. 10. Aristo∣bulus, Alexanders son. 17. strives with his brother, is defeated and carried to Rome. 20. escapes. 22. is poysoned. 29 Aristonicus seiseth on the Roman Towns. 9. is sent to Rome with the wealth of Attalus. ib. and there is stran∣gled. ibid. Arius, and Arians. 80, &c. Armes of England used by Queen Mary of Scotland. 597
Armignac taken prisoner. 301 Arminius in Holland occasioneth much Debate. 443. suppressed at U∣tricht. 447 Arnulphus Emperor. 139 Arnulphus Duke of Bavaria. 142 Arragonians obtain Sicily and Naples. 235 Kingdom of Arragon in debate. 303 Arragonian Fleet defeated by the Genuois. 489 Arras Rebelleth. 499 Arteman the Gantois Captain. 300 Artenel, Captain of the Gantois. 298, &c. Articles between King Charls of France, and King Henry 5 of Eng∣land. 522 Articles between the English and Scots. 551 Articles between Edw. 4. and the Fr. K. at which Burgundy storms. 558 King Edward 4. kisseth an old wi∣dow for 20l. 558. is entertained in France. ibid. Assembly of the 3 Estates of France at Blois, for setling of Peace. 607 Athanasius. 81. 83. 85. Athens destroyed by the Turk. 262 Walter Earl of Athol his Punish∣ment. 539 Attalus. 92. Attila, K. of the Hunns. 94, 95. 398 Atulphus. 92 Aubigney advanced by King James, and is accused falsly. 628 Avenion, the Popes Seat. 255 bought by the Pope. 260 Augustin. 93 Aurelian Emperor. 72. his end. 73 Aurelius Probus Emperor. ib. his end. 74 Auria, Admirall of Genua. 261. 271 Auriflamme the holy Standard. 299 Austrians quarrel with the Switzers. 357, &c. Austrians make peace with the Ti∣gurins. 361. make Warr upon the Can∣tons. 362. make Peace again. ib. which is shortly after broken. ibid. B BAbylon, the Seat of the Sarazens. 112 Bacchides his Actions. 2 Bada its History. 372 Bajazet the Turk. 261. his Actions and death. 264. his sons. 265 Bajazet the Turk his Actions. 469, &c. Bajazets Rebellion against Soly∣man. 477. strangled with his four sons. ibid. Baldwin King of Jerusalem. 165 Baldwin de Burgo▪ 166 Baldwin Earl of Flanders, Empe∣ror of Byzantium. 186 Baldwin Earl of Flanders. 227, &c. Baldwin the second. 228 Baliol King of Scots. 242. doeth homage to King Edward. 244. flyes out against him. ib. he submits, and is imprisoned. 245 Edward Baliol King of Scots. 309 Baliol resignes his Right to the Scotch Crown. 322 Baliol Invades Scotland. 324 Bannockbarn Battell. 320 Baras the Persian. 106. Bardas Cae∣sar. 134. Barnabos afflicts Genua. 272, &c. Barnabos quarrels with the Savoyen 286 Basil the Emperor, and Basil the Eunuch. 149. Basils Actions 150. his crueltie upon the Bulgarians, ibid. his Victories and death. 150, &c. Basil its History. 365▪ Basilius, of an horse-courser, made Emperor. 135. his Actions. 136. his death. ibid. George Basta forceth Religion. 404 Basta and Batorius strive for Transilvania. 439 Stephen Bathors Valour. (399) Steven Bator, King of Poland. 436 Bator the Transilvanian. 438. An∣drew Bator. 439 Battel of Agencourt. 519. of Ver∣noyle. 524 Gabriel Bator Halts between Cae∣sar and the Turk. 404 Thomas Becket his life and death. 188, &c.
Belgae, their Army against Caesar. 22. Belisarius. 101, &c. his exploits. 102, &c. Bencozba. 54 Berengarius King of Italy. 139. sa∣luted Emperor. 140. Berengarius murthered. 143. Berengarius the younger. 144 Berengarius taken, and set free by the Emperor. 145. taken again and im∣prisoned. ibid. Berenice, Queen of Aegypt. 21 Bern sides with the Switzers. 361. Bernevild and his Complices in Hol∣land. 449 Bienna makes a League with Bern, and other Cantons. 371 Blanca, mother of Saint Lewis. 229 Blanca Maria Dutchess of Savoy. 355, &c. Bocchus King of Mauritania. 12 Bohemia troubled with their Kings, 255. Enriched and divided by Charls the fourth 269 Bohemia troubled with Wars by the Hussits. 334 Bohemians have Liberty of Reli∣gion. 442 Bohemia Rebels against Cesar, 447, &c. Boiebracius King of Bohemia, a Hussit. 409, &c. Borgias poysoned, and recovers, 504 Borussians fall off from the Marian knights, 414. Ioyn with Poland, ibid. Bothwels ill offices between Murry and the Hamiltons. 617 Bothwell restored to the discontent of Murry. 618 Bothwell accused of murthering the King; and is made D. of Orkney. 620 Marryed, ibid Bothwell proclaimed Traytor, 631 Surpriseth Leith ibid. Botoniates Greek Emperor. 164 Bourdeaux fals off, and once to the English. 490 Boyds, their greatnesse and fall in Scotland. 563, &c. Brigerus the Tyrant of Swethland. 266 Britan invaded by Cesar, 22. Base Britany in controversie. 290 Duke of Britany reconciled to the King, 302. Duke of Orleans killed by Burgundy. 304 Duke of Britany angry for the peace between Lewis and his Subjects. 493 Britany in France troubled by the Dukes favorite, 501. Sues for peace, 502 Bruce King of Scotland, 244. He consults with Cumin, who betrays him. 246. Escapes strangely into Scotland, and kils Cumin. ibid. King Bruce his contestation with K. Edward. 305 Bruce his good successe. 306 Robert Bruce King of Scotland his successe. 320 Bruce and his Nobility differ. 322 Bruce king of Scots his advice, will and death. 323 Bruciaus and Baliolaus have divers encounters 324, &c. Bruges rebelleth. 342 Bruges begs pardon of the Duke, 488 Brunchilde her punishment. 111 Brunswig like to be betrayed. 440 Brunswicks out-rages, 452. He is defeated by Tilly, ibid. Lost his arme. 453 Brunswick beat again by Tilly, ibid. With other passages that year. ib. &c. Brutus his death. 30 Duke of Buckingham animated by Dr. Morton, against King Richard. 554 his bad success; is betrayed and behea∣ded. ib. Bucquoi, Brunswick, Spinola, Tilly, and other Commanders oppress Germa∣ny. 451 Bulgarius. 114. 116. 118. 120. 127. Converted twice. 132. Their Battell with Leo. 143. Pillage Hadrianople. 141 Burdilex, Governor of Piemont his Petition to the French King, and his Counsell about the delivery of the Sa∣voyen Towns. 397. Answer thereto. 397. &c. Burgundie of old a Kingdom, now a Dutchie, and Countie. 156. Burgundians Converted to Christ. 92. Burgundy annexed to France. 276 Burgundians 3 times defeated by the Switzers. 363 Duke of Burgundy absolved by the French King, and
then takes Paris. 486  Is murthered by the Dolphin. 487. his son makes a League with England. ib. Burgundy and Orleans reconciled. 489 Burning Glasses. 99 Byzantium the Walls overthrown. 61. Rebuilt, and new named. 81. Fired. 96. Its Library burnt. 97. a great Slaughter there. 101. Besieged by Fleets. 112. 118. Taken by the Latins. 186. Lost by Baldwin the 2d. 228. taken by Palaeologus. 246. Besieged and taken by Mahumet 2d. 466. its miserable Con∣dition. ibid. C CAbades the Persian King. 100 Jack Cade's Rebellion. 530 Caesars League with Pompey. 21. he promotes the Agrarian Laws. 21. his Success against Auletes, the Helveti∣ans, and Ariovistus. 21, &c. the Belgae, Gauls, and Britans. 22, &c. he envies Pompey. 24. subdues the Auverni, He∣dui, and others. ib. refuseth to part with his Army, or lay down his Commission. 25. he passeth Rubicon. ibid. enters Rome, and seiseth on the Treasurie. 26. attempts to Surprise Pompey, and takes in divers Towns. ibid. his sayings of Pompey. ibid. his Pharasian Army and Fight. ib. &c. his courage in the Storm. ibid. his skil in Swimming. 27. he over∣comes Ptolomie's Army. ibid. and the African under Juba, Scipio, and Ca∣to, ibid. his 4 Triumphs, Feast, Magni∣ficence and Clemency. 28. his fifth Tri∣umph, Titles, Pride, Death, and Com∣mendations. ibid. 416, &c Caesar Borgias cruelty. Caganus King of the Avares. 105, &c. Enters Lombardy. 109 Calender Reformed. 437 Caligula, his good and bad qualities, his Tyranies and death. 40, &c. Callis Besieged by Burgundy. 527 Callis left by the English. 596. Demanded by Queen Elizabeth. 597. 599 Calojohannes Emperor, his Reigne 172 Calypha. 119 Campobassus perfidious. 410 Campson Gaurius, King of Aegypt 473. troad to death. 474 Caire besieged and taken. 530 Cantacuzenus his life. 61 Canton Towns described. 373. Can∣tons beyond the Alpes. 374 Car, Earl of Sommerset his Story. 636, &c. Caracalla, his wicked Reigne and end. 63 Carola, Queen of Cyprus. 354 Carolus Martellus. 117, &c. Carolomannus. 137 Carrarius his wickedness and end. 332 Carthaginian War the 3d. how occa∣sioned. 3. Debated in the Senat, whe∣ther Carthage should be overthrown. 4. The Carthaginian ships burnt by the Romans, and their City taken and bur∣ned. 4. Their wrongs to Masanissa. ibid. Carthage taken by Gensericus, then by Belisarius. 12 Carus and Carinus his son emperors. 74 Cassius his death, 30. His Rebellion. 57 Catalani, who? 247 Cathibaius Sultan of Egypt. 469 Catalins conspiracy. 20 Cato laid in Chains, 22. Hee kils himself. 27 Cazanus the Tartar bèats the Sultan of Aegypt, 248. His error. 249 Prince Charls sent into Spain with Buckingham, 639. Returns, ibid. The match broken. 640 Charls K. of great Britain, his acti∣ons and end. 641, &c. K. Charls grants the Scots Presby∣terians their demands. 644, &c. Charls the Bellicous. 343 Charls of Burgundy his losses. 355 Charolois of Burgundy quarrels with Lewis the eleventh, 492. &c. His hatred to him. 495 Charls of Burgundies ambition, 496 Full of troubles, ibid. His greatnesse. 498 Charls of Burgundy beateth, and is beaten by the Switzers. 498. Beaten again, and is killed, ibid. His daughter Mary sends to K. Lewis. 499 Charls the Great, 122, 125, &c. His death and commendations, 128. And famous works. ibid, &c. Charls of Anjou. 234
Charls the balde. 136, &c. Charls de Blois. 290, &c. Charls of Dyrrachium, 260. Mur∣thered. ib. Charls the fair of France. 288 Charls the Great's issue fails. 141 Charls the Gross. 137, &c. Charls of Moravia Crowned Em∣peror at Bonna. 259 Charls King of Navarr. 292 Charls the simple. 143 Charls the fourth Emperor, 267. his Actions and death. 268, &c. Charls the fifth of France. 293, &c. Charls the fifth ends the Venetian Warr. 419. The manner of his Electi∣on. 420, &c. Reasons for the same. 421, &c. Is Elected. 423. And Crowned, 424 Charls the sixth of France. 296. 486 Charls the eighth of France, and his Actions. 415 Charls the fifth Emperor his Pede∣gree. 344 Charls the fifth his Actions. 425, &c. his end. 431 Charls 7 of France, his Message to Duke Lewis of Savoy. 353. He makes War against Savoy. 355 Charls 7 his Actions. 487, &c. Charls 7 his death. 491 Charls 8 of France, his Reigne and Actions. 500, &c. His death. 503 Charls 9 of France. 507 Charls King of Naples murthered. 397 Charls 3d of Savoy loseth most of his Countrey. 393. is accused by King Francis. 394 Duke Charls of Savoy excused. 394 Dieth. 396 Charls the fifth Duke of Savoy. 356 Charls Canutus King of Sweden. 336 Charls, Sigismunds Uncle, a Pro∣testant made King of Sweden. 378. His Actions. 379 Charls taken by a Stratagem. 488 Childebertus. 104 Childericus. 97. 114 Chilpericus King of France. 121 Christ is born. 34. Disputes being 12 years old. 36. his Actions, Preching and Miracles. 38, &c. His Death, Resurrecti∣on, Ascension, and sending of the Holy Ghost. 39 Christians persecuted. 45. 50. 53. Ob∣tain Victory by Prayer. 57. Live quietly under Commodus. 59. Falsly accused. 63. Quiet under Caracalla. 64. Under Alexander Severus. 65, &c. Persecuted under Maximinus. 68. Under Decius. 69. Under Valerian. ib. quiet under Gallienus. 70. Persecuted under Clau∣dius. 72. Under Aurelian. 73. Under Di∣oclesian▪ 75. & Maximianus. 76. & Ga∣lerius Maximinus. ibid. Licinius. 79 Christians, their good success against the Sarazens. 165. Win and lose Da∣miata. 224. Defeated at Ptolemais 225. They lose it. 236. Their success a∣gainst the Mores and Tunis. 237. Per∣fidious to the Turks. 248. Slain by the Aegyptians. ib. Murthered by the Turks in Hungary. 400. Defeated by Amurath. 408. Their loss in Africa under Sebastian. 435. They lose Byzan∣tium, and are invited thither again. 466, &c. Christianus the third, King of Denmark. 340 Christian fourth of Denmark. 440 Christianus King of Sweden. 338, &c. Christiern a cruel Tyrant. 337. Chri∣stiern the 2d. 339 Chrysostom. 90, &c. Cicero, see Tully. Cimbrians, their Victories over the Romans. 12. Their Actions about the Alpes in Spain, and in France. 13. Their Women. ib. Cinna his Actions. 15 Clauda, Montfort's Wife. 290, &c Claudius Caesar, his Reigne, good and bad qualities. 41. His Publick Works. 42. He banisheth the Iews, and is poysoned. 43. Flavius Claudius Em∣peror. 71. Claudius Tacitus Emperor. 73 Clans, Turbulent Families in Scot∣land. 537, &c. Cleander, Commodus his Favorit. 58 Cleopatra, Physcons Queen, and her Actions. 11. Cleopatra made Queen by Caesar. 27. Defeated by Octa∣vius. 33. Poysoneth her self. 33 Clergy Revenues aimed at. 518
Clodius the Tribun. 21. killed by Milo. 24 Clodoveus baptized by Remigius. 98. his actions. 99 Clodovejus his sacriledge. 113 Christopher Columbus his Disco∣very. 502 Columni and Ursini. 256 Columnii, their raging against the Clergy in Rome. 425 Isaacus Comnenus, Greek Empe∣ror, is affrighted. 163 Comodus Emperor, his bad quali∣ties. 58. Escapes divers dangers. ib. his vanities. 59. his end. ib. Computation from the years of Christ, when begun. 138 Conolave ordained. 246. revoked and renewed. ib. Conference at Hampton-Court. 634. ib. Conradin Sultan of Damascus. 224. Conradinus, son of Conradus. 234 Conradus, Emperor. 142 Conradus Salicus Emperor, his Actions. 155, &c. Conradus his expedition into Syria. 183 Conradus, Fredericks son. 226. 234. Constable of France, his pride. 496, would have the King swear. 497 Constable of France imprisoned by the Duke of Britany. ib. Constable of France his death plotted by the King and Duke. 497. delivered and beheaded. 498 Constantin. 77. he defeats Maxenti∣us. 78. and Licinius. 79. is confirmed by the sight of the Cross, and his victories thereby. ibid. his excellent Government and Piety. 80. no friend to Rome. 81. his wavering. ib. his goodness and death 82. his sons, Constantin, Constans, and Constantius. ib. Constantin fifth. Emperor. 120. his actions. ib. his death. 121 Constantin, Irenes son. 123 Constantin, Zoe's son. 141 Constantin, Basils brother, his reigne. 151 Constantin Monomachus Emperor. 158 Constantin the last. 466 Constantinople much distempered. 482. 484. Constantinus Pogonatus. 113 Constantius his actions and end. 83 Constantius a great Commander, 92 Constans Emperor. 112. his actions and end. ib. Corinth destroyed and burned by the Romans. 5. Corinthian brass. 5. Cornish men defeated. 548 Cosroes. 100. 102, &c. his death. 105. a Christian. 106. Cosroes the second. 106. his cruelty. ib. will make no peace with Heraclius. 109. urgeth Nestoria∣nisme. 110 Cossacks and Croats cruelty. 453 Cossacks molest the Muscovit and Turk. 480. beat the Tartars. 482. Covenanters, their Forces and de∣mands from the King. 644. their inso∣lenoies. 645 Councel of Nice. 80. of Tyre. 81. of Sardica. 83. of Millan. 84. of Arimi∣num, of Seleucia. ib. of Alexandria. 86 of Antioch. ib. of Constantinople. 88. of Ephesus. 94. of Chalcedon. 95. of Constantinople. 103. of Toledo. 108. of Constantinople. 114. of Trullus. 116. of Constantinople. 120. of Nice. 123. of Frankford. 124. of Aix. 130. of Constantinople. 136. of Ravenna. 141. of Lateran. 223. of Lions. 226. 275. of Constance. 334. of Basil. ibid. 350. of Papia. 335. of Florens. 336. 350. of Pisae. 419. of Trent. 429. 432 &c. of Lateran. 172. 192. Conuela of Sutrinum, deposeth 3 Popes. 158 Craford fals off from Douglass. 544. Crassus sent against Aristonicus, is defeated and killed. 9. Crassus robs the Temple, is defeated, and he is killed by the Parthians. 23 Cremona burnt. 48 Crescentius rebels, and is hanged at Rome. 152 Cromwel, the Clergies great ene∣mie. 559. beheaded. ib. Crannus kils Niciphorus the Em∣peror. 427. and makes a Cup of his Skull 129. subdued. ib. Cumin, Viceroy of Scotland. 325. Cyprus subject to divers changes. 166. &c. Cyprus▪ after divers changes becomes the Venetians Island. 414 Cyril of Alexandria. 94
D DAlmatia subdued by the Romans. 3 Damiata taken. 224. and retaken ib. 229 Danes, and their Wars. 128. converted to the Faith. 130 Danes Massacred; they subdue Eng∣land, and are defeated in Scotland. 153. poysoned. 156. troubled by their Kings. 230. 251 Danes and Hamburgers quarrel. 463 Daniel D. of. Russia cheats the Pope. 246 Danish Ambassador to Queen Elizabeth 609 Darby the Queens husband murthered 620 Darkness. 120. 124 David King of Scots conveyed into France. 324 King David returns from France and invades England. 326. is beaten. ib. taken prisoner, Ransomed & died. ib. David Prince of Scotland famished. 535 Decius his Reigne and end. 69 Demetrius the Son of Seleucus, his acti∣ons. 2. why called Soter. 3. he is slain. ib. his son Demetrius overcome by Ionathas. 3. Demetrius Nicanor. 5. he is overthrown. ib. overcomes the Persians, and is taken. 6. he escapes and is retaken by Phraates. 6. regains Syria, and loseth it. 7. is overcome and slain. ib. Demetrius Euserus, K. of Damascus, his Actions. 11. &c. Denholme stoutly resisteth the Enemy. 460 Denmark. 265 Denmark full of troubles. 171 Denmark's History. 338, &c. Denmark's Army defeated by Tilly. 457. his Proceedings in Germany. 458, &c. flyeth. 460 K. of Denmark entertained by. K. James Desiderius last King of the Lombards. 122 Didius Julianus Emperor. 60. his end. 61 Dioclesian Emperor. 74. 78. Diodatus called Tryphon, murthers Jonathas. 5 Dioscorus of Alexandria. 94. 97 Dithmars subdued by the Duke of Holst. 432 Dolphinat sold. 276. The Dolphus quar∣rels with the Savoyen. 282 Dolphinat annexed to France. 292. The Dolphins care in his fathers ab∣sence. 293 The Dolphin raiseth the Counsel of. Ba∣sil. 336 Dolphin flyes from France to Burgundy. 491. his Zeal against the Turk. ib. Dolphin's and King Henrie's Messages. 518 Dolphin murthers Burgundy, and is complained against. 522 Domitian, his good and bad qualities. 50. his ridiculous actions and end. ib, &c. his murtherers murthered 52 Donald and Duncan, Kings of Scot∣land. 174 Donald of the Isles submits to the King 545. his insolencie and sacriledge 562, &c. Dort maintains her Priviledges. 253 Dort Synod against the Arminians 449 Douglass his expedition into Ireland 328 Douglass and Percie fight a Duel. 329. the effects thereof. ib Douglass his greatness and ambition. 540. betrayed and beheaded. 541 Douglass persecutes the Chancellor and Regent. 542. is persecuted and slain. 543 Douglasses insolencies against the K. 544. they are persecuted. ib. and pro∣scribed. 545 Douglasses, Hamiltons and Humes disturb Scotland. 571 &c. Douglasses proscribed, and Tantallon Castle surrendred. 574 Douglass Earl of Morton, Regent. 627 is removed. ibid. Drakes Navigation. 602 Constantin Ducas, Greek Emperor ∣vercomes his enemie by prayers. 163 Dunbar occasions a new War between the two Kingdoms. 330 Duncan Earl of Mar, Protector of Scot∣land. 324 E EArls of Holland. 251. &c, 278, &c. Earl of Renessius 277. Earls of Savoy. 279, &c.
Earl of Orkney beheaded, and his Ca∣stles taken. 637 Earthquakes. 94, &c. 101, 103, 114, 120, 254, 462, 508. Edenburgh taken by the English, 578 Edenburgh Castle battered and surren∣dred. 646 Edward the Confessor Crowned: 159 Prince Edwards Actions. 212, &c. Edward Prince of England, marries with Elenor the Spaniards sister. 240 His service in the Holy Land. 241 His Return, and Actions at home, being King. 242 Quarrels with his Clergie, and doeth homage in France. 242. His Expe∣dition into Scotland. ibid. Into Flanders. 243. His dealings with Bruce and Baliol. 244. He runs through Scotland, and brings away their Monuments. 245 Edward Earl of Savoy. 284 Edward of England denyed the Regen∣cy of France. 288. Challengeth the French to fight. 289. Makes a truce with France. 290 Prince Edwards Victory at Poictiers. 292 Edward the first's Actions. 304 Edward the 2d of England, his Life & death. 305, &c. He and his Queen at variance. 307 Edward the 2d resignes his Crown, and is murthered. 308 Edward the 3d doth homage in France: His cruelty to Seaton. 309. Helps Baliol. ibid. Edward the 3d his actions, ib. &c. His Death and Issue. 314 Edward King of England sends a Monk to poison Randulph. 323 . Edwards preparation against Scot∣land. 326 Edward the fourth King of England, and his Actions. 546, &c. Edward the fourth furnished with ship∣ping by the Duke of Burgundy: He is received into York. 549. Is re∣ceived into London. ibid. Defeats Warwick, and takes king Henry prisoner. ibid. The Queen also and Prince. 558. Enters France, and makes peace with the French K. ib. King Edward the fourth deluded by the French and Scots. 551. Dieth. ib. Edward the fifth ibid. Edward the sixth his Reign, 586, &c. His charity and zeal. 590 Egypt falls off from the Empire. 117 Egyptians take Tripoli. 248. Pre∣vail. 249 Egyptians defeated by the Turks 474 Electors of Germanie meet about choo∣sing the Emperor. 420 Elinor Qu. of England, 242 Lady Elizabeth sent to the Tower, to Richmond, to Woodstock. 592 &c. Lady Elizabeth set at liberty by King Philip. 595 Queen Elizabeth her Raign. 597, &c. Helps the Protestants, ibid. Declared an Heretique. 600. Many Trea∣sons against her. ibid. Sends aide into Scotland. ibid. Navigations in her time. 601, &c. Shee protects the Netherlanders. 603. And why. ibid. Qu. Elizabeths preparations against the Spanish Invasion, 604. Shee thanks God for Victory. 606 Qu. Elizabeth intercedes for Q. Mary, but is denyed by the Scots. 623. Sends Sussex. 624 Qu. Elizabeth sollicited by the Scots to name them a Regent. ibid. Queen Elizabeth's Treaty with Queen Mary. 629. Her sorrow for her death. 631 Qu. Elizabeth's death. 613 Bishop of Ely Protectour of England in the absence of King Richard: 189, &c. Emanuel Philbert Duke of Savoy, recovers what his Father had lost. 396 Charls Emanuel. D. of Savoy takes the towns of Carmaniola and Salu∣sium. 398 Emanuel of Thessalonica with his se∣ven sons. 262 Empire torn by the Barbarians. 86, 93. Translated. 125 Made Tributaries. 127 Empire at Trapezuntium. 233 Emperors Colleagues. 257 Emperors of Byzantium. 261 Empire proffered to K. Edward of En∣gland. 267
The Emperour sides with England, against France. 289. and is taken off again. ibid. Emperor complains to Wolsey against France. 553 Empson and Dudley beheaded fer op∣pression. 550 England by whom called so. 129. hath Wars with France. 230. Troubled under King John. 231. Wars again with France. 232. Troubled with the Barons Wars. 241. The English trouble Savoy. 285. Have Warres with France. 289. They beat the French by Sea. 290. And by Land at Crescy. 291. Their Warres in Britany and Normandy. 290. they take Callice. 291. Beat the French at Poictiers. 292. Spoil and plunder France. 293. Are beat by the French at Sea and at Land. 294. They com∣plain against the French, and the French against them. ib. & 295. Englands troubles under Henry the fourth. 515. &c. English beat the French. 524 Englands troubles under Henry the sixth. 529, &c. Under Edward the fourth. 547, &c. Englands troubles under Henry the 7. 546, &c. English invade Scotland by Sea and Land. 324, &c. English lose all their Holds in Scot∣land. 325, &c. England and Scotland wast each other. 327, &c. English plot discovered. 328 English successe in France under Edw. the 3d. 310, &c. English massacred in Paris. 488 English lose Guyen and Normandy. 490 English and French quarrell under Henry the 5th 518, &c. The English good success in France. 519, &c. Their bad successe. 523, 526, &c. English Regents of France. 524, &c. Their various successe in France. 527, &c. English Lords sollicite king James for aid. 545. English aide the Britans against the French. 546 English invade France under Henry the 8. 557 English beaten by the Scots. 679 Beat the Scots. 580 Beaten by the Scots. 581 English Fleet spoiled upon the Or∣chades. 583 The English lose all they had gotten in Scotland. 589 English Ambassadors their Conference with the French Councell about Cal∣lice. 599 English send a Fleet for Cadiz, which they take, 608, &c. For the Azores. 609 English Army against Q. Maries facti∣on in Scotland. 624 Epiphanius Bishop. 91 Ericus K. of Denmark. 251 Ericus King of Swedeland. 336, &c. Essex sent into Ireland to suppresse the Rebels. 610 Returns discontented. 611 Essex counselled by the Lord Keeper to submit to the Queen, and his Answer thereto. 612 Essex his Discontents and Rebellion. ibid. His apprehension and Death. 613 Eudoxia brings Peters chains. 93. Eudoxa mother to Childericus. 102 Eutiches the Heretique. 94. Eutiche∣ans divided. 97. Their mouths wit∣tily stopped. 100 Euxin Sea frosen. 121 Exceter besieged and relieved, 586, &c. F FAramund. 93 Fausta. 81 The Feast of All Saints Instituted: 132 Ferdinand drives the Mores out of Spain, 234 Ferdinand King of Hungary and Bo∣hemia. 400 Ferdinand hath Wars with Solyman. 401 Ferdinand the Catholick King. 413 Ferdinand buyes his place from Soly∣man. 431. Dyeth. 433 Ferdinand 2d Emperor. 448. Rejected by the Bohemians. ib.
Ferdinand declares against Frederick King of Bohemia. 449 Fetherstone whipped and hanged. 595 Flavianus Bishop. 94. banished. 99 Flavius Constantius Chlorus, 75, &c. Flemins rebell against the French, 238 and beat them, ibid. And are beaten by them, 239. are beaten again, 288 their outrage. 291 Florentii Earles of Holland, 251, &c. Florentius the fifth claims the crown of Scotland. 253. Florentines make war against the Pisans. 259 Florianus Emperor. 73 France raiseth a mighty Army against England. 317 Francis the French King complaines against D. Charles of Savoy, 393 His reasons. ib. Francis the French King blamed, 395 Complained against by the Emperour. ibid. Francis King of France aimes at the Empire, but misseth it, 420, 423. Quarrels with Charls the fifth. 428 His Reign and Actions. 505, &c. Franks and Almains overthrown. 103 French subdued in Spain, 108. French kings dissolutenesse. 113. France its twelve Peers 129. The French Peers reject the Grecian affinity. 228. Have Wars with Eng∣land, 230, &c. Take Scicily, and are destroyed in it, 234, &c. Massa∣cred at Bruges. 238. Defeated in the battell at Courtray. ib. They beat the Flemins, 239. They fall upon Flanders. 243. Driven out of By∣zantium. 247, French kings when Crowned. 277. French reconciled to Flanders, 287. They make warre upon England. 289. Beaten by the English. 290, &c. They beat the English. 294. Make a League with Gustavus the King of Sweden. 382 The French successe in Savoy. 394 The French Ambassadors shew rea∣sons, why the French king layeth claim to some parts of Savoy. 397 French quarrell with the Pope, and Venetians. 418. Driven out of Lombardy. ibid. In France Civill War between the Papists and Pro∣testants. 455. France much troubled by the D. of Burgundy. 486 French over-run base Britany. 501 and Naples, but lose it again; yet found a new Disease. 502, &c. beat by the Switzers. 505. Their divers actions. 506 France fights for Religion. 507 Pestered with Civill War. 508, &c. Consult about choosing a new King. ib. More Civill Wars. 513, &c. Beaten by the English at Agenconrt. 519 French and English have divers con∣flicts. 523. Beaten by the English. 524 French hinder the Union between Eng∣land and Scotland. 560, 562 French send a Fleet against the Isle of Wight. 561 French labour with the Scotish Regent to resigne his place to the Q. Mother. 582 French Kings Race. 150 Frasers cut off. 579 Frederick Barbarossa his Actions and end. 176, &c. his submission to the Pope. 178 Frederick Barbarossa's end. 181 Frederick of Bohemia quite defeated. 450. interceded for. 453 Frederick the first king of Denmark. 340 Frederick the second Emperor. 222, &c His contestation with the Pope, 223 His expedition into Asia. ibid. Returnes, and is reconciled to the Pope. 224, &c. He contests again with the Pope. 255 Is cursed by him. 226 Builds Victoria; and is beat at Parma. 226, &c. Is poysoned. 227 His parts, wives and children. ibid. Frederick, Alberts son of Thuringia. 255 Frederick of Austria Emperor. 257 Taken prisoner. ib. Frederick the third Emperour, and his Actions. 409, &c. Frederick the Palsgrave dyeth. 391 Frederick Palatin sent Ambassador into Spain. 424 French assist the Earle of Flanders a∣gainst the Flemins. 299. prepare a Fleet against England. 300
Plunder divers English Towns. 315 French King Phrantic. 302. like to be burned in a mask. 303 French make divers Leagues with the Switzers. 376 French K. in a low condition. 488. and France much distracted. ib. French make peace with England, and pay a Pension to Henry the seventh. 547 French send aid to Scotland. 580. with the Scots besiege Haddington. 581 French Ambassadors desire crossed by the Scots Parliament. 615 Friburg plundred by their Lord. 364. they confederat with the Cantons. 364 Duke of Fridland Generalissimo. 388 G JOhn Gabeas of Millan, his Actions and Death. 332 Gabinius accused, defended, and con∣demned. 23 Bethleem Gabor swears Fealty to Cae∣sar and the Turk. 404. his other Actions. ib. &c. Bethleem Gabor defeats Batorius. 445. reconciled to Caesar. 451 Gainas. 90 Galba his Reigne and end. 47 Galeacius. 258. Galeacius a lover of Learning. 268 Galerius Maximinus Emperor. 74. 76. Galileans sold and murthered. 46 Gallia divided. 96 Gallienus Emperor. 69, &c. his neglect and folly. 71. his end. ib. Gallus Emperor. 69. Gallus Caesar. 82, &c. Gambalot Satrapa of Alepo, solicits the Pope and Caesar. 443 Gascony fals out with Montfort. 240 Gaveston King Edwards Favorit. 305 Gauls overthrown by Q. Fab. Max. 10. by Caesar. 22, &c. they rebel. 24. Gaunt full of troubles. 295. rebels and submits. 295, &c. Gant rebels against their Earl. 298, &c makes a league with France. 300 Gantois rebel and are beaten. 290 Gantois careful of their Dutchess. 499 Gazelles Governor of Syria, over∣thrown. 475 Geberd Bishop of Colen, a Protestant 436 Gemes, Bajazets brother. 469 Geneva its History. 371 Geneva's Earls contest with the Savoy∣ens. 280, &c. 284. Bishop of Geneva a covetous man. 355, &c. imprisoned by Galeacius. 356. Geneva in danger. 440 Gensericus sacks Rome. 96 Genua and Venice contend for the ma∣stery of the Sea. 167 Genua implores the French help against the Pyrats. 301 Genuois defeat and are defeated. 261. Their long War with Venice. 271. They reform their City, make league with the Emperor, and beat the Ve∣netian Fleet. 271, &c. take Saint Nicholas Church, and the Town Clodia. 272. they beat the Robbers. 273. and the Venetians. 274. their error and loss. ib. make peace with Venice. 275. besieged by the Milla∣nois. 287 Genuois take two Kings prisoners, and are angry they were dismissed with∣out ransom. 489. they make Rene King of Naples. ibid. Germany in a bad condition. 381. 388 Germanie's miseries presaged. 392 Germany troubled with Religions and rebellions. 426. 430. Germany in a woefull condition. 449, &c. 458. Germanicus his victories and death. 36, &c. Germans defeated. 22, &c. Germany made a Province. 35. they submit to Probus. 73. stain by Constantius. 75 their Nobility killed. 141. their civil wars. 121, &c. their divisions about the Emperor. 235. Germany divided under two Emperors. 257 Geta murthered by his brother Cara∣calla. 63 Gilimer, King of the Vandals. 102 Glarona and other Towns joyn with the Switzers. 360 Archbishop of Glasco's strange death. 542 Duke of Glocester abuseth the credu∣lous Queen and
Earl Rivers, 551.  murthers the Lord Grey with others. ib. is made Protector. 552. gets cun∣ningly the young Duke of York from the Queen his mother. ibid. puts the King and his brother in the Tower. ibid. his complying with Bucking∣ham. ibid. he accuseth the Queen of Witchcraft. ibid. beheadeth Hastings and others. 553. imploys Dotor Shaa to Preach, and set forth his Title to the Crown. ibid. cunningly got him∣self to be Crowned. ibid. causeth the young King and his brother to be murthered. ib. hinders the Earl of Richmonds marriage. 550. raiseth an Army 556. is slain, and his car∣cass dishonorably buried. ib. Godaliscus the Monk. 134 Godfride of Bullion. 164, &c. Gordianus Emperor. 67. his end. ibid. Gordian the third his reigne and end 68 Gordon and Forbese's fight in the North. 626 Goths. 87. 89. murthered. 90, &c. In∣vade Italy. ib. and Rome. 92. are driven thence. 102. grow stately. 106. driven into Biscay. 117 Gowrie seiseth on the King, and is be∣headed. 628. &c. Grame, Archbishop of Saint Andrews persecuted. 564 Gratianus Emperor. 86. 88. Greece made a Province. 5. its misera∣ble condition. 228. Greeks reconciled to the Latins, 233, &c. 247. Greek Church divided. 248. Greece torne in pieces. 262. Greek Emperor ends. ib. Greek tongue brought back to Ita∣ly. 277 Greeks their treacheries. 183 Gregory the great, King of Scotland. 142 Pope Gregory seaventh 160 deposeth the Emperor. ib. is imprisoned. ib. Grisons their History. 370 Grisons in great trouble. 451 Gryphus made King by his mother. 7. whom he poysoneth, quarrels with his brother about the Kingdom of Syria, is slain. ib. Guelfs and Gibellins. 225. 254. 256. 287 Guido, Marquiss of Tuscia. 143 Guises murthered by the French King. 608 Gunpowder treason. 634 Gustavus Adulphus King of Sweden, and his Actions. 379, &c. enters Po∣merania. 380. declares the wrongs he sustained by the Emperor ib. he sends abroad his edict 381. his Victories. 380. 381, &c. he defeats Tilly. 386. takes in many Towns. 387. indanger∣ed at Ingolstad. 389. he hastneth to relieve Saxony. 391. is wounded and dieth. ib. his corps sent home. 392. Gustavus makes peace with Poland 462. he finds Germany in great dis∣tempers. 463 Guy, Earl of Flanders. 238. assisted by King Edward. 242. taken prisoner. 278 H HAbesburg released. 361 Hadrian his Government and Victories. 54. his good and bad qua∣lities. ib. &c. his sickness death and Tomb. ib. he vexed the Jews. ib. Ha∣drianopolis, the Turks chief Seat. 263 Hagarius Sultan led in triumph. 136 Hali Bassa the Eunuch slain. 472 Hamiltons original. 322 James Hamilton, Earl of Arran, Vice∣roy of Scotland. 576, &c. Hamiltons and other Lords storm at Q. Maries Match. 619. are driven from Edenburgh ib. are banished, and return. ib. Hamilton is denied the Regency. 622. sent to Edenburgh Castle. 623 Hans-Towns in Germany. 269 Hans-Towns perswaded to side with Caesar. 459 Hatto Bishop of Mints. 142 Hatto Bishop of Mints, eat up by rats. 146 Hay defeats the Danes in Scotl. 147 Helena. 81. 85 Henry Beauclerk King of England his Reigne. 173, &c. Henry second, King of England. 188. his troubles and Penance. 188, &c. Henry Duke of Lancaster made King. 219. Henry King of England, Regent of France▪ 487 Henry third. 507, &c. Henry fourth. 508. &c.
Henry fourth of England, and his Reigne. 515. Articled against. 516, &c. escapes and overcomes divers Treasons. 515. &c. dieth. 517 Henry fifth, King of England, his Reigne and Actions. 518 Henry sixth, Crowned at Paris. 487 Henry sixth of England, and his reigne 524, &c. Crowned in France. 526. Henry sixth his Marriage. 529. his los∣ses, ib. &c. is taken prisoner. 531. 533 546 King Henry restored to his Crown by Warwick. 548 Henry sixth murthered. 558 Henry seventh King of England, and his Actions. 545, &c. his death. 550 Henry eight, his Actions. ib. &c. growes weary of his Queen. 554 Henry eight, his eagerness to be divor∣ced. 555, &c. quarrels with the Church. 556 Henry the eight desires to meet James the fifth, which is denied. 575 Henry the eight desires to match his son with the Scots Queen, which is deni∣ed. 576 King Henry the eight his Death, Will, Character, Wives and issue. 561, &c. Henry made Prince of Wales. 636 Henry the Fowler, Emperor. 142, &c. Henry, Otho's brother. 144. Henry, son to Frederick the second. 223 Henry, Lantgrave of Thuringia. 226 Henry, Baldwin's brother 228 Henry, King John's son of England, 232. his Wars with France. ib. Henry the third, his exploits. 240. he quarrels with his Peers. ib. Henry of Lucelburg, Emperor. 255. poysoned, 256 Henry second, Emperor, and his actions. 154. lamed by a leap; his death. ib. Henry third, Emperor, his actions. 158, &c. his death. 159 Henry fourth, Emperor, and his acti∣ons. ib. &c. his Penance to the Pope. 160. his end. 161 Henry fifth, Emperor, his actions. 169, &c. is vexed by the Popes. 170 Henry sixth, called Asper, Emperor, his actions and end. 192 Henry of Juliers offended, and reconci∣led with Brunswick. 446 Henry second, King of France and his actions. 506, &c. Henry third of France, entertained at Turin. 398 Henry the fourth of France, becomes Catholick. 509, is stabbed. 511 Henry of Navarr excommunicated. 607 Proclaimed King, and assisted by Q. Elizabeth. 608 Heraclius, Emper. 109. he subdues his enemies, and recovers the Cross. 110. dieth. 111. his race endeth. 116 Heresies. 51, &c. 55, &c. 58. 62, &c. 66. 68, &c. 71. 80. 84. 88. 92. 94 &c. 97. 103. 246. 433. Herman the Palatin forced to carrie a dog on his shoulders. 176 Hermaphrodites ominous to Rome. 8 Herod, his actions. 29. he is made King. 31. flatters Hircanus, and drowns A∣ristobulus 32. bribes Antony. 33. he doats upon Cleopatra, his insolencies, he is defeated at Actium. ib. he puts Hircanus to death, and makes his peace with Octavius. ib. he defeats the Arabians. ib. he murthers Mari∣amne, Alexandra, and the Sanhe∣drin. 34. his buildings, murthers, and wives, his death. ib. Hexamilium the wall in Peloponesus 464. 467 Hierom. 93 Hircanus succeeds his Father Symon, in Judea. 6. his actions. ib. he over∣throws the Temple of Samaria. 7. and the City also. 10. he dieth. ib. Hirca∣nus, Alexander's son. 17. quarrels with his brother 20. is established in the Pontificat. 29. lost his cars. 31. de∣livered by Herod. 32, and put to death 33 Hollands History. 251. ingreat trou∣bles. 278 Hollands History, and their Earls. 341, &c. troubled with civil war. 342 Hollanders infest the Spaniards. 442 Holland troubled about their Excise, 446 Hollanders good success at sea and land. 461, &c. Homar. 113. Homar and Hali. 263. Honorius Emperor. 90 Hormisdas the Persian King. 106 Horne, the Swedish General. 392 Hospitalers succeed the Templers. 239 and take Rhodes. ib.
Hugo, Earl of Arles. 143 Humbert, first, second, third, Earls of Savoy. 279, &c. Hungarian History. 398, &c. Hungarians. 140. beat the Germans. 141. defeated. 143. troubled by their Kings. 250. Hungary in great trou∣bles. 333. their Victories in Germa∣ny and Italy. 398, &c. defeated by the Germans. 399, &c. Hungary af∣flicted by the Turks. 398. 479. and by intestin Factions. 399 Hungarys miserable condition. 401, &c Hungarians defeated by Solyman, and Buda taken. 476 Hunns. 87. stain. 100. obtain Panonia. 104. 398 Huniades, John, and Matthew. 398, &c. 407, &c. Huntly's hatred to Murry. 617. is de∣luded by Queen Mary. ib. defeated by Murry. 618. Huntly taken, and his son John behea∣ded. ibid. Huntly and Argile favour the Queens side. 623 Huntly's zeal for Queen Mary. 625. 627. assisted by the Spaniard. ib. Huntly defeats Argile in the battell of Avinian. 631, &c. John Husse broacheth his doctrin. 331 John Husse and Hierom of Prague burnt. 335 I JAcoba, Countess of Holland. 341, &c. Jagello, Prince of Lituania. 277 Iames the Apostle. 46 Iames, Prince of Scotland, a prisoner in England. 535, &c. carried into France. 536 Iames, King of Scotland, and his Reigne. 537, &c. his daughter con∣veyed into France. 538 Iames the first, his murther. 539. Iames the second, his Reigne. 539, &c. Iames the second, much troubled by Factions. 540. his death. 545 Iames the third of Scotland, and his Reigne. 562, &c. his Governors. ib. married. 563. his supersion and ty∣ranny. 565. his Courtiers hanged up. Iames the third complained against for his misgovernment. ib. persecuted by his Subjects, and slain. 566, &c. his death grumhled at. 567 Iames the fourth, his Reigne. 567, &c. defends Warbeck. 568. his match. ib. Iames the fourth, his prodigality and resolution for Syria. ibid. sollicited to quarrel with England. ib. his fleet. ib. his message to King Henry 569. he was disswaded from making war, in vain. 59. he lost the battel and his life. 570 Iames the fifth, his Reigne. ib. &c. Iames the fifth, his Navigations, mar∣riages, strange dreams, and death. 575, &c. Iames, Queen Maries brother, hastneth into France. 614 Iames the sixth Crowned. 620 Iames the sixth strictly guarded. 627. Governeth with 12 Peers. ib. im∣prisoned. 628 King Iames displeased for his mothers death; but appeased by Queen Eli∣zabeth. 631 King Iames proclaimed King of Eng∣land, and his journey thither. 632, &c. makes peace with Spain, pardon∣eth and executes some Traitors, sends presents to Spain. 633. and receiveth from thence presents. 634. he detects the gunpowder plot. ib. he is modera∣tor at the Conference of Hampton Court. ib. &c. King of Great Britan. 635. entertained at London. ib. di∣vers Occurrences. ib. &c. Institutes Knights Baronets. 638. Ambassadors to him from Russia and Persia, and goeth into Scotland. 639. his death and happie Government. 640. some strange accidents, and works of cha∣rity in his time.. ib. Jane the Duke of Suffolks Daughter proclaimed Queen of England. 590 Is beheaded. 591 Janisaries their Originall 263 Janisaries their Institution. 465 Janisaries, their insolencies at Con∣stantinople. 482, 484 Jerusalem befieged and stormed. 20, 32 Ierusalem its last Miseries, 47, &c. Rebuilt and new named. 54. Taken by Cosroes. 109. By the Saracens.
111. By the Parthians. 229 Ierusalem lost by the Christians. 166 Iesuites banished out of Turky, 483, &c Iesuites banished out of France, and why. 510. Restored again. 511 Jews infested with three Sects. 10. what these were. ib. they assist Cleopatra against Lathurus. 11. their great Councel destroyed. 29. they complain against Herod. 30. will not admit his Government. 32. are murthered by Archilaus, against whom they com∣plain. 35. they rebel, and are suppres∣sed by Varus. 36. rebel under Theu∣das. 42, &c. they quarrel with the Sa∣maritans. 43. they rebel, and are mur∣thered. 46. their miseries under Ve∣spasian. 47. and Titus. 49. are mur∣thered every where. ib. their barba∣rous cruelties. 54. forbid to enter Je∣rusalem. ib. converted. 84. deluded. 95. Jews found out their pricks. 98. their cruelty. 108, &c. forced to em∣brace Christianity. 110. follow Ma∣homet ib. made slaves in Spain. 116 desperat. 118. banished out of Eng∣land. 242. poyson the waters, and are hanged by each other. 287. wear yel∣low caps. 431 Images abolished. 118. 120. restored. 123 condemned. 124. 129. restored. 134. Imperialists lose Pomerania. 385. are defeated. 391, &c. Indians, with Hunns and others, be∣come Christians. 103 Joan, wife of Andrew of Hungary. 259. her murther, incest, and insa∣tiable lust. 26. 413 Iohannes Maria, a bloudy Tyrant. 332 Iohn Baptist Preacheth, Baptizeth, is beheaded. 38. Iohn the Apostle ba∣nished. 50. restored. 52. dieth. 53. Iohn de Bregna, King of Ierusalem. 223. Iohn, King of England. 30. his contestation with, and submission to the Pope. 231. his death, wives, and children. 232. Iohn Cantacuzenus. 249. Iohn, Duke of Brabant. 251. Iohn, King of Bohemia. 258. Iohn, Emperor of Byzantium. 261. Iohn, Earl Nivern, defeated by the Turks, ordains the order of a Golden Fleece. 264. Iohn. Wickliff. 276. Iohn Ga∣leacius. 277. Iohn, the Hanonian, Earl of Holland. ibid. Iohn de Montfort. 290. Iohn, King of France. 291. Iohn Hunades. 398. Iohn Bassilides, Duke of Muscovia. 422. knocks his son on the head. 437. Iohn of Anjou, beats Ferdinand. 491. Iohn Scot, the great Fasr. 574. Iohn a Stampis. 73 Iohn, otherwise called Robert, King of Scotland. 329 Iohn, Duke of Burgundy, with. Ama∣deus, vex Orleans and Burbon. 346 Iohn, Governor of Croatia, his cruel∣ty. 397 Iohn of Leyden, his madness. 427 Iohn, Prince of Swethland. 378 Iolanda of Savoy imprisoned with her son. 355. dismissed by the French K. ib. Ionathas, Governor of Iudaea, his acti∣ons. 2, 3. 5. his death. ib. Iovinian his life and actions. 85. his end. 86 Irene, Emperess. 123 Ireland rebels. 598. 602. assisted by the Pope and Spaniard. ib. Irish rebels with the Spaniards, defeated by the Lord Montjoy. 611 Irish converted. 82 Isaacius Angellus; Greek Emperor. 185 Issabel, Dutchess of Anjou; prepares a Fleet for Naples. Ismael, the Sophi of Persia. 470. his actions and victories. 471. wounded. 472 Italian troubles. 15. subdued by the Ro∣mans. ib. being Invaded by Goths, Vandals, Longobards, Hunns, and others is reduced again to the Empire of Iustinian. 103. miseries of Italy under the Guelphs and Gibellins. 225. Italian Cities change their Go∣vernors. 256. are punished by the Em∣peror. ib. fall off from the Pope. 269. Italy disturbed with civil wars. 333. Italies devotion. 345. troubled about Mantua. 462. Italy in troubles. 503, &c. Iudas Macchabaeus, his actions and death. 2 Iudgements remarkable. 97, &c. 100. 102, 104. 108. 117, &c. 123, &c. 131. 270. 563. 146. 154. Iuditha, Ludovic's wife. 130, &c.
Jugurtha his oruelty, cunning, and end. 12 Julicrs full of troubles. 443 Julianus. 83. His Apostacy and wic∣kedness, 84, 85. his end. ib. Julius Agricola's victories. 51 Julius Caesar. see Caesar. Pope Julius raiseth great troubles. 504 Overcom by the French. 305 Nicholas Jurith a stout Hungarian: 401 Justinus Emperor. 100 Justinian Emperor. 101, 103. His Death. 104 Justinus the second, his Reign. ib. His end. 105 Justinian 2d Emperor. 115. Imprisoned and escapes, ib. His cruelty and end. 116 K KEnnedies blow the coals of sedition in Scotland. 563 Kenneth k. of Scotlands stratagem, 134 Kent divided about Qu. Maries match with Spain. 591 Kets Rebellion and end. 587, &c. Kings of Asturia and Leon, of Navarr and Arragon. 119. of Galicia, ib. of Bulgaria, 120. Lombardie; 116 Saxons, ib. Ratchesius and Aistul∣phus k. of Lombardy, 121. Kings of Spain. 122. kings of Navar, 123 of Denmark, 128. of England and Scotl. 134. of Italy, 139. of Spain. 142. of Denmark, 230. of Hungary 250. of Poland. ib. of Denm. 251 of Scicily, 254. of Sweden, Den∣mark & Norway, 265. K. of Mo∣rocco defeated, 276. Four kings in the French army. 289. The French and Scots K. taken prisoners, 292, &c K. of Navarr troubles France. 293 of Denmark, Sweden and Norway. 336, &c. of Hungarie, 397, &c. of Arragon, Naples, Castile and Sci∣cily, 413. Kings of Arragon faile, 418. K. of Denmark endangered, 455. K. of Sweden invades Livo∣nia, Borussia, and Dantisk, 456. Of Ierusalem, 166. of France. 172 Kings, their conditions dangerous and uncertain. 646, &c. Knox his preaching, and the effects thereof. 584 Keyrie Eleison when begun. 94 L LAdislaus first of Hungary. 398 Ladislaus the second. 399 Ladislaus king of Hungary. 406, &c. Ladislaus king of Poland. 407 Ladislaus, son of Huniades beheaded: 408 Duke of Lancaster inriched in Spain. 317 Lathurus called Philometor, why, 11 his actions. ib. Peter Laudais the Du. of Britanie's fa∣vourite, hanged. 501 Laws called Agrariae: what? 8 League between Hungary, Bohemia, & Poland 419 holy-League in France. 509, &c. Leicester and Hollander disagree. 603, &c. The English and Scots besiege Leith: 614 Mathew Earl of Lenox made Regent, ib. Killed. 626 Leo Emperor. 96 Leontius Emperor. 115 Leo Isauricus. 118, &c. Leo the fourth Emperor. 122, &c. Leo the fifth Emperor. 129. Killed in his Chappell. ib. Leo Bishop of Thessalonica. 134 Leo, Basil's son, delivered by a Parrot. 138 Leo the Philosopher Emperor. 140. Is cudgelled. ib. Leolin Pr. of Wales beheaded. 242 And his brother David quartered: ibid. Lepidus his insolency and ruin. 31 Lewis the 7th of France. 187 Lewis the Ninth of France, his holy life and actions. 229. Is canonized, ibid. His Ship. ibid. His Iustice at home, and actions abroad. 237 Dieth before Tunis ibid. Lewis of Anjou poisoned. 260. Had Wars with Alphonsus of Arragon. ib. Lewis Hutin King of France. 287 Lewis of France entertains his sister of Savoy. 355
Lewis the eleventh of France, his reign 492, &c. he quarrels with Burgundy and Brittany. ib. and with his Peers. 493. imprisoned by Duke Charls. 494 Lewis soweth disord among the Princes 493. his double dealing with Burgun∣dy. 495. Lewis desires Mary of Burgundy to put her self under the French. 499 Lewis the twelfth of France, his reigne and actions. 503 Lewis the 13th of France. 512, &c. Lewis of Anjou takes Rome. 333 Lewis, Duke of Orleans rejected from being Governor. 501 Lewis Duke of Savoy, his actions. 353, &c. complaines of his son Phi∣lip. 354 Lewis, Marquiss of Salusses. 356 Lieinius Emperor. 77. his wickedness. 79. is defeated, his end. ibid. Liege makes Warre against the Bishop. 345 Ligeois beaten by Duke Charls. 494. rebel again. ibid. cut in pieces. 495 The Ligeois defeated by the Duke of Burgandy. 486 Lipsick surrendred. 386 Lisbon assaulted by the English. 607 Livonia wasted by the Muscovit. 432. Implores help from the Dane and Polacks. 432 Loadstone found out. 275 Locusts infest Affrica with Famin and Plague. 9. and France. 137. Waste Thracia. 157 Longobards. 101. 104. change their Government. 107. their Kings. 16. Lorrain in strife between Otho and the French. 148, &c. Duke of Lorrain leaves Naples, and fals on Arragon. 494 Lotharius Caesar. 130, &c. Lotharius Emperor. 132, quarrels and fights with his brothers. ib. &c. di∣vides his Kingdoms and enters into a Monastery. 133 Lotharius, Duke of Sexony, Em∣peror 171. opposed by Conradus. ib. his life and end. ib. Lowden is imprisoned and rsed. 64, &c. Lucerna like to be surprized. 358 Lucius Verus, his Government and death. 56, &c. Lucullus his actions. 18, &c. Ludovic Emperor. 130. his rebellious sons. 131. he deth. ib. Ludovic the second, Emperor. 135 Ludovic the younger. 137 Ludovic the Stammerer. ib. Ludovic the fourth, Emperor. 140 Ludovic Transmarin. 144. Ludovic of Bavaria, Emperor. 257. condem∣ned by the Pope. ib. complains of the Pope. 258. Ioynes with England a∣gainst France. ib. is deposed by the Pope. 259. Ludovic, King of Hun∣gary. 260 Ludovic the second, King of Hun∣gary. 400 Martin Luther begins to stirre. 426, &c. Lysius his Army. 1. he Invades Judaea. 2. is murthered. ib. M MAcedonius. 83 Magdeburg besieged and taken. 381. its ruine presaged. 381. 384. its misery. ib. Magdeburg again besieged. 461 Magnentius. 82 Mahomet his originall. 109. his death. 110. Mahumetans 127. Mahumetanisme prevails. 249. Mahumet the first. 463 Mahumet the second, his cruelty. 465. actions and victories. 466, &c. his aim at an Universal Monarchy, and his end and character. 468 Mahomet the third, his victories and actions. 480. his cruelties, ib. Maide of Norway. 244 Maide of Orleans. 487 Malcolme, King of Scotland, his life. 190 Malcolme, King of Scotland, mur∣thered, and the murtherers drowned. 154 Malta Assaulted by the Turk. 477 Mamalucks of Aegypt. 175, &c. their Kings or Sultans. 176 Mamalucks, who. 469. 473. destroyed by Selymus. 474
Manfrid the bastard stisles his Father. 227. his other wicked acts. 234 George Maniaces, a great Comman∣der. 157, &c. Manlius Torquatus puts his son to death. 9 Mansfield violats his Faith. 451. refu∣seth to fight. 453. is defeated. 456. dieth. 457 Mantua possessed by Nivern, which causeth great troubles. 462 Manuel Comnenus, Greek Emperor, his life and end. 183, &c. Earl of Mar, made Regent. 626. dieth. 627 Marcianus Emperor. 95. 96. Marcus Antonius de Dominis, burned 455 Mardacus, his misgovernment of Scot∣land. 536. his end. 537 Margaret of Holland. 253 Margaret, Queen of Denmark. 266, &c. Margaret, the Emperor Lodo∣vics wife. 279 Marius overthrowes Jugurtha and Bocchus. 12. his triumph. ib. his vi∣ctory over the Teutons. 13. and Cim∣brians. ib. raiseth a civil war. 14. his victory over the Marsians. 15. his quarrel with Sylla. ib. his troubles and death. ib. &c. Marquisats erected in Germany. 143 Marquiss of Brandeburg. 222. of Sa∣lusses. 285 Martina, her tongue cut out. 111 Martyrs. 55, &c. 58. 63. 66. 68, &c. 71. 73, &c. 87. 98. Mary, last of the house of Burgundy. 343 Marie, King Henries daughter wooed by divers Princes. 557, &c. Mary of Scotland conveyed into France. 581. there married. 582 Mary, King Henries daughter, is pro∣claimed Queen. 590, &c. her Reigne. 591, &c. Queen Maries persecutions. 595. with child. ib. her death. 597 Q. Marie returneth into Scotland. 615 she with her Lords, sends an Ambas∣sador to Queen Elizabeth, to declare her successor, which she refuseth to do. 615, &c. Queen Mary and the Ministers of Edinburgh differ. 616. she makes her brother James, Earl of Murry, which discontents Huntley. ib. Queen Maries progress into the North. 617, &c. She falls in love with young Lenox, and marrieth him. 618 Her discontent with her husband. 619. escapes by Setons means. ib. persecutes the murtherers of David. ib. is deli∣vered of Iames 6th. ib. Is abused by her Subjects disgracefully. 620. and forced to resigne her Crown. ib. With Bothwel she escapes to Dunbar, they raise an Army. 621. she is brought disgracefully to Edinburgh, and he escapes to Orkney. ib. his end. ib. she escapes to Hamilton, raiseth an Army, and is defeated by Murry Regent. 622 Her plot with Norfolks detected. 623 She complains to Queen Elizabeth; and her answer. 628, &c. is removed to Paulet. 69 Suspected and accused of Treason, is condemned, her last desires. 630. is in∣terceded for by King Iames, and the French King: her death. 630 Massanissa's age, strength, and death. 4 Matthias the Machabee. 1 Matthias Corvinus, his actions and death. 398, &c. Matthias Emperor. 444 Matthias, the Emperor's Brother. 403 Maude the Emperess. 187 Prior of S. Maurice, his excellent speech to Duke Amadeus. 349 Maurice, Governor of Holland. 437, &c. Mauritius Emperor. 106. his covetous∣ness. 107. his troubles and end. ib. all his children slain. ib. Maximilian Emperor. 402 Maximilian and the French quar∣rel. 411. Maximilian's actions. 415, &c. his end and Issue. 419 Maximilian the second, Emperor. 433 he dieth. 434 Maximilian defeated by Mahomet. 480
Maximinus his wicked Reign. 67 Is murthered with his Son. ib. Maximianus Caesar. 74, 76 Maxentius a wicked Tyrant. 78 Maximinus his cruelty. ib. Maxentius overthrown and drowned. ib Maximinus his end. 79 Maximus the Generall. 88 A great Man. 95. Stoned to death. 96 Metellus banished and brought back. 14 His Actions. 18 Michael Curopabates Emperor. 127 Michael Balbus Emperor. 131 Michael son of Theodora. 134 His Fooleries, Cruelties and death. 135 Michael Paleologus. 229. His actions and end. 247 Michael Emperor of Constantinople. 157 Michael Calaphates Emperor. 158 Michael Parapinacius Greek Emperor, suffers the Empire to be ruined. 164 Milcolumbus Canmor k. of Scotland, His life and end. 169 Millan taken by the Goths. 102. Spa∣red by Frederick, the overthrown. 177. Set at liberty by Henry the Emperor. 256. Entertains Ludo. vic. 258. Governed by 24 men. ib. sold to John Galeacius. 270. quar∣rels with Savoy. 285 Its greatnesse torn in pieces. 332. quar∣rels again with Savoy. 346 Struggles for liberty. 353 Laid claim to by divers. 411. Taken by the French. 412. By Caesar. ibid. 414. Taken by Francis Sforsa. 360 in great troubles. 499 Archbishop of Mintz his speeches. 420, &c. Mithridates king of Pontus, his parts, actions and languages. 14. Subdued by Scylla. 16. and Fimbria. ib. By Lucullus. 18. By Pompey. 19. His end. 20 Monks drowned and killed. 99. a Monk invented Guns. 270. Monks called Iesuites, 277 Wicked Monks of Ambrunaya. 283. Franciscans and Dominicans quarrell. 419 Monks of Saint Maurice in Savoy. 348 Monsters. 43; &c. 46, 48, 51, 56, 108, 112, 38, 439, 511, 534, 567. Monteths plot discovered. 321 Montmorancie taken and Beheaded: 515 Moravia and Silesia in question. 411 Its troubles. 457 Mores make peace with the Christians. 237. Driven out of Spain. 444 Mortimers. 307. Mortimer hanged. 308 Morton's men, and the Queens party fight. 626 Is beheaded notwithstanding Q. Eliza∣beths intercession. 628 Moscovites. 134. Miraculously con∣verted. 138. Waste Livonia. 433 Beaten by the Polander. 436 Mouns lost and taken again by the English. 525 Muhavias the Saracen. 113, &c. Mulhouse unite with the Cantons: 371 Andrew Murrey Viceroy of Scotland. 324 Murry the Regent goeth to Qu. Eliza∣beth to cleer himself, 622. He returns and is opposed by Hamilton. ib. Is killed. 624 Mustapha, Solyman's son strangled. 477. His cruelty. ib. Mustapha of a three months Emperor, became a prisoner. 481. Made Em∣peror again. ibid. And Deposed. 482 N NAples in great troubles, 259, &c. In great troubles by Arragon and Anjou, 413, 416. Divided. 417 Taken by Arragon, and Anjou sent away. 489 Taken by the French and lost again. 502 Changeth Kings quickly. 503 Narses 103. deposed. 104. cals the Lon∣gobards into Italy. ib. defeats Baras 106 King of Navarr burned with aqua vitae 301 Neochomum, or Neufchastel annexed to Bern. 372 Nero, his good and bad conditions, his Tyrannies. 44, &c. his end. 46 Nerva, his good Government and con∣ditions. 52. and death. ib. Nestorius the heretick. 94. Nestori∣anisme far spread. 111
Netherlands divided among divers Princes. 268 Newburg and Brandeburg differ in Religion. 445 Newport Battel. 439 Nicephorus Emperor. 126, &c. slain. 127 Nicephorus Phocas, Emperor of the East, his life and death. 147. &c. Nicholaus the Scriv'ner seiseth on the Capitol. 260. is defeated and impri∣soned. ib. Nigar, Emperor. 61 Normans, their Victories. 133. settle in Neustria. 137. rage in Germany ib. defeat, and are defeated. 139. take Calabria from the Greeks. 161. Normandy recovered by the French. 222. invaded by the English. 230 Norvegians. 265 Norwitch pestred by the Rebels. 587 Novatus. 69 Numantia's Delinquency and ruin. 9 Numerianus. 74 O OCtavius, Caesars adopted son, is made Emperor against Antony 29. his age and beginning of his Go∣vernment ib. is slighted by the Senat, and is made Consul. ib. &c. his battel at Phillippi with Brutus and Cassi∣us. 30. he lost many of his ships. 31. honored with Ovatio. ib. his victory at Actium. 33. obtains 3 triumphs. ib. his honors, happiness, and peace with all Nations. ib. &c. he reforms all disorders, and is grieved for the loss of Varus. 34. his death, and ex∣cellent parts described. 35 Odenatus, General. 70 Odoacer, King of Italy. 97 Offida, his strange punishment. 352 Oneals rebellion and tyranny in Ulster. 598 Opllius Macrinus his wicked Govern∣ment. 64. by Martialis he murthered Caracalla. ib. his end. ib. Prince of Orange defeated. 347. Mur∣thered. 436 Orcanes the Turk. 250. 263 Order of the Anunciada. 285. of Ca∣laturava, and of Saint James. 182. of Carmalits. 183. 192. of Carthu∣sians. 279. the Garter. 276. 310. of the Golden fleece. 264. 342. of Heremits. 182. of the holy Ghost, 508 of the Humiliati. 177. of Saint John of Jerusalem, of the Templars, of the Tutonicks 166. of the Knights of Iesus Christ. 276. of Marinus. 414. of Saint Michael. 285. of Mount O∣livet. 277. of the Premonstratensis 172. of Predicants and Minorits. 192. of the Star. 276. of Stephanits. 433. of Jesuits. 277 Origen. 63. 69 Duke of Orleans and Richlieu quarrel. 514. Orleans defeated. ib. Osman made Sultan. 481. his actions. ib. strangled by Mustapha. ib. Ostend Battel. 439 Otho, his reigne and death. 47 Otho first bore the 3 Lillies. 139 Otho the first, German Emperor. 144 Otho the Emperor, his divers exploits. 145. he makes divers journeys to Rome, and takes it. 145, &c. in a Synod he deposeth Pope John the twelfth. 146. punisheth divers of the Citizens. ib. he wasts Calabria and Apulia, and marrieth Theophania to his son. ib erects divers Bishopricks, and dieth. ib. Otho the second, Emperor of the West, and his actions. 148, &c. Otho the third, Emperor, his reigne. 151. &c. his agreement with the Pope 152. his pilgrimage, justice on his wife: and death. 153 Ottacar, King of Bohemia. 235 Otterburn battel, and the Scots Stra∣tagem. 329 Otto, the sonne of Henricus Leo. 221. Emperor, and his contestation with the Pope. 222. resignes his Em∣pire. ib. Ottoman Family appeareth. 247. Ot∣toman the first 248. his actions and death. 249. 263 Overberry imprisoned & poysoned. 637 P PAlatinat. all lost. 453 Pappenhem slain. 391 Paris troubled with mutinies. 297. Fi∣ned. 300. rebels against the Dolphin. 312 Parliaments at Edinburgh, two at once 626
Parma defeats Fredericks Army. 227 Parthians defeated. 31. their civil war. 42. subject Trajan. 53. defeated un∣der Antoninus. 56. seise upon Meso∣potamia. 62. wronged by Caracalla. 63. subdued by the Persian King, Artaxerxes. 66. by Gordian. 68. beat the Turks. 479 Paul Preacheth the Gospel. 41, &c. 45. his Iourneys and Miracles. ib. his death. ib. Paul the Heremit. 69 Paulician Hereticks. 132 Peace between Amurath and Ladislaus, made, and broke. 407 Peace between Frederick the Emperor, and Charls of Burgundy. 410 Between Caesar and the Turk. 442. Between Spain and Holland, ib. Between Spain and Holland expi∣red. 452. Between the Danes and Swedes. 445 Between Caesar and the Dane. 460. Swedland and Poland. 462 Between the Turk and Persian. 481. the Turk and Polander. ib. Between Caesar and the Turk and Gabor. 483 Between England and France. 293 Between France, England, and Burgundy. 497 Concluded in France. 510. and with Spain. ib. with England. 514 Dishonorably concluded with Scot∣land. 308 Between France and England. 552. 558. Between England and Scot∣land. 562 With the French broken, and why. 557 Concluded between the English, Scots, and French. 614 Pelagius, the Popes Legat. 224 Perennius, Commodus his Favorit. 58 Perkin Warbeck his Story. 547, &c. 567, &c. Persians subdued. 70. beat by Maximi∣nus. 75. submit to Constantin. 81. Article with the Romans. 85. defeated by Ardaburius. 92. conver∣ted. 100. defeated by Martianus. 105 and by Mauritius. 106. they subdue Phenicia, &c. 108. defeated by Mau∣ritius. 109. subdued by the Saracens 111. Baptized. 114. their Story un∣der, Usumcassanes, Harduelles, Ish∣mael, &c. 471. defeated by Solymus the Turk. 472. Prevail in Asia. 480. their bloodie battel with the Turks. 481. they take Babylon and other places from the Turk. 482 Perth begins the Protestant reforma∣tion. 584 Pertinax saluted Emperor. 60. his ex∣cellent Government and end. ib. his. murtherers banished. 61 Pestilence at Babylon and Rome. 56. 58. 70. at Picenum and Constan∣tinople. 102. at Rome. 108. 118. at Byzantium and else where. 120. in the Camp at Tunis. 237. 260. at Rome. 438. at Constantinople. 481 at Rome 508 Peter the Apostle. 43. his Miracles and death. 45 Petrus de Vineis. 227 Petrus Antisiodorensis. 228 Peter of Arragon obtains Sicily. 235 Peter de la Broch. 237 Peter of Arragon killed. 238 Peter of Savoy, his actions. 281. Pe∣ter of Castile. 293, &c. Peter, King of Hungary killed. 158 Pharnases defeated and murthered. 27 Phaselus beats out his own brains. 30 Philbert, Duke of Savoy. 355 poyson∣soned. 356 Philbert the second. ib. Philip, King of Syria. 11, &c. Philip the Apostle. 43 Philip the Emperor his Reigne. 68 Philippicus Bardanes. Emperor. 117. Philip the German Emperor. 221. slain. 222. his contestation with the Pope 221 Philip, the Bold King of France. 237, &c. Philip the Fair. 238. contests with the Pope. 234. like to be killed. ib. defea∣ted of the Empire. 255. Philip, E. of Savoy. 282. Philip le Long. 287. Philip Valois declared K. of France. 288. his actions. 298, &c. Philip of Burgundy. 342. Philip, Prince of Belgium invited into Spain. 417. King Philip beats the Pope out of Latium. 431 Philip Augustus, King of France. 187
Philip Valois, King of France. 308. Philip of Savoy imprisoned. 354 Philip Duke of Savoy. 356 Philip of Austria entertained in Eng∣land. 550 Philip of Spain, his marriage with Q. Mary, and Articles thereupon. 594 King Philip deserts Queen Mary, pos∣sesses his fathers Dominions, wars a∣gainst France. 596 King Philip solicited by Queen Eliza∣beth, in behalf of the Netherlanders. 602, &c. Phocas Emperor. 107. his wicked life and end. 108 Phraates his actions and death. 6, 7. Pyemont joyn'd to Savoy. 280 Pipinus. 117. made King. 121. his gift to the Pope. ib. Pipin, King of A∣quitania. 130 Physcon, King of Egppt, his actions. 5 Plantaginet. 230 Plantaginet the true and false. 545, &c. Plato's Coffin. 125. Plautianus, his ambition and end. 62 Pliny excuseth the Christians. 53 Poliman Knights, their habit. 159 Poland in great troubles. 230. distra∣cted by their Kings. 250. their Crown translated. 277 Polanders massacred in Russia. 441. disagree at home. ib. beat the Mu∣scovit. 443 Poland proclaims war against the Turk. 451 Polands Ambassador to Queen Eliza∣beth, and her Answer. 609 Pomerania in bad condition. 380, &c. Pompey destroys the Pyrats. 19. his greatness and Command ib. his acti∣ons. 20. takes Jerusalem and other places. ib. suspects Caesar. 24. is sup∣ported by the Senat against Caesar. 25. he and they also flie to Brundu∣sium. ib. is Master of the Sea. 26. defeats Caesars Army. ib. he chu∣seth Epirus for the seat of the war. ib. his Pharsalian Forces, his defeat, light and death. ib. &c. his head presented to Caesar. 27. his son de∣feated and slain. 28 Cardinal Pool, his Story. 594, &c. Pope Damasus. 86. innocentius 91. Leo. 94, &c. John the first. 100, &c. Gregory the first. 108. Boniface 3d. and fourth. 109. Martin. 112. Vita∣lianus. 11, &c. Eugonius the first. 113. Agatho. 114. Leo second. ibid. Sergius. 116. Constantin the sea∣venth. 117. Gregory the second 118 &c. Gregory third. 118. Stephen. 121. Zachary. ib. Adrian the first. 125. Leo the third. ib. &c. Sergius the second. 133. Leo fourth. 134. Formosus. 139, &c. Gregory the ninth. 223. Popes wanting 21 months 226. Innocent fourth. ib. the Popes contestations with England. 231, &c Gregory the ninth. 234. Clemens the fifth translates his seat to Avini∣on. 238. Boniface the eight. 239. Clemens the fourth. 246. Popes cho∣sen without the Conclave. ib. Martin the fourth. ib. Celestin the fifth. ib. Boniface the eight. ib. John the twenty two. 258. Clemens the fifth, his Coronation and Actions. 275. John the 22, his error and actions. 276. Benedict the eleventh. ib. Cle∣mens sixt. ib. Innocent the sixt. ib. Urban sixt. 277. Boniface ninth. ib. Martin the fifth. 334. Eugenius the fourth. Felix 5. 336. 350. Pope ho∣nors the Switzers. 366. Pius the se∣cond. 410. Julius second. 412. Leo the tenth. 418. Clemens the sea∣venth 425. Julius the third. 429. Paul fourth, a great Antilutherian 431. Pius fourth. 432. Gregory 13 437. Sixtus the fifth. ib. Paul the 5th 441. Gregory the 15th. 452, &c. Urban the eighth. 454. Julius the second. Leo the tenth. 504, &c. Cle∣ment seaventh. 506 Popes, divers in few years. 162 Pope Paschalis. 169. Pope Adrian. 177. Vittor and Alexander Antipopes. ibid. Pierre de Lalune, a Castilian Pope, removes from Avenion. 303 Pope Paul the fourth 506, &c. Popes power curbed by King Henry the eight. 558 Portugall Crown in question. 277 Portugals take many places in the East-Indies. 431 Portugal seised on by the Spaniard 435
Presbyterie curbed in Scotland. 629. their power. 631. force King James. 631, &c. Prodigies. 223. 276. 384. 386, &c. 392. 437. 447. 454. 460. 462. 504. 534. 593. 153. Protestants differ among themselves. 426. are gently used by Caesar. 428. Reject the Counsel of Trent, 432. are persecuted. ib. massacred. 434. Their troubles and Doctrins. 429. they are dispersed, and allowed. 430 435 Banished out of Styria, &c. 439. their troubles in Germany. 442. Complain at the Diet of Ratisbon. 444 Their Iubilee causeth much trouble. 447. their proceedings in Bohe∣mia. ib. Are massacred in France. 507. per∣secuted there. 513 Persecuted also in Scotland. 575, &c. 579. make stirrs in Edin∣burgh. 583 In Scotland quarrel with the Queen Regent. ib. their Violencies. 584. Angry at Queen Maries match. 594 and abuses offered. ibid. In Scotland prevail, and shake off the French yoke. 613. Petition the Queen Regent to dismiss the French. 614 Province falls to the French King. 500 Prusius, King of Bithynia, slain by his son. 3 Prusia, the Turks Capital City. 248 Ptolomie Philometor, is restored and reconciled to his brother. 2. his actions and death. 3. Ptolomi Euergetes 5 Ptolomi Philometor, his kindness to the Iews. 5. Ptolomie Lamyras, his cruelties. 10. Ptolomie is driven out of Aegypt. 21 Ptolomie Auletes dieth. 25 Ptolomie Dionysius. 25. Ptolomies Library burnt. 27. he is stifled in the mud. ib. Ptolomais taken by Sultan Melech. 236 Publicius Malleolus, his murther and punishment. 13 Pulcheria. 59 Q Queen Mother of France. 511, &c. Quintillus Emperor. 72 R RAdbodus his wicked speech. 118 Sir Walter Rawleigh beheaded. 639 Randulph, Earl of Murry, Protector of Scotland. 323 Ravenna, the Regal Seat of Italy, 97, &c. the Exarchat. 104. the Bishop∣rick. 114. endeth. 121. Rebellion of Yorkshire. 547. in the North. 545, &c. in Cornwall. 548, &c. In Lincolnshire, and other Northern Parts. 559 In Cornwall and Devonshire about Religion. 586. about inclosures in Norfolk. 587. the Rebels stoutness and strength. ib. &c. North Rebelli∣ons. 588 In the North against Queen Eliza∣beth. 599, &c. Regent, his absence from Scotland, occasioneth much mischief. 572, &c. His actions with the Queen Mother 581. resignes his place to her. 582 Queen Regent of Scotland, and her actions. ib. She dieth. 614 Rhodes and Belgrad taken by Soly∣man. 475, &c. Ricaredus, King of Spain, is called Catholick. 108 Richard cure de Lion, King of Eng∣land, his actions abroad and at home. 189, &c. Richard Earl of Cornwall. 235. 240, &c. Richard the second, King of England. 315, &c. his misgovernment. 318, &c. is deposed. 319 Earl of Richmond encouraged by Dr. Morton, against King Richard. 554. puts to Sea, and returns into Britany. 550. where he was like to be betrayed. ib. he arrives at Milford Haven. ib. Fights King Richard, gets the day, and is Crowned in the field. 556 Earl of Richmond preserved in a Sanctuary. 558
David Riz, great with Queen Mary. 618. His bad counsell and end. 619 Robert, the Conquerors sonne, rebels. 167 Agrees with his brother Henry. 173. dieth. ibid. Robert, King of Apulia. 256 Robert de Vere, Duke of Ireland. 317 Robert King of Scotland dieth with grief. 536 Rodulphus, Duke of Suevia made Em∣peror, and lost his Army. 160 Rodulphus the second, Emperor. 435 Rodulphus Emperor, dieth. 444 Rogation, when instituted. 97 Roger, King of Sicily. 171 Rogerius Laurea, the Spanish Admi∣ral. 247 Rohan besieged and taken by the En∣glish. 521 Rollan, called Rupert. 138 Roman victories. 4, 5. they degene∣rate. ibid. troubled by the sedition of Gracchus. 8. by the slavs of Sicily & Cilicia. ib. Rome infested with the plague. ib. the Romans severity against Mati∣enus and Mancinus. 9. their success, bad and good in Spain. ib. against Jugurtha. 12. against the Cimbri∣ans and Teutons. 12, 13. against the Thracians. ib. against the slaves. ib. &c. against the Pisentes, Samnites, Marsians, and other Italians. 14, 15. their bloodie civil wars. ib. &c. their Sertorian, Spartic, Sardanian, and Mithridatick wars. 18. their Pyratical war. ib. and German. 22. their success in Gallia and Britan. 22, &c. their battel at Pharsalia. 26, &c. the number of the Citizens. 28 they defeat the Parthians, by Ventidi∣us. 31. their civil war at Actium. 33. their miserie under Tiberius. 37, &c. under Caligula. 40, &c. their number under Claudius. 42. their miserie under Nero. 44. are murther∣ed by the Britans. ib. their disasters under Commodus. 59. and Cara∣calla. 64. their Victory over the Per∣sians. 66. their miseries under Gor∣dianus. 67. the Roman Empire torne 69, &c. Romes miserie under Ne∣potianus. 82. are defeated by the Hunns, Goths, and Vandals. 87. Rome taken by Alaricus. 92. Sack'd by Gensericus. 96. taken by the He∣ruli and others. 97. ends in Augu∣stulus. ib. taken by Belisarius, then by Totilas. 102, &c. Rome surpri∣zed by a hare. 139. overthrowes Fre∣dericks Garisons. 226. runs with blood under the Columni and Ur∣sini. 256 taken twice by Ladislaus. 260. Romans abuse Pope Pauls Sta∣tue. 42. in Rome, strife about the Popes Election. 440. taken by the Duke of Burbon. 506 Romans storm at the Inquisition. 507 Romanus the Admiral. 141 Romanus the younger, Emperor of Constantinople. 147 Romanus Argyropolus, Emperor, his life and death. 157 Romanus Diogines, how used by the Turks. 163. and how by Ducas. 164 Rome taken, and the Walls overthrown 333 Romilda and her daughters. 109 Rosimunda, her revenge. 104 Bishop of Ross, Agent for Queen Mary. 627 Rotchell Besieged. 513. and taken. 514 Rotvil, the place of Iudicature. 371 Rudolphus of Burgundy. 143 Rudolphus of Haspurg, Emperour. 235 his Victories and actions. 236. his death. ib. Ruffinus. 90 Rupert of Bavaria, Emperor. 331. his actions. 332 Rupert the Palatin occasioneth a War. 417 Russians defeated. 144. of the Greek-Communion. 246 Russia deluded by Demetrius, the Counterfeit Prince. 440 Russia Molested by the Polander. 446
S SAlador, its History. 364 Salique Law. 287. in Savoy. 394 Sapores, the Persian King. 68, &c. 81. 85 Saracens subdue the East. 111. attempt Byzantium, and take Rhodes. 112, &c. fall out about their profit. 113. Waste Afric, and are defeated by Constantin. ibid. &c. Subdue the Persians. 115. defeat Justinian. ibid. Are killed in France. 119. And in Spain. 125. Overrun Cy∣prus. 127. Defeated in Spain, 130. They Defie Christ and Basil the Emperor. 136. Their Rites and Prayers changed. 138. Beat by the Tartars. 248 Sarmatians. 87 Saturninus torne in pieces. 14 Savoy, and its Earls. 279, &c. Savoyen History prosecuted. 345. 392, &c. Savoy made a Prey to strangers. 393 Savoy denies passage to the French. 491 Duke of Saxonies complaint, and reso∣lution. 386 Saxony much troubled, and their Duke taken. 429 Saxons called into Brittan. 93. Drive out the Brittans. 95. Erect their Kingdom. 98. Kept off from lan∣ding. 102. Take the Isle of VVight. ibid. quarrel with the Suevi. 107. Their Plantations. 129 Saxons quarrel with Henry the sea∣venth Emperor. 160, &c. Saxons and Caesarians at variance. 429, &c. Saxony the seat of war. 455 Scaliger, Cajus and Mastinus. 259 Scanderbeg revolts from Amurath, 464. with Huniades, spoyles Amu∣rath. 465 Scanderbeg is beat, and dieth. 468. His strength and courage. ib. Scaphusa, it's History. 366 Schismes. 86. 277. 295. 251 Scipio Aemilianus. 4. Opposeth Grac∣chus, and is poysoned. 8. Scipio is sent against Numantia. 9. Scipio, Pompeys Father in law kills himself. 27 Bardas Sclerus his actions. 149, &c. Scotland troubled with intestin wars. 325 Scotland shelters the English King and his adherents. 534 Scotlands friendship sought for by the English and French. 538 Scotland disturbed by the Chancellor and Regent. 539. By Douglasse. 544 Troubled by Courtiers, and Factions, 563, &c. In great troubles in James the fifth's Minority. 570. &c. Troubled with civil wars between Queen Marie's Party and the Re∣gents. 624, &c. Raiseth tumults about the new Ser∣vice-Book. 642 Bishops of Scotland protest against the Covenanters. 643 Scots Presbyterians expell the Bi∣shops, and raise great Armies a∣gainst the King. ibid. Invade England. 646. Take Newcastle. ib. Scots receive the Christian Faith, when 79 Converted by Palladius. 93 Destroy the Picts. 134 Have Wars with England, and troubles at home. 233 They beat the Danes and Norvegi∣ans. 243 Take the Isle of Man, and aid King Henry against the Barons. 243 Scots Clergy contest with the No∣bility; 243. they slight the Popes Legat. ib. divided by the factions of Baliol and Bruce. 244. they overthrow the English Fleet. ibid. They lose Barwick, Edenburgh, and Sterling. 245. They invade England. ib. Are beat by King Edward. ib. They defeat three English Armies in one day. ib. Scots overthrow the English at Bannock. 306
Invade England and Wales. 317. are angry with the French. ibid. Their success at home and in Ireland 321 Slight the Popes Legats. 322 Invade England again with. 20000 horse. ib. Beaten by Baliol. 324. invade Engl. without their Kings consent. 328 Scotch and English bickerings in France. 536. Scots defeated at Flo∣den. 551. Their civil Wars. 536 Scots waste the English borders. 579. Their miseries in Queen Maries Mi∣nority. 577, &c. Will not hearken to a match with England. 580. are defeated by the English. ib. Send Commissioners into France a∣bout the match. 582. are poysoned there. 583 Scots Crown demanded by the French. but refused. ib. Scots Protest ants make a League with England against France. 585 Scots beaten by Sommerset, Protector of England. 586 Scots beat the French into Leith. 614 Will not be induced to admit Queen Mary. 625 Scylla, his victories and quarrels with Marius. 15, &c. his cruel acts and success. 16, &c. his Dictatorship and death. 17 Sejanus, his wickedness and cruelties. 37 &c. his Tragical end. 39 Seleucus, son of Antiochns Gryphus. 11 Selymus the Turk. 472. his actions and victories. ib. &c. his end. 474 Selymus the second, his victories. 478 Seneca. 44. &c. Seriphas the Aegyptian. 248 Sertorius his actions and death. 18 Severus Emperor. 61. he defeats Niger. ib. his other actions. 62. his rigid Go∣vernment and end. ib. Severus the Eutychean. 99, &c. Sextus Pompeius seiseth upon Sicily, 30 is reconciled to Octavius & Antony, 31. is beat at sea, and slain. ibid Maximilian Sforsa's gift to the Swit∣zers. 374 Francis Sfortia invades Millan. 411 his actions and end. 412. his son re∣covers it. ib. 416 Sfortia defeated by the Switzers. 504 English Ships, two in number, fight with 30 Turkish Gallies. 485 English Ships taken by the Scots 567 Sicily quickly won and lost. 157 Sicilian cruelty against the French. 235 Sigismund of Austria. 375 Sigismund of Swethland deposed. 377, &c. Sigismund Emperor. 333. his actions. ibid. &c. Sigismund, King of Hungarie. 270. 397, &c. Sigismund King of Hungarie impri∣soned, and set free. 303 Silesia subdued. 257 Simon succeeds Jonathas. 6. his actions; is murthered. ib. Symon Magus. 43. 45 Sinan the Turk dieth with grief. 403 Siroes the Persian King. 110 Slaves trouble the Romans. 8. are o∣verthrown in Sicily by Lucullus and Aquilius. 13. &c. Slavi, or Slavonians. 101. 168. 115. Solyman invades Hungary. 400. for∣ced to leave Vienna. ib. Solyman his actions and victories. 475, &c. his end and Character. 478 Spain possessed by the Saracens. 117. under Mozarabes and Almod, Ara∣bians. 119 Overrun by the Mores. 192 Spain defeats the Affrican Kings. 290 troubled with civil Wars. 344. Obtains all Naples. 417. beats out the Moors. 413. Spanish Fleet beat by Solyman. 433. Spanish harshness in Belgium. ib. Spaniards beaten out of Africa. 434. rejected by the Netherlanders. 435 Spain hath divers disasters. 503 Spain prepares a Feet against Eng∣land. 604. The greatnesse thereof. ib. Spanish Fleet encountred with, and defeated by the English. 605, &c. Spain invaded by the English. 606 Spaniards beaten by the French. 607
Spaniards beat and are beaten. 452. Spaniards beat the French out of Italy 504 Spaniards in Ireland article with the Deputy and are sent home. 611 Spanish Fleet defeated by the Hollan∣ders. 644 Archbishop of Spalato entertained and sent away. 640 Spartacus his actions and death. 18 Spencer. 306, &c. Spinola and Maurice, their actions. 454 Spier Diocess mutinies. 419 Stauratius the Patrician. 123, &c. his son. 127. wounded. ib. Stephen the Patriarch. 144 Stephen, King of England. 187 Stilico. 90 Michael Stratioticus Greek Emperor. 162 Robert Stuart, King of Scotland. 327 Stuarts and Douglasses strive for the young King. 573 Matthew Stuart, Earl of Lenox, de∣luded. 577. beaten, and flies into Eng∣land. 578, &c. Charls Suderman. 440 Suffolk accused of high Treason. 530. his end. ib. Sultan, his expedition into Persia. 485. he sends home the French Ambassa∣dor, and bribes the Janisaries. ib. &c. Duke of Sommerset accused, and slain. 531 Duke of Sommerset, protector of Eng∣land, executes his brother, and is ac∣cused of Treason. 588. is executed. 589 Swedish History. 377, &c. Swedes make Laws for establishing their Kingdom. 379. have wars with the Danes. ib. Swethland and its Kings. 265, &c. Swethlands History. 336, &c. Switzers subdued by Rodulphus. 246. Cantonize. themselves. 253. their va∣lour in the Romans time, and their Service against the Sarazens. 357. they rebel against their Nobles. ib. divided into two Religions. ib. their League. 358. they had much bicker∣ing with the Austrians. 357, &c. their History. ib. &c. they have divers enemies. 361. they war amongst them∣selves, and with the French 362. they defeat and kill Charls of Bur∣gundy. 363. they increas their Can∣ton Towns. ib. they quarrel with Mil∣lan. ib. their last war for their Liber∣ty. 365. are worsted at Naples. 366. they aid the French and the Pope. ib. and Maximilian. 367. their ami∣ty sought for. 366. make peace with the French. 368. then fall out with them. ibid. then make a perpetual League with France. ib. &c. their sti∣pendiary Towns. 372. other of their Towns. 373. their 9 Bailiages. 374. their free Provinces. ib. their divers Confederacies. 375, &c. they defeat and kill Charls of Burgundy. 410. disswade the election of King Fran∣cis. 421 Synod, see Councel. T TAmerlan and his Conquests. 264. Tartarians, what kinde of people. 182 Tartars overrun many Countries. 230. are converted ib. send to the Pope. 239. become Mahumetans. 247, &c. Precopit Tartars made slaves to the Turks. 479 Taurinum strangely released. 281 Techelles the Persian Commander. 471 &c. Telerichus the Bulgarian. 120. 122 Temple at Delphos. 85. at Jerusalem. 49. 84. of Apollo at Rome. 85. of S. Sophia. 103. of S. Mark. 104. of the Holy Sepulchre taken. 229 Templars destroyed. 238, &c. Tenedos occasion of much war. 271: slighted and forsaken. 275. Terza beats the Turk, 247 Thalmud. 100 Theodiscus corrupts Isiodor. 113 Theodosius the Emperor. 88. hi ex∣cellencies. ib. &c. his death. 89 Theodosius the younger. 91, &c. The∣odosius of Adramyttum▪ 117. &c. Theophilus Emperor. 132 Theodora Emperess. 134 Theodoricus the Goth. 94. his acti∣ons and death. 98. Theodorus Lascalis. 228. Theodorici Earls of Holland. 251
Thomas, sirnamed Constantin, his life and death. 132. Thomas Earl of Savoy. 280. Thracians Rebellion. 13 Tiberius his victories. 35. his govern∣ment and qualities described. 36. his reformation and cruel nature. 37. is perswaded by Sejanus to remove from the City. ib. he lives eleven years at Capreae, and why. 38. his in∣humanitie to his mother. ib. he de∣stroys Sejanus, and why 39. his death and burial. 40. Tiberius, Emperor of Byzantium, his actions. 105. dyeth. 106 Tiberius Apismarus, Emperor. 115 Tigranes and his actions. 17. 19, &c. Tigurum changeth its Government. 358. like to be surprized, and quar∣rels with Habespurg. 359. and with Rapersvil. ib. they waste Marchia. ib. desire peace with Austria, which is denied them. 360. they submit to the Queen of Hungaries verdict. ib. make war with the Austrian. 360, &c. Tigurins will make no League with France, and their reasons. 368. Tilly, the Caesarian Generalissimo. 382 takes Magdeburg. 383. his other actions. 384, &c. Tilly Defeated and wounded, 386. wounded again. 388. dieth at Ingolstad. 389 Tillies and Fridlands proceedings. 456 &c. 460 Tir-Oen rebels in Ulster. 609, &c. his underhand-dealing. 610. he beats the English. ib. he parlies with Essex. ib. spoiles Ireland, and is beat by Mont∣joy. 611. submits and is pardoned. ibid. Titus the Emperor. 46. subdues Jerusa∣lem. 49. and Triumpheth with his Father. ib. his sweet nature and con∣ditions. 50 Tomumbeius, King of Aegypt, hanged by Selymus. 474. Totilas. 102. killed. 103 Tournay taken by a French Barbar. 499 Trajan. 52. his good Government and victories. 53. indangered at Antioch ib. his losses and death. ib. his burial and Pillar. 54 Traitors and Treasons against Queen Elizabeth detected. 600, &c. Transylvania pestred with civil war. 439 Treaties between England, Naples and Persia, with the Turk. 483 Elector of Trevers Speech. 422, &c. Troubles between the Queen Regent of Scotland and the Protestants. 584, &c. Tryphon obtains Syria. 5. which he loseth again, and is slain. 6. Tryphon the Patriarch. 144 Tully is questor. 19. Consul. 20. is ba∣nished and plundered. 21. returns, and is called Transfuga. 23. and Impera∣tor. ib. pleads for Milo. 24. inveighs against Antony. 29. is banished, mur∣thered, and after death, abused. 30 Tunis besieged, which makes peace with the Christians. 302 Turks. 105. revolt from Heraclius. 110 break out of the Caspian Straits. 121 Turks employed by Mahomet. 150. whom they subdue with his Saracens. 151. they desire peace with Constan∣tin. 158. beaten by Theod. Lascaris. 228. Invade the Greek Empire. 246 defeat the Alani. 247. waste the Ea∣stern Empire. 248. take divers Towns. 250. their original and in∣crease. 262 &c. their Tetrarches. 263 called in by Francis the French king, they besiege Nicaea. 395. waste Hun∣gary. 400. they defeat Ferdinand, and are defeated by him. 401. their cruelties in Hungary 403. assault Malta, and take Chios. 433. 477. take Cyprus and Golet, 434. 478. take Constantinople. 466. take di∣vers places from the Venetian. 467, &c. they take Rhodes. 476. defeated at Lepanto. 478. their bad success a∣gainst the Persians. 479. their per∣fidiousness to Hungary. ib. their bad success in the Mediterranean sea. 481 Wat Tylers Rebellion. 315 V VAlentinian and Valens, their Government. 86. and end. 87. Valentinian the second. 88. &c Valentinian the third. 93. 95 Valerianus his reigne and end. 69
Valesians their History. 370 Vandals invade Africa. 93 Varius Antoninus Heliogabalus, why so called. 64. his wicked, tyrannicall, and ridiculous Government. 64, &c. his end. 65 Varus is defeated in Germany. 35. he defeats the Iews. 36 Iohn Vayvod of Transylvania. 400 Confirmed k. of Hungary by the Turk, ib. Vayvods treachery. 402 Venice founded. 95. her first Duke. 117 Venetians expell the Duke, 127. Besiege Byzantium. 186. Make a League with the Comnins against the Las∣carins. 228. take Candie. 233. quar∣rel with the Genuois about a Church, 236. they fight the Genuois. 261. quarrel again. 269. their long warr with Genua for the Isle of Tenedos. 271. are beaten, and sue for peace. 272, &c. beat off from the walls of Clodia. 273. defeated at Sea by the Genuois again. 274. obtain a victo∣ry. ib. recover all their losses. ib. &c. are reconciled with the Genuois. 275 are deluded by Fr. Sfortia. 412. enter into a League against him. 416. their greatnesse envied. 417. their losses. 418. fall out with the Iesuites and Pope. 441. and reconciled. ibid. their ships infested by the Croats. 446 are reconciled to Ferdinand the arch-Duke. ib. lose divers places. 467, &c. make peace with Mahomet. 468. they quarrel with Bajazet. 470. make peace with him. ib. lose Cyprus. 478 Vespasian's actions in Iudea. 46, &c. his reign. 48. his good parts and end 49, &c. Vesuvius breaks out. 50, 97 Victor Bishop of Rome. 59 Villiers D. of Buckingham. 638 Viriatus a Robber beats the Romans. 8 is betrayed and slain. ib. Virius the Captain. 345 Visigoths. 93. subdue Cantabria. 105 Vitalianus Mustermaster. 99, &c. Vitellius his reign and death. 47, &c. Vitiges the Goth. 102. Uladomirus Pr. of Russia defeated. 158 Ulphilas Bishop. 86 Ulricus Earl of Cilia. 408 Union of England and Scotland hin∣dered. 572 Universities of Cambridge. 111. Of Paris. 125. Of Papla, Ticinum Osnaburg, and Bononia. 125. Of Oxford. 136. Of Bononia transla∣ted to Padua. 226. Of Naples. 227 Of Salmatica. 234. Of Prague. 268 Of Lovain. ib. Of Orleans. 276. Of Cracovia. 277. Of Lipsia. 334 Of Tubinga. 414. Of Witteberg, of Franckfort. 415. Of Sena. 431 Of Leyden. 434. Of Helmestad. ib. Of Saint Andrews in Scotland. 536 Of Lovan in Brabant. 146 John Archbishop of Upsalia, 339 Usumcassanes his message to Mahomet 467. 470 Bishops of Utricht. 344 W VVAldemar king of Denmark. 177 Waldemar 2d K. of Denmark. 224 Waldemar 3d 266 Waldenses what? 222. Beaten by Phi∣lip, Lewis the 8. and Lewis 9. 229 Wales subdued. 242. Prince of Wales in France complained against. 294 Wall of Peloponesus built and demo∣lished. 262 holy-War undertaken. 164. &c. 181 War begun between Denmark & Tilly 454. In the Valtelin. 455 Wars between England and France, 291, &c. In Flanders, 295. Wars denounced at the Diet of Spire. against K. Francis. 396 VVars of the Netherlands begun, 433, &c. 436 Wars between Engl. and France. 551 Between England & Scotland. 327 Between England and Scotland a∣gain, 542, 560, 578, &c. In Flan∣ders by the Gauntois. 298. Between Lewis 11. and his people. 492, &c. Between Mantua and Savoy, 446 In Germany and Bohemia. 448. Be∣tween Poland and the Turk. 481, 482. 485 Warwicks proceedings against K. Ed∣ward. 547, &c. Wenceslaus Emperor, his flagitious life and death. 269, &c. John Wickliffe occasions tumults in London. 314 A Wild-man in Sardinia. 182 William the Conqueror. 167, &c. his actions and end. 168.
William 2d his life and end. 168, &c. William, King of Scotland, his actions and death. 191, &c. William, Ea. of Holland, against Fre∣derick. 226. is driven back into Hol∣land. 227 William Wallas, a valiant Scot. 243. he recovers the lost towns, and beats out the English. 245. invades England ib. is betrayed and slain. ib. William, Bishop of Utricht. 252 William, Earl of Holland, sails into Scotland. ib. William, K. of the Romans, his life & death. 253. William, third and fourth, Earls of Holland. 278, &c. Wolfardus the Favorit hanged. 253 Wolsey, his greatness and pride. 552, &c. his oppressions and sacriledge. 553 &c. his entertainment abroad. 552, 554. accused and articled against. 555 his downfall. 556 Wyats Rebellion. 591, &c. he is taken. and beheaded. 592 Y ARehbishop of York defeated by the Scots. 321 Battels between the Yorkshire and Lan∣cashire Factions. 531, &c. D. of York raiseth an Army, & is made Protector. 531. is removed, and raiseth an Army. 532. flyeth into Ireland, re∣turns and claims the Crown. 533. is slain. 534. young Duke of York fights, and is victorious. ib. Z ZEbina, King of Syria. 7 George Zeck, the factions Hun∣garian tortured. 399 Zeland united to Holland. 253. trou∣bled. 278 Zelots of Judaea. 36 Zeno, an Eutychian. 97. starved in his Tombe. 98 Zenobia. 71, &c. Zimisces, Emperor of the East. 148 Zirizaea Besieged. 278 Zoe, Constantine his mother. 141. Zoe, the wife of Romanus. 157, &c. FINIS. Good Reader, Though care was used to prevent literall or verball Errors, yet by reason the Book was under Three severall Presses, some Errata's have esca∣ped the Eyes of the Correctors, which are here set down, and may be mended with thy Pen. In the TREFACE; p. 5, l. 12; r. Historians. PAge 7. line 22. read one; p. 8. l. 49. dele the; p. 12. l. 53. r. Tigurins; p. 13. l 27. r. Tublicius; p. 17 l 10. r. Legions; Ib. Cap. 5 Contents, r. Catalins conspiracy; p 19. l 17. r. Eunuch; p. 20. l. 39. r. Arears; p 21. insert and; p. 23. l 43. r. ffings; Ib l. 31 r. Caste∣auf; p. 26. l. 48. dele were knights; p. 29. l. 57. r. Antonius, Mareeks brother; p. 41. l. 41. r. Manumissed; p. 43. l 44 r. de Marso; p. 51. l. 13. r. Visards; p. 53. l. 29. r. Walachia; p. 55. l. 15, & 17, r. Antoninus; p. 59. l. 39. r. Pantenus; p 63. l. 4. r. Leonides; p. 68. l. 2. r. Busiris; l. 30. r. Conqueror; p. 72. l. 17. r. boughs; p 87. l. 3. add, the; p. 96. l. 57. r. People; p. 106. l. 7. dele, in; p. 111. l. 3. r. Hera∣clius; l. 37 r. Aquitania; l. 48. r. Artois; p. 115. l. 1. r. sate a while; p. 121, l. 37. r. Aemilia; p. 131. l. 21. r. by his followers; p. 138 l. 20. r. Gallic Ocean; p. 149. l. 48. dele, the; p. 156. l. 36 r. Legio; p. 171. l. 35. r. Apenins; p. 181. l. 21. r. Henry; p. 229. l. 26 r. Calyphs forces; p. 230. l. 48. for place, r. peace; p. 233. l. 55. r. Trapezuntinum; p. 235. l. 30. r Sancius; p. 247. l. 55. r. Bolld; p. 255. l. 53. r. sets himself forward; p 256. l. 21. r. Placenza; p. 257. l. 12. r. Benna; p. 262. l. 55. dele, by; p. 269. l. 28, r. Famagusta; p. 271. l. 38, r. Frioli; l 46, r. against them; p. 272. l. 51. r. Colodia Fossa; p. 273. l. 6, for, it, r. in; l. 19, r Hamiscar; p. 277. l. 26, dele, he; l. 43, r. An∣nates; p. 279. l. 29, r. Sabaudia; l. 45, r. Caudaius; p. 288 l. 33, r. the Flemings; p. 315. l. 11, r. the Drawbridg; p. 321. l. 17, r. he had hidden; p 332. l. 34, r. Forum-Iulii; p. 335. l. 7. r. desired; l. 28, r. the Papacy; p. 347. l 13, r. Vandemontium; p. 361. l. 22, r. Bern, ib. &c. p. 383. l. 13, r. Monticuculus; l. 27. r. neither; p. 385. l. 33, dele, an; l. 50, r. but to no purpose; p. 386. l. 12, r. of Wittenberg, p. 397. l. 20, dele, he; p. 399. l. 51, r. defeats them, one; p. (397) l. 28. r. Vayvodia; p. (398) l. 5, r. Scutati; p. (399) l 13, r. Walachia; ib. l. 49. P 404, for Bohemia, r. Hungaria; p. 407. l. 32, r. Amurath; ib. 35, &c. p. 409, l. 34. r. Leonora & Scnae; ib. 47, Exarch; p. 413. l. 46, r. Consalvus; ib. 53. p. 417. l. 40. r. Bononia; p. 418 l. 37, r. Bentivoli; p 419. l. 33, r Boruscan; p. 431. l. 4 r. Leptis; l. 13, r. Genuois; p. 433 l. 35, r. Chios; p. 437. l 8, for 17, r. 13. p. 439. l. 8, r Wasinburg; p. 440 l. 5, r. Grave Maurice took the Sluce; p. 451. l. 15, Vallelionis; p. 455. l 12, r. Sebrize; p. 462 l. 23, r. Casall; p. 463. l. 47, r. Adriannopolis; p. 464. l. 7, r. Towns; l. 10. r. Acarnavia; l. 18, r. Bosna; p. 467. l. 38, r. Comueni; l. 47, Bosna; 49, Asiatick; p. 468. l. 17, r. Taurica Chersonesus; p. 469. l. 49 r. Saladins; p. 471. l. , r. Innovation; p. 472. l 18, r. the incitation; p. 483. l. 35, r. defeate by the Caesarians; l. 50, for, Tarta Han, r. Tartarian; p. 485. l. 29, r. convented; p. 488. l. 32, r. in at all; l. 48, dele, is wished; p. 491. l. 44, r. zeal; p. 493 l. 12, r. Towers; p. 496. l. 46, r. Rhene; p. 499. l. 52, r. Galeas; p. 500, Contents Cap. r. Prosecution of the French History; l▪ 28, r. Capitt; p. 502, l. 42, r. Angelo; p. 504, l 31. for 3, r. 2. p. 511, l. 8 for accused, r. informed; p. 513. l. 44, r. Soubize; ib. &c. p. 519. l. 23, r. Marle; p. 537. l. 7, r. Mordacus; p. 542. l. 10, r. Argile; p (548) l. 19, r of France; p. 558. l. 24, r. curb p. 573. l. 11, & 12, r. returning; p 583. l. 49, r. Ruuen; p. 597. l. 42, r Parker; p. 625. l. 13, dele, him; p. 633. l. 8, r. Ambassadors; p. 640. l. 22, for Abbot, r. Whitguift; p. 641 l. 38, r. upon. p. 642. l. 25, after Parliament a period. Faults escaped in the CHRONOLOGY. 178 year before Christ; l. 2, r, Aules; l. 4, Cizieenus; 70 Y. after Chr. in the C: l. 4, r. Aehia; 80 C: l. 2, & 5, r. Cerinthus; 100 S: l. ▪ r. refuseth the Consulship; 160 C: l. 5, r. Encratites; 170 S: l. 3, r. Marcomant; 180 C: l. 8. r. Artatyritae; 200 C: l. 4, r Zephirinus; 210 C. l. 3, r. Eclesaitae; 260 S: r. Galien; 380 C: l. 10, r. Armorica; 400 C: l. 6, r. Metangismonitae; l 7, r. Pelagius; 420 C: l. 3. r. Constantinople; 440 S: l. 5, r. Anthenius; 470 C: l. 1, Acatius; 530 S: l. 3, r. Constantinople; 540 C: l. , r. Virgilius; 550 l. 7. dele, it; 740 S: l. 10, r. Pa∣latins; 750 S: l. 3, r. out of Macedonia; 950 S: l. 6, r. Hungarians; l. 12, r. Venice; 1020 S: l. 2, r. Cyclades; ib. C: l. 5, r. preached; 1040 S: l. 5, r. Monomacus; 1050 S: l. 4, r. Stratioticus; l. 7, r. Loveyn; 1100 S: l. 3, r. Anselm; C: l 4, r. Ligeois; 1110 S: l. 16, add, by K. Coloman; 150 S: l. 14, add, to; 1170 C: l. 6, add, years; 1240 S: l. 22, after peace, a period; l: 23, add, the K. 1270 S: l. 6. r. Domicella; l: 28, r. Anconians; 1320 S: l. 20, r. Pvlacs; 1340 S: l. 1. r. Nicomedia; 1350 l , r. Lesbos; 380. l. 6, r. Achmet; 1410 S: l. 2, r. Valathian; 1430 C: l. 10, r. and the Bishop; 1440 S: l. 5, r. Moldavia; 1460 C: l. 2, r. Laetus; 1520 C: l. 5, r. Sena. The Reader is to take notice that (C) stands for to direct to matters of the Church; and (S) for the State.
The Printers to the Reader. SInce it is rather Ingenuity, then otherwise, to confess. The Errata's which have escaped us, will be our charge; though we could say, and it oft fals out, That the best Authors write not always the best Hands; which (as Mr. Fuller in his Preface to a Posthume Book of Dr. Holdsworth. one Observes) hath rendred the Writings of a late Reverend and Learned Author, use∣less to the world; but we cannot apply that to our Author: Besides, he is not only living, but active, and did oft visit us, or we him. That there are some Errors in a Book of this Bulk, is no wonder; That there were not more, we attribute to the Authors Care and Pains, and to the more then ordina∣ry sedulity of the Book-seller to prevent them, The most are but litteral, scarce any that do alter the Sense in any place, but what with a Comma (,) Point (.) or Parenthesis () thy Pen may rectifie: Pos∣sibly thou mai'st finde some of them mended to thy hand, as they were, happily discovered at the Press. So wishing thee to Correct and Read, then our opinions and hopes are, that you will like. R. Cotes T. Newcomb T. Mab & A Coles. The Book-seller to the Buyer. THis Book could not have been published (though intended for a general good) in a more censorious Age; the Test wherof I dare adventure. That which gave encouragement to Print it, is, That our Author in the cours of his History, hath comprehended much in a few lines. I shall confidently affirm, it was nei∣ther his Design or Work, to Confront his The ever Re∣nowned Sir WALTER RALEIGH Leader (as some pretend) but that the world should have the be∣nefit of who wrote the first Part of the History of the World. His History, compleated so far, as he might deliver himself freely and impartially without preju∣dice. Should he have oft digressed, or fraught it with the impertinencies which these later Years would have afforded, it would have swoln into too many Volums, either to burthen the Stationer, or overcharge the Reader, besides the vast (and peradventure unprofitable) expence of precious Time. If Mar∣row be better to digest then the Bone, or the Kernel then the Shel; then (instead of a Prolix History) this Epitome may gain thy acceptation; in confidence whereof I shall presume to subscribe my self (at least intentionally) Thy Friend, IOHN SAYWELL. Courteous READER (having the advantage of a blank Page before me) I thought good to minde thee, That (besides this History, &c.) there are extant a few usefull Books, as they may suit the Genius of thy reading. For PRINCIPLES. I. THat excellent Book (of Iohn Wollebius, D. D. and ordinary Professor of Divinity in the Universi∣ty of Basil) compendiously containing the whole Body of Christian Divinity, both in the Spe∣culative and Practique Parts thereof, whereof so many thousands have bin sold in Latin, lately (for Britains good) Englished, and in some obscure places cleared and enlarged by Alexander Ross; revised and amended in those misquoted Texts wherewith the Latin Copies do abound. For PRACTICE. II. That experienced Piece of Richard Sibbs, D. D. Entituled The Returning Backslider (& the Saints Pri∣viledge, &c.) or a Commentary on the whole 14. Chapter of Hosea: the third time Reprinted, being one of the Legitimate Pieces of that truely pious Author, there being added in this, an useful Table, wan∣ting in former Editions, together with an account of all the works of the said Learned Author, as yet extant, By one piously affected with his Writings. For NOTION. III. Those Seraphical Sermons of Dr. Donne late Dean of S. Pauls, London, being fourscore in number and usually called his First Volume, containing the Quintessence of Piety and Parts, and dedicated to his late Majesty. Which are all in the Vendition of John Saywell, at the Greyhound in Little Britain. 1652. A REGISTER for the help of the BOOK-BINDER, whereby he may be ascertained of the Perfection of this Book. The Order of the HISTORY. ¶ THe Title. (a) (a 2) (b) (b 2) (b 3) A. A 2. (a) B. B 2. B 3. &c. R 3. ends. Aa. A a 2. &c. Z z 2. ends: Aaa, Aaa 2. &c. P p p. P p p 2. P p p 3. &c. R r r 3. ends. S s s. S s s 2. &c. Z z z 2 ends. Aaaa. Aaaa 2. &c. Hhhh 2. ends. The Order of the CHRONOLOGIE. I i i i. K k k k. K k k k 2. &c. X x x x ends. The Order of the ALPHABETICAL-TABLE. a a a a a. a a a a a 2. &c. d d d d d. d d d d d 2. e e e e e. ends. Take notice, that in some Copies the Signiture is (b2) for (b3) C 2. for D 2. E 5. for E 3. K k k k to be added. FINIS.
