S5310 99833601 38079
The State of the Case concerning the Election at Bridgwater. Polled for Mr. Balch 85. Polled for Mr. Gardner 86. The Case stands by the Poors Rate as under, viz. MR. Balch has in the Poors Book and claims John Trott married to a Widow, but the Certificate not compared with the Register. However I add him. 82 1   83 From which must be deducted William Symons, who has no Estate rated to the Poor, and stands in the Poors Book thus, William Symons or Occupier; and he is neither Owner nor Occupier. 1 2 William Chance, bribed by the Promise of paying his reckoning to Vote for Mr.Balch, and declared would otherwise have Voted for Mr. Gardner. 1     81 Mr. Gardner has in the Poors Book 84 Viz.   In the Poors Book by Name 81 Charles Bell married a Widow, rated to the Poor, and allowed. 1 John Glass, his Estate is rated in the Poors Book with his Brothers. 1 John Mills, objected against: for not being full 21 years old; but being of Age to be Executor, I think is of Age to give a Vote. 1   84 And William Pym would have Voted for Mr. Gardner, but was kept all Night in Mr. Balch's House, and Mr. Balch promised to give him a Life in a House, and strike him out of the Poors Rate. 1   85 But though Mr. Gardner has the Majority by the Poors Book, I think all that pay other Taxes ought to be accounted Scot and Lot-Men, and not lose their Right: It is usually said, when Men do not pay Taxes, they go Scot-free. Accounting those to be Scot and Lot-Men, who pay other Taxes as well as the Poors Rate, the Case stands thus: For Mr. Balch 85 For Mr. Gardner 86 From which must be deducted, Viz. Edward Raymond, who pays to no Taxes, and had no Estate in the Burrough rateable. 1 5 William Symons pays not to the Poor, nor any other Tax, only is Administrator to a small Estate in right of his Aunt. 1 Francis Gatcomb, at the time of the E∣lection was not rated to the Poor, or any other Taxes, 1 John Trott, his Marriage not duly pro∣ved, the Certificate not being compared with the Register 1 William Chance, bribed 1     80 All proved to have paid to other Taxes before the Election. It would be a hard and very discouraging thing not to allow those Votes as Scot and Lot-Men who pay the King's Taxes: And note, the the Poors Rate is altered oftentimes once in Three Months time, and may be done every Month, if the Magistrates and Overseers please; so that the Poors Rate only is a very uncertain way, and may be made use of to serve particular Designs; however, Mr. Gardner has it both ways. Note, The keeping William Pym in Mr. Balch's House all Night, and his Promise of giving him a Life in a House, and striking him out of the Poors Rate; also the Promise made to William Chance of paying his Reckoning for him, were proved by the Persons themselves: What was endeavoured to be fixed on Mr. Gardner, as it was false in it self, so it was only hearsay by which no Man can or ought to be charged.
