T2564 99825551 29935
A TRVE AND PERFECT RELATION OF THE PARTICULAR Passages at YORK, on Friday the third of IVNE, 1642. HIs Majesty having summoned the Free-holders of the County of Yorke, to appeare before him on Hewarth Moore, on the day above said, to satisfie them concerning his intentions, many of them did appeare together with a great multitude of Labourers and poore people, as also divers of the inhabitants of the County of Lancaster, in all according to the estimate of my selse, and divers others of judgment) about the number of seventy thousand or upwards, they came not in any warlike way, nor put themselves into any posture or order, neither was the third part of the Free-holders, and Farmers of Yorkshire there. His Majestie had appointed 800 foot compleatly armed to guard his Person, and about eleven of the clocke came to the Field or Moore accompanied with a great number of Lords and Knights of great qualitie. The Prince also led a troope of Horse consisting of 150. Knights, Esquires and Gentlemen, some whereof had foure, some three, and most two men a peece, which made another troope. As soone as his Majestie came neere the Moore, the people did entertaine him with a very loude shout, and being come into the Moore, and as much silence made as could be, his Majestie made a speech, therein declaring his constancie in the Protestant Religion, and his great affection to that County, intimating that he re∣solved to recide amongst them in those parts to keepe the Countrey in peace. His speech being ended, he rode round the Moore, and about the number of 65000 followed him, crying all the way (God blesse the King) but the rest which were about 5000 all Free-holders separated themselves to Petition to his Majestie, and had their Petition ready to present to him the effect of it, was to beseech his Majesty to come to the Parliament, &c. but their Petition was intercepted by the Lord Savill, who carried himselfe very strangely in that particular, and in a forcible manner, suffered them not to deliver the same; His Majestie having rode round the field, all the people brought him off the Moore with a great shoute, and there many left him, but 20000. accompanied him to the Court gate, and saw him safe at Court, and with a great shoute left him. A great multitude of the people never came at the Field, but staid in the City, and others came but into the Moore, when the rest came out. And having thus made their appearance about eight of the clocke at night all were returned out of the field. FINIS. Printed by A.N. for Humphrey Tucky. 1642.
