W1944 18391497 107454
THE PATH of the JUST Cleared; AND Cruelty and Tyranny laid Open. Or a Few Words to you Priests, and Magistrates of this Nation, (who say we deny the Scriptures, and that we are Antichrists and Deceivers, and that we deny the Word of God,) Wherein your Oppression and Tyranny is laid Open, which by you is unjustly acted against the Servants of the Living God, who by the World which hate the Light of Christ, are in Derision called Quakers. Wherein also is something declared both to Judges and Justices so called, concerning Contempt of Authority. Also the Ground and Cause of the Imprisonment of George Whitehead and John Harwood, who are Sufferers for the Innocent Truths sake, In the Goal of Bury in Suffolk. Also a Copy of a Paper, which a Servant of the Lord called Richard Clayton, was moved to set upon a Steeple-house Door at Bury in Suffolk, for which he was caused to be whipped by one Thomas Waldegrave, Justice of Peace in the said County. But though hand joyn in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished; but the Seed of the Righteous shall be delivered,Prov. 11. 21. From the Spirit of the Living God in me, whose name in the flesh is George Whitehead, who for Sions sake cannot hold my peace, but testifie against her Oppressors: who am a Sufferer as aforesaid, the 4. day of the 7. month. 1655. Also, A Paper against the sin of Idleness, which we declare against, and live out of; and are diligent serving the Lord, though that sin be cast upon us, yet it we deny, with all other sins and ungodli∣nesse, which is contrary to the Gospel of Christ. London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the Black-Spread-Eagle, near the West End of Pauls, 1655.
THE Path of the JVST cleared: AND Cruelty and Tyranny laid Open. See what Christ we own, and who are Antichrists. THat Christ we owne and witness, and are par∣takers of his Sufferings,Isa. 42. 6. & 49▪ 9 who was promised for a Covenant unto the people, for a light un∣to the Gentils, to open the blind eyes, this is he who was before Abraham was; who said,Joh. 8. 58 Before Abra∣ham was, I am; who was in the beginning which was the Word, by which all things was made, which Word became flesh, and dwelt among the disciples, and suffered at Jerusalem,Jhon 1. and witnessed a good confession before Ponce Pilate; whom Pilate delivered up to the Jews, and the chief priests and elders, whom they mocked and despite∣fully used,Joh. 17. & put to death concerning the flesh; but is rais∣ed up by the spirit,Joh. 5. 22. and ascended into glory, which glory he prayed for, even that glory whereby he was at first with his Father glorified in,Joh. 10. 3. wherein he is glorified in his Saints, and is God over all, God blessed for ever; and he that
hath him, hath the father also, and hath life; and he that hath not the Son, hath not life; for he is the light of the world and in him is no darknesse; and He is the Way the truth and the life;1 Joh. 5. 12. & 8. 12. and he that followeth him shall not abidein darknesse, but shall receive the light of life. And this is the true light, which lighteth every man that cometh into the world,Joh. 1. 9. which Iohn who was a man sent from God was a witnesse of, and we are witnesses of, and do not deny the Word, nor the Scriptures; but they who persecuted him even the Scribes and pharises, and the chiefe priests and elders of the people, who had a profession of the Scrip∣tures, Joh. 7. 19. of Moses words, and the prophets words: they did deny the Scriptures, even Moses who wrote of Christ, so did not beleive Christ,Joh. 5, 47. & 8. 37. and so denyed him who was the Word which became flesh. And so his word did not take place in them, because they did not believe that he was the Christ, but looked for another Christ to come in pompe like themselves, but against their pride he did cry, and said, Woe unto the Scribes and Pharises, who were called of men Masters, stood praying in the Synagogues, had the chiefest places in the assemblies and greeting in the markets: and laid heavy burthens upon the people.Mat. 23. & 10. 8. 9. But he said to his di∣sciples, Be not ye called masters: and when he sent them forth he forbad them to take money or bag or Scrip: but freely ye have received, freely give: and many of them had no certaine dwelling place,1 Cor. 6. 4, 5, & 11. 24. but suffered persecution and hunger and nakednesse and prison and stripes and perils, and were chargeable to no man: but where they had sown Spiritual things they said, if we sow to you Spi∣ritual things,Heb. 11. 36, 37. it is a smal thing if we reap of you carnal things. But these were not the world, for the world was persecuters and revilers,Joh. 16. 2. and haled them out of the Synagogues; and such as Christ sent we owne, and the Scriptures we own, and Christ come in the flesh we owne and witnesse; but you Magistrates and you Priests of this nation who are upholden by such as persecute and
hale out of the Synagogues, and imprison, and whip, & despitefully now use such as are sent freely to witnes forth the truth, and for that Christ, and against Antichrist, and deceivers, such as Christ cryed wo against: here, you priests of this nation,Mark. 12. 38. who are found in their steps which Christ cryed woe against, even the steps of the Scribes & Pharises, & you Magistrates, Justices, Judges, & Rulers, who uphold such, and persecute, imprison & cause to be whipped: and fine such as are sent to bear witness against them that are found in Scribes and Pharises steps;Math. 23. who lay heavy burthens upon the people, and are called of men masters, stands praying in the synagogues, and have the cheifest pla∣ces in the assemblies: you are filling up the measure of their iniquities, who persecuted Christ, & upheld them which Christ cryed wo unto, and them who persecuted the true prophets,Isa. 6. 11. who was sent to cry out against the false pro∣phets, these cryed against such as sought for their gain from their quarters,Mica. 3. 11 & such as were hirlings, & such as bare rule by their means, and taught lyes, who said they were sent of God;er. 5. when God never sent them but man, before they were sent: and these were the prophets who cryed against the false,Ezek. 34. 3. who said; thus said the Lord, and Heare the Word of the Lord. But God never spake to them: but Jeremiah who cryed against such was not a proud man, nor a covetous man, as the priests of Eng∣land are now, who are in these steps before mentioned, which the false prophets were in. But Jeremiah was moc∣ked, & they were stoned & some killed, and Jeremy was set in the stocks for witnessing forth the truth against the false prophets;Je. 38. 6. and put into adungeon and here we are wit∣nessed by the true prophets, Christ, & his Apostles, who ever witnessed against deceivers, and such as lived in pride and coveteousness: and Amos who was a true witness for God, witnessed against the abomination of rulers, and people; he was not made a Minister by the will of man, nor up∣held by a carnal weapon,Amos. 7. 10. nor an outward Law▪ but when
he prophesied against the house of Jeraboam, then A∣maziah, the priest of Bethel complained to Jeroboam the King against Amos; and said, the Land was not able to bear his words, and bad him flee away into the Land of Judah, and prophesie no more at Bethel; for he said It was the Kings Chappel, and the Kings Court, as you may read, Amos 7, 10, and o you priests of England complain: moreover many of you do swear to the Magistrates a∣gainst us, who are witnessed by Christ, the true Prophets, and Apostles: both in our sufferings, and testimony wich is against all deceit and deceivers; o you Priests and Ma∣gistrates cause us to suffer, because we are offended at the truth, which witnesses against all deceit, without respect of persons, whereof they that are sent of God were wit∣nesses: and so by you some suffer imprisonment, some whipping, some stocking, and some you imprison and fine 10, or 40, or 50, Marks, and they that stone & hale out of the Synagogues, their hands you strengthen against the innocent, and execute your law upon them, who are re∣deemed from that which the law takes hold upon, who do witnesse against transgression, where ever it is by the truth which respects no mans person. And here the end for which you are brought forth, is to witness for God & to the establishment of Judgment, and mercy, & righteousnesse & peace, which takes away all occasion of outward punishment, and carnal weapons, where it comes to be established, and set up in the hearts of people; and this they who come to witness set up in them which they that own the Light of Christ are wit∣nesses of, dare not act in their own wills, in Tyranny, and Cruelty, against the innocent who are freely sent to wit∣nes forth the truth against all deceit & cruelty, & oppressi∣on which is acted in this generation, even among you Priests & Magistrates, both Judges Justices & Rulers, whose ears are open to heare the complaints of these proud and coous priests, who make great petitioning and com∣plaints
against us, who suffer by the cruelty of you, who cause su to be sent to prison, when you can charge su with the breach of no known Law, and cause some to be whip∣ped, & some to be fined, as aforesaid, and the priests that complain for the help of Magistrates, to have this people, called Quakers, suppressed because they are affraid that their Tythes and maintenance should faile them, and they come to lose their gifts, and rewards; because we cry against such as Isaiah cryed against, who seek for their gain from their Quarters; as you may read, Isa. 56, 11, and against such as beare rule by their means, which Ieremi∣ah cryed against; Ier. 5. and such teach for hire, and divine for money; which Micah cryed against, Mica. 3. and a∣gainst such as Christ cryed woe against, as you may read, Matt. 23. and we cry against such as go in Cains way and Balaams, which Iude cryed woe against Iude. 11. And here they are affraid that their riches and honour should faile them, whose riches is earthly, and honor is earth∣ly: and here you Magistrates uphold such as the Pro∣phets, Christ, and his Apostles cryed against, and causes the innocent to suffer by your wills, contrary to the Law of Justice▪ and equity; and so are filling up the measure of your iniquities, who persecuted the true prophets of Christ and his Apostles; and you may consider by the Light in your consciences, what Reformation and Just government is established by you, who have long professed Liberty, Justice, and equity; when now this is the end of your profession, and praying, and your fasting, and your dayes of thanksgiving, even persecution, and oppressi∣on, and strengthening the hands of evil doers against the in∣nocent, and so neglect the fast which the Lord requires, read Isa. 58. 6. Is not this the fast that I have chosen, saith the Lord, to loose the bands of wickedness, to undoe the heavy burthens, and to Let the oppressed goe free, and that ye break every yoak, but instead of this, ye strengthen the bands of wickedness, and goes on in your cruelty, and oppression. Ah wo, word, is the end of your profession, who are so
acting in your Cruelty, and Tyranny; against them who for conscience sake cannot bow to your wills, but witness against the deceit which is acted in this Nation, both a∣mong the Priests and People: therefore among you Ru∣and Magistrates is this Scripture fulfilled.Psalm. 2. 2. The Rulers take counsell together against the Lord, and his Annointed; and the blood of the Saints shall be requir∣ed, at your hands who persecute, even the blood of all the holy men of God, who suffered, from Abel until this generation. Oh, be ashamed of your profession, and you fair pre∣tences of reformation, since the Bishops were cut off, who now are acting in the same cruelty that they acted in, and yet you can speak against them, and their Tyranny, and you found in the same; Oh fear and dread the living God of heaven and earth, whose Judgment and wrath and fiery indignation slumbers not,Rev. 6. 10. for these things: Oh the blood of the righteous cryes in the ears of the Lord of hosts, for vengeance against you persecuters; your pray∣ers and pretences, of serving the Lord, is abomination unto him, and your Sacrifices is wearisome unto the Lord, and grievous unto him, as the Sacrifices and oblations of the Rulers, of Sodome, and people of Gomorrah was, which the prophet Isai cryed against, who said unto them Your new moones and your Sabbaths, and your calling assemblies I cannot away with: it is iniquity, even your solemn meetings saith the Lord;Isa. 1. 13. your new moons and appointed feasts my soul hateth, they are a trouble to me, I am weary to bear them when you spread forth your hands, I will hid mine eyes from you, yea when you make many prayers, I will not heare, your hands are full of blood, Isa. 1. 15. Therefore all you that act in persecution, and cruelty, and oppression, read your selues both Priests and Rulers, to be in that gene∣ration which Isai and the rest of the prophets did cry a∣gainst, Ezek. 16. 49. and are partakers of their sins; and now you live at ease in pride & fullnes of bread, as Sodom & Gomorrah did, and the end of your profession liberty and freedom
is oppression and Tyranny, as was in the Bishops time, to those that cannot stoop to your wills, when as you ought to have Judged the cause of the oppressed, and to have undone the heavy Burthens, and to have let the op∣pressed goe free. Therefore hear the word of the Lord, ye Rulers of this Nation, who Joyne with the priests, who goe in the way of Cain to envy, and run greedily af∣ter the error of Balaam for gifts and rewards; you Joyne with them who go in the steps of the false prophets; and of them which Christ cryed woe against, who are called of men masters, stand praying in the Synagogues, have the cheifest places in the assemblies,Mat. 23. and the greetings in the Mar∣kets, and lay heavy burthens upon the people, and devour widdows houses; and so here the cause of the widdows, and opressed you do not judg: therfore the Lord may justly say of you as he said of that people, which he had set in a fruitful place,Isa. 5. 7. when I Looked for Judgment behold oppressi∣on, therefore repetn of your cruelty, and undo the heavy burthens, and let the oppressed goe free: for if you still refuse, and rebel against the Lord, which is a God of truth and equity, he will cut you off, and give you your portion among all the oppressors and persecuters, whom the Lord in his indignation cut off, the Lord of hosts hath spoken it, and what will ye do in the end of your perse∣cution, when the Lord calls you to an account; will not the Lord avenge his quarrel upon Sions oppressors,Is. ia 1. v2. and ease him of his enemies? Therefore, remember you are warn∣ed, lest you are pertakers of the plagues, who go on in persecution and oppression, who pervert true Judgment, and despise equity, and so have your portion with the workers of iniquity. So to the light in all your conscien∣ces I speak, which loves equity and true Judgment, and is the condemnation of all the practices before mentioned, which are contrary to it. And the condemnation of all them, that live in them, by which light are witnessed who walk in the light, and to it we are manifest, whether you heare or forbear▪
A few words to you both Judges and Justices so called, that say we contemne Magistracy, and are not subiect to Au∣thority, and Government, because we cannot put off our hats, nor bow to you when we are called before you. THe Powers that are ordained of God,Answer. who are sent of him, for the punishment of transgressors, and for the encouragment of them that do well, these we own, and are subiect to them for conscience sake; knowing that such are not a terror to good works, but to evil; for such exe∣cute the law in righteousnes,Rom. 13. 3, 4. upon them who are guilty of the transgression of it, for because of trangression the Law is added & there the Law is executed in its place, and in righteousness; and so those that execute the Law in its place, they are for the establishment of righteousness and peace; and, contrary to the Law of Justice, & equity, dare not act in their own wills, nor for their own ends: and herein they seek not themselves, nor their own glory, nor honour, but the glory and honour of God, who is honoured and glorified among them who act in truth and righteousnesse, and love the Lord; and to them our souls are subject. But you who act in cruelty and perse∣cution as before mentioned, who execute your law upon the innocent, you do not encourage them that do well, but encourage them that do ill, and strengthen the hands of evil doers, and make strong the bands of wickedness, who indite, and fine, and imprison those who cannot for conscience sake bow to your wills, nor put off their Hats, to satisfie your corrupt wills: wherein you are seeking your own honour, and not the honour of God: and because that many cannot for conscience sake, act these heathenish customs, to satisfie your vain minds, and your fleshly exaltations, wherein you act in pride and high∣mindedness, therfore by you many are fined, and endited, and imprisoned contrary to any Just Law, and contra∣ry to the Law of the Nation: and no such vain cu∣stome can you prove that ever any of the Saints did act, when they were brought from vanities to serve the Li∣ving God; But the world and the conformities and fashi∣ons
of the World they were brought to deny, and by the same Spirit are we brought to deny all these heathenish practices, and to witness against the World who live in them; and because we witness against the World, that the deeds thereof are evil, therefore we are hated, and by the World suffer: and here ye Magistrates who plead for these things, and cause the innocent to suffer, for denying them, you act in the costumes of the world contrary to the Light of Christ, which condemns the World with its deeds and sayes that we contemn Magistracy and Au∣thority because we cannot stoop to your wills, in these customes; here you falsly accuse us, for Authority we do not contemn, for by the Spirit of the Living God, where∣by we are Transformed, by the renuing of our minds, we do deny the conformities of the world as the Apostle said;Ro. 12. 2. Be not ye conformed unto this World, and the same A∣postle did not contemn Authority, but said, Let every soule be subject to the higher powers, and, Rulers are not a terror to good workes but to evil, but he speakes not of pulling off the hat, nor bowing, neither gives he liberty to any of you to persecute and imprison them who can∣not, for conscience sake, bow to your wills, nor put off their hatts; for he was imprisoned, and persecuted, and did suffer by that generation you are in, who suffered stripes, tumults and imprisonment, and many perils, & of his sufferings are we pertakers: and the cloak that you have for these vanities, will not hide you: for you say that though you have no written Law of the Nation, for pul∣ing off hats, nor Scripture to prove it, yet you say that it is the custome of the Nation; as bowing &c and that the very heathens do bow, and that the Egyptians bowed; I answer, so is drunkenness, and Ly∣ing, and Swearing, persecution, and fighting, and Quarrel∣ing, accustomed in this Nation, which many that act in, go unpunished, which the righteous Law of God takes hold upon: but the righteous Law of God speaks not of put∣ing off a hat, therefore be ashamed of your actings, and
be ashamed of your customs, who makes a Custome a Law, to act in envy and cruelty, against the servants of the Lord. And when you alledge, that Jacob bowed to Esau, and called him Lord, and that Abraham bowed to Seth, who was a Heathen. I answer, that which was act∣ed by them, when they bowed, was not a command to you and that you might seek honour one of another, who profess your selvs to be Believers and Christians, to imitate these heathenish customs, though for a time Ja∣cob and Abraham bowed, and Jacob called Esau Lord, who was the elder, but when the elder was made to serve the younger, he was not Lord, but servant: and so out of Esaus state, and the Heathenish nature, we are redeemed, and the one Lord, who is the true God, we witness: so out of the many gods, and many Lords, which are in the World, vve are redeemed, and hovv can ye believe and seek honour one of another, for the true God is no re∣specter of persons;John. 5. 4. and he that respects persons, com∣mits sin: and so by you that seek eye-service, and honour one another,Jam. 2. 9. is not the Lord hououred. But ye seek that to your selves, which belongs to God; and this is He, vvho reigns over the house of Iacob, and is greater then Abraham. Let the heathens bovv to him, vvho hath re∣deemed us out of the heathenish nature, for he wil break the limits of the heathen, and dash them to peices, and all your limits, who live in envy, and rage in the hea∣thenish nature; and plead for their customs, and would limit the righteous to walk in their steps, and to bow to your proud flesh,: for as I live, saith the Lord, every knee shall bow to me, and every Tongue shall confess unto god; as you may read, Rom. 13. 11. Isai. 45. 23. Phil. 2. 10. Therefore bow to the Lord of hosts, and let proud flesh stoop before him, who seeks honour to your selves, which belongs to God, Fear before the Lord, and tremble, at which Name every knee shall bow, and every tongue confess to the glory of God. Then examine what will be the end of your Earthly glory, whose honour must be laid in the dust: who seeks your own glory, and not the glory of
God: whose honour and glory we seek, and not the ho∣nor of man: and therfore we cannot stoop nor bow to your pride, nor conform to your vanities, which are act∣ed in your wills, contrary to the pure Law of God; which respects no mans person: and here you act for your own ends, and punish the servants of the Lord, who for his sake cannot submit to your deceit, and heathenish vani∣ties; you act contrary to the Law of God, and the Law of the Nation, and for the Lords sake act not, neither were you sent of God to this end, therefore accuse us not for contempt of Authority, neither say that we are not subject to every ordinance of man, for the Lords sake: for to every Ordinance of man, which are for the Lords sake, we are subject: whether it be to supream, or unto▪ Go∣vernors, as unto them that are sent by him, for the pu∣nishment of evil-doers, and for the praise of them that do well. But you who are sent to judge of Causes, be∣tween man and man, according to the truth, and equity, by an outward Law, which takes hold upon transgressi∣on, and now execute power upon them, who by the Law of the Spirit of life are made free from the Law of sin, and death, and so would usurp Authority over the conscien∣ces of the people of the Lord, whose consciences is ex∣ercised by the Light of Christ, which condemns the World with its deeds, and so you go beyond your limits, to judg in things pertaining to God, who is Judge, and Law-giver: and so here you act in frowardness, contrary to the Light of Christ in you, and so would lord it over Gods heritage: and here let the Rulers among the hea∣then, which Christ spoke of, condemn your practices, who said, the Kings of the Gentiles exercised Authority over them, but ye would exercise Lordship over us, who are not Heathens, but Christians. Therefore, ye Magistrates of this Nation, see whom you are acting for, and what order is set up by you, and whose glory it is you seek, and who it is that you seek to exercise Authority over: for when the Judgments of God comes upon you for acting in your wills, and in your cru∣elty, against the innocent, you will witness them to be
Just by that of God in your consciences, and your Just reward. And know that in as much as you persecute them, whom Christ hath sent, you persecute Christ: therefore now while the Lord doth not speedily execute his Judg∣ments upon you, consider your wayes, and see what you act, and whom you act for, as you will it eternally answer. The ground of John Harwoods & my imprisonment; that In∣nocency may be cleared, and the wicked bear their burthens. UPon the 30 day of the 5th month, being the 2d day of the week, I & my two Bretheren, Jo: Harwood, & Richard Clayton,, passing through a town called Bury, in Suffolk, about 5 Miles from Halstead, in Essex, where we were at a meeting the firstday before, in the feare and service of the Lord, and passing by the steeple house, in the said Bury, Richard Clayton, was moved to set up a paper upon the steeple house door, and John Harwood▪ & I passing on a litle before, and seeing some people of the said Bury, coming to Richard Clayton, where he was set∣ing up the paper, and so we passed back to them, who stayed him, and were about him reading the paper; who could find nothing contrary to Scriprure in it: so John Harwood, and I, being to speake a few words to the people there present in the name of the Lord, ex∣horted them to turne to the Lord from the vanities, & wickednesses they lived, in, which several of them was made to confess the truth of which was declared to them, and the mouths of many who were in rage, were stopped, and so we passing from the people there present there came a Constable▪ called Richard Hum, who stayed us, and said, he had a warrant to stay us: so we demand∣ed to see his warrant, but he had none to shew, but said he
had order from the Justice, & so carried us two before Harbert Pellam, called Justice of peace, in the said Bury, whose office is for Essex: so first I was carried before him, and he examined me, & then John Harwood, of our names, and country, and abode, where we had been, and what money we had when we came out of our own countryes: which we answered as we were moved, and had freedom; and many other vain questions he asked in his bsie vain Light mind, which were not worth mention∣ing: and when I was moved to speak a few words, concer∣ning his rage▪ & filthiness, which he uttered forth, he said, he sent not for me to preach: but he could lay no transgression, nor the breach of any known Law to our charge: but in his fury, & rage, sent us by the Constable & some others with him, to one Thomas Walgrave, who is called Justice of peace at Smalbridg in Suffolk, about half a mile from the said Bury, whose office is for Suffolk: so when we came before the said Walgrave, we were carri∣ed into the house, & they first examined Richard Clayton, of his name, and country, and where he had been, and what was the cause of his coming into that country, and who sent him, which he answered as he was moved; and some other vain Questions were asked him: & when he had examined him he then examined me of my name & country, and where I was born: and how long I had been acquainted with Richard Clayton; and where I first met with him, which I answered according to my free∣dom, & some other vain needless Questions were asked not worth mentioning; so he could lay nothing to our charge, concerning the breach of any Law: we being free born English men, and not Chargeable to any; so then John Harwood was brought before him: and Rich∣ard Clayton, & I, commanded to go out of doors with a keeper, so the said Waldegrave, asked John Harwood, if he would answer him all the Questions that he should de∣mand of him. But Jo. denyed to be limited to his will, but as he had moving: so the said Harbert Pellam, being
there present, who before had examined us, and had our examination in writing: John Harwood told Walgrave, that Pellam had his examination in writing, and bad him, if he had any thing to accuse us of, to declare what he had against us: so then the said Waldegrave being in a great rage, would not suffer him to speak, but caused him to be haled out of doors: so he and the said Pellam, con∣sulted a great vvhile together: so after a time, Walgrave came forth,Psal. 2. 2. and spoke to John Harwood, and in a fury put off his hat, and cast it dovvn, and asked him his name, and country, vvhich Questions John ansvvered: so he came to me, and asked me if I would work at hay: so I de∣nyed to be bound to such task-masters: for I was in that Calling whereunto God hath called me,1 Cor. 7. 20. wherein I was chargable to no man: for he had nothing to do, to lay any task upon any of us, who was brought out of Egypt, from under Pharoahs Task-masters; so he went in, and sent out a Warrant to imprison John Harwood, and ano∣ther: to have Richard Clayton whipped at Bury, and sent from Constable to Constable, till he came at his outward being: so he charged the Constable, to keep me that week, till another Justice came from the Assizes at Bury; so we demanded of him what Law we had transgressed. But he would shew us none, neither declared unto us any transgression that we had acted. But called the paper that Richard Clayton set upon the steeple-house door, a sedi∣tious paper, and non-sence, which he could not prove, nor shew any thing in it, contrary to the Scripture. But he would scarce suffer us to speak, but did stamp, and rage, and caused us to be haled out of doors, so we were had back again to the said Bury, and according to the Warrant, Richard Hum, the said Constable, the same night in the open street, whipping Richard Clayton, he being stript naked to the midle about the wast, so pre∣sently after he had whipped him, he sent him away that nighr, according to the warrant: and John Harwood, and I was kept at an Inn in the same town that night, and
early in the morning, John was sent with 2. men to the prison of Bury, St. Edmonds in Suffolk, about 16. miles from the said Bures, so until the next day, under the Con∣stables custody I remained, so in the morning there came a warrant, from the said Waldegrave, to the Constable, to send me to the said prison of Bury: so accordingly I was sent the same day, where we remaine in bonds by the cruelty of these called Justices, to wit, Harbert Pellam and Thomas Waldgrave, and are not convinced of the breach of any known Law, of the Nation. But in patience we suffer, and in our sufferings, have peace; our bonds being unjustly laid upon us, by them who pro∣fess Justice: but here they, and their profession is seen, and with the light of Christ condemned to be contrary to the law, justice, and equity. Therefore let the supreme, and governors, who are in Authority, consider for all your professing Liberty to tender consciences and Religion, what Liberty by you is brought forth: when as we, who are sent of the Lord, to bear witness unto pure religion, and to witnesse forth a good conscience, and our labour and travel is, that justice and equity might be set up, and deceit confound∣ed: and also we being free born English men, may not have freedom, to passe the high-way about our lawful calling. But have such bonds, and snares, laid upon us both contrary to the Law of God, and the law of the Nation; and contrary to that liberty which hath been promised to them professing Godlinesse by the supreme of this Nation. As in the act for the government of Eng∣land, Scotland, and Ireland, in Article, 36. That to the publike profession held forth none shall be compelled by penalities, or otherwise, but that endeavours be made to win them by sound doctrine, and the examples of a good conversation. Article. 37. That such as profess faith in God by Je∣sus Christ, though differing in Judgment, from the do∣ctrin, worship or discipline publickly held forth, shall
not be restrained from: But shall be protected in the profession of the faith, and exercise of their Religion, so as they abuse not this Liberty to the civill Injury of others and to the actuall disturbance of the publique peace on their part; provided that this liberty be not ex∣tended to Popery or Prelacy, nor to such who under the profession of Christ hold forth and practise Licentious∣nesse. Article 38: That all lawes, statutes, ordinances and clauses in any law, statute, and ordinance to the con∣trary of the aforesaid liberty, shall be esteemed Nul and oyde. Now let the Supreme, and Magistrates, see and exa∣mine what performance there is acted by you, of these solemne promises which hath beene promised for the li∣berty of Godlinesse in this Nation, when such injustice is winked at, and acted by you who professe justice, and are set in authority to act according to the law of justice and to remove unjust causes: when now both contrary to the law of God, and contrary to your own law, you cause the servants of the Lord to suffer Whipping and Imprisoning, them which you cannot charge which the breach of any law: here be ashamed of your unjust act∣ings, ye oppressors and persecutors of the innocent, and know that at your cruelty the Lord will not winke, but though you joyne hand in hand you shall not go unpunished, and the very heathens may condemn you that whip and act contrary to your own law, against them, whom the law condemnes not: for when they were ready to Whip Paul, he said to the centurion, Is it lawfull for you, to scourge a man that is a Roman and uncondemned, and said he was free borne, and so both the centurion and the chiefe Captaine, who bound Paul were afraid, after they knew that he was a Roman, and caused him to be loosed: but though we be free-borne English men and uncondemned by the law, you are not ashamed to Whip and act in cruelty against us, there∣fore
see what equity is owned by you, and see whethe you do as ye would be don by, yea or nay: and let al people who have any feare of God in them, see you shame and envy, you utter forth and have acted againe the innocent. For they who are authorised to beare ths sword of justice, ought not to be a terrour to good work-but to the evill, and saith the Lord by his prophet Da¦vid he that ruleth over men must be just, ruling in the feare of God, and such who rule in the feare of God, are not persecutors of the innocent, but doth defend and preserve, such as these men before mentioned whip and persecute. For the law which because of transgression is added, doth not take hold upon the innocent, which no law hath transgressed. So ye who have acted your cruelty upon the innocent, who in the sight of God, are free from the breach of any known law, who according to your own law, by you ought to be protected; here you are found transgressors of the law, which because of transgression is added, and with it are condemned, and with the light of Christ you are seene to be the Magi∣strates, which beares the sword in vaine, who turnes the edge of the sword against the righteous seed, which you ought to turne against the wicked, that the land might be emptyed of transgressors and evill doers: for the law was not made for the righteous, but for the lawless and disobedient; which law is witnessed by us, (to be good in its place▪) who suffer by the wills of un∣reasonable men, contrary to the law of God and the law of the Nation: for we who professe faith in God, by Jesus Christ, and through faith hath victory obtained over that nature, which leads into the transgression of the Law, ought according to your own law, to be pro∣tected in the exercising of our religion, but you instead of protecting us, whip and imprison us. And here let your own law be a witnesse against you, and be a∣shamed of your unjust actings, but the Lord of God of Hea∣ven and Earth, (who is our protector) who is righteous,
who beares not the sword in vaine, who will execute the judgment upon the transgressor, who will reward you according to your works, before him you shall not be able to stand in judgment, in the day of your account, therefore come downe to the light in your consciences, which calls for justice and equity, and awake to righte∣ousnesse, all ye that lie in your Pride and presumpti∣on, and therein act against the innocent, for the day hastens wherein you will be found out by the righteous judgments of God: for the cry of the innocent, which is oppressed by you, hath entred into the eares of the Lord of Sabbath, who will come quickly and reward e∣very one of you according to your deeds. Therefore re∣pent of your cruelty before the evill day come, least you be found guilty of the blood of the innocent, when the Lord calls you to an account: for know this that when the Lord comes to plead with you, that of God in all your consciences, will witnesse for God in his righte∣ous judgments; therefore by that light which is pure in your consciences learne your condemnation, and own it upon those things before mentioned, which are contrary to the light, that peradventure you may be hid in the day of the Lords wrath. From us who are sufferers in outward bonds, for the te∣stimony of a good conscience, for the inno∣cent truth sake, which shall stand for ever a witnesse a∣gainst all cruelty, and bloody persecutors, in which truth we have assurance and peace in our sufferings, who are counted by the world deceivers yet true, per∣secuted but not destroyed. Our names according to the flesh are George Whitehead, Iohn Harwood &c. From Bury Gaol this 14 of the 9 Month,
A True Coppy of the Paper which Richard Clayton was mov∣ed to set upon Bures Steeple∣house doore, for which he the said Thomas Waldgrave, called Iustice of peace caused him to be whipped which he the said Thomas Walde∣grave called a seditious paper and non-sence. IF you do set up such Ministers as seeke for their gaine from their quarters, you do set up such as the Prophet disapproves, Isa. 56. 11: And if you do set up such as do beare rule by their meanes, you do set up such as the Prophet Jeremiah, and the Lord disapproves, Jer. 5. And you that set up such as seeks for the wool, and make a prey upon the people, you set up such as the Prophet Ezekiel disapproves, Ezek. 34: And you that set up hirelings, set up such as Micah disapproves, Mica. 3. And you that set up such as are called of men Masters, stands praying in the synagogues, and have the chiefest places in the assemblies, you set up such as Christ disapproved Math. 23: And you that set up such as are given to filthy lucre, you set up such as the Apostle disapproves 2 Pet. 2.
14. And you that set up such as persecute, and cause people to be sent to prison for speaking the truth in the synagogues, you set up such as goe in Cains way Jude. 11, And you that set up such as receives guifts and rewards, the wages of unrighteousnesse, you set up such as minde earthly things, whose God is their belly, which the A∣postle disapproves; Phil. 3. 10. And you that set up such as strives to keep out Gods labourers out of his Vineyard and keep up such which Christ and the Apostles disap∣proves; and you that set up such as would not suffer a∣nother to speake that stands by, when any thing is re∣vealed, but sends him to Prison if he do, you set up a persecuting Spirit, full of disorder, and are judged by the Apostles life and doctrine, (who was a Minister of Christ) both you that set up, and them you do set up, (who said they might speake one by one) and so you all by this Spirit are judged to be in the Spirit of errour, and to be such as would quench the holy Spirit, and would limit the Spirit of God, and despise prophe∣cying and dare not try all things, manifesting your selves to be haters of the light, and disapproved, with the Prophets and Apostles, and their practices and life: and you that sets up such as gives people, Davids Quak∣ings, Tremblings, Cryings, Roarings, and Tears, and Prophecyes, and prayers and praises, in Meeter mixt together, you set up such as have not the Spirit of understanding to sing with the Spirit and with under∣standing, which Spirit brings to know the time of prais∣ing, Praying, Groaning, and Crying, and Trembling, and Quaking, and Prophesying: the Spirit of understand∣ing witnesseth, these things in their places, but you give Scoffers, and Scorners, and Drunkards, and Swea∣rers, and Threatners, and Persecuters, Davids con∣ditions to sing, for he was scoft at when he was in such conditions, and these do so now at these that are in such conditions. And if you set up such as takes Tythes, you set up such
as the Apostle denied, for the Apostle said, the Preist∣hood was changed, and the law was changed also, Heb. 7. and if you set up such as is before mentioned, you set up such as are contrary to Scriptures, and plants no Vineyard, nor labours in the Vineyard; for first they must plant a Vineyard, before they eat of it.
To all you-Rulers, Gentry, Priests, and people in the Nation, who accuse us, you call Quakers, for idleness; Take notice of your envy, you have against Gods Labourers. WHereas by many of the Magistrates, Priests, and People of this Nation, we are accused of idleness, who are sent by the Lord of the Harvest into his Vineyard to dresse it (as the Disciples of Christ ever were) and are faithful and diligent in his work, who hath called us, (as the true Ministers, sent forth by Christ, were in all ages) and are not idle, but do (as they did) by the same spirit, bear witness against all such as live in idleness, and prophanenesse, as the most part of these people do, who accuse us: such, as live in pride and wantonness, who work not at all with their hands, accuse us of idleness, who have a Cloud of witnesses for our practice; for the holy men of God travelled from place to place, (as we do) as they were moved of the Lord, and they were sent (as we are) by the Lord; to testifie against such un∣godly practices, as the people of the world live in; and the same Generation in nature, hated and persecuted them, as do hate and persecute us; And by the same holy spirit, ye are tryed and found to be the idle persons, who accuse the Ser∣vants of the Lord of idlenesse, who are in the work of the Lord, labouring in his Vineyard. You Magistrates, Gentry, Priests and people, who sport your selves in the day-time, and wantonly lives upon the earth, feeding your selves with dainty dishes, Dives-like, wasting the Creatures of God upon your lusts, devouring the Creation, decking your selves in gorge∣ous attire, that you may be set up and esteemed of, above your poor brethren, & so are found Gentils in nature, exercising Lordship over your brethren persecuting & imprisoning them, who are redeemed out of that nature you live in, who cannot bow and worship you (as the Heathen do;) but know this, you
Gentiles, Priests and people, who lives in these practices, (in envy, pride, idleness, and fulness of bread.) The day drawes nigh, wherein you an account must give to the Creator, for your envy and cruelty, and for the Creatures which you have wasted, and do waste and devoure, upon your ungodly lusts; and in the day of account, you will houle and lament, for the misery which will upon you come; for, to the mighty God of Heaven and Earth, the Creatour of all things, you an account must give, for your pride and idleness, fulness and gluttony, which you have lived in, and do live in, and your reward you must receive, according to your deeds and practi∣ces, your outside formal profession will not at all avail you, in the day of the Lord: And you shall then know, who have lived in idleness, whether you who are found in the sins of So∣dom alive, or we whom the Lord sends amongst you, to de∣clare against such practices, and to forewarn you of the evil, which is to come upon you, who are found in these practices and doth in life and word bear true testimony against you, who live in, and practise such things daily, as is before men∣tioned. And many of you are grown so dainty, and so curi∣ous in your Dyet, and Apparrel, that you scarce know what to eat, what to drink, or what to put on; and so causes the whole Creation, to groan under the weight and burthen of your corruptions: who lives in idleness, whose belly is your God, who glory in your shame: And here both Priests and Gentry, who accuses others of idleness, are caught in their own snares: You who accuse us for idleness, who are in the work of the Lord, or you your selves, who are found in the work of the enemy of God, let the honest hearted judge, who live in idleness: you who are enemies to the Servants of God, which labours to have such practices destroyed, as causes the wrh of God to remain upon such as act in these things be∣fore mentioned. All your coverings which you can make, will not hide you; for the righteous judge, who will plead the cause of the innocent, will finde you out, in the day of his fierce wrath, which is comming upon you, which you cannot avoid, nor escape: your high thoughts, nor your greatness will
not save you though you esteem never so highly of your selves, and scorn and derde your poor fellow-Creatures, counting them inferiour to you. And many of you think us not wor∣thy to live upon the earth: we seem so vile and base in your scornful eyes. But know this, you proud, high minded, self-conceited ones that God is no respecter of persons, who hath chosen the (despised) poor of this world, to be heirs of eter∣nall salvation and hath left you for utter destruction, except you speedily repent; for wo will come upon all you that are covered, and not with the Spirit of the Lord: therefore now be you warned, and while you have time, prize it; for the migh∣ty terrible day of the Lord draweth nigh: therefore repent, and forsake the evil of your doings, (you Sodomites) be∣fore the evil which is determined against you, come upon you: the day of your Calamity hastens, the Lord is righteous in his judgements, who a short work will make upon the earth, and he will reward you according to your works: you who are workers of Iniquity, must depart from his presence, and into utter darkness must be cast; for the living dreadful God of life and glory, is of purer eyes, then to behold iniquity: there∣fore cease, cease, from your pride and vain glory, ye high-minded self-conceited ones, and sit down in dust and ashes, lest the door of mercy be for ever shut against you, and you perish eternally. Remember you are warned in your life time, From Edmonds Bury Goal, the 19. day of the 6th moneth, 1655. By a Servant of the Lord in outward bonds for the truth∣sake, in scorn by the pro∣phane world, called Quaker, whose name in the flesh is, JOHN HARWOOD.
