w2498a 99831429 35892
A CHARTER of Regulations Granted to the East-India Company by Their Sacred Majesties King WILLIAM and Queen MARY, under the Great Seal of England, Dated the 11th. of November, 1693. in the 5th. Year of Their Majesties Reign. WILLIAM and MARY by the Grace of God King and Queen of England, &c.WILLIAM and MARY, By the Grace of God King and Queen of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, Defenders of the Faith, &c. To all to whom these Presents shall come Greeting.Whereas the Governour and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East-Indies, have been long a Cor∣poration, to the Honour and Profit ot this Nation, And enjoyed divers Immu∣nities by vertue of several Charters;Whereas the Governour and Com∣pany of Merchants of London Trading into the East-Indies, have been of long time to the Honour and Profit of this Nation, a Corporation, and have enjoy'd divers Liberties, Priviledges and Immunities, by force of several Charters and Letters Patents here∣tofore granted to them by several of our late Royal Predecessors, More particularly by Letters Patents of our late Royal Uncle, King Charles the Second, under the Great Seal of England,VIZ, bearing date the third day of April, in the 13th. Year of his Reign; And by one other Charter, or Letters Patents, of the said King Charles the Se∣cond, under the Great Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster the 27th. day of March, in the 20th. Year of his Reign; And by one other Charter, or Letters Patents of the said King Charles the Second bearing date at Westminster the 16th. day of December in the 25th. Year of his Reign; And by one other Charter, or Letters Patents of the said late King Charles the Second, bearing date the 9th. day of August, in the 35th. Year of his Reign; And also by a Charter or Letters Patents of the late King James the Second bear∣ing date at Westminster the 12th. day of April, in the Second Year of his Reign:And whereas some doubt hath arisen touching the Validity of the Charters heretofore granted to the said Company, And whereas some doubt or Question having been lately made, touching the Validity of the Charters granted hereto∣fore by our late Royal Predecessors Kings and Queens of England, to the Governour and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East-Indies, and whether the same were not in strictness of Law void by the not actual Payment into the Receipt of our Ex∣chequer,By the not actual Payment of the first Quarterly Pay∣ment of the 5 l. per Cent. Tax. of the first Quarterly Payment of the Tax of five pounds per Cent. charged on the General Joynt-Stock of the said Company; according to a late Act of Parliament Entituled, (An Act for con∣tinuing certain Acts therein mentioned, and for charging several Joynt-Stocks) And We having taken the same into our Royal Considera∣tion,We, well weighing the Dis∣orders that would happen if advantage were taken of the said Forfeiture, and well weighing what Disorders and Inconveniences would befall the said Company, and other Persons concerned and employed in their Trade and Adventures, especially in the remote parts of the World, if we should have taken advantage of the Forfeiture afore∣said, Did by our Letters Patents under our Great Seal of England,Did by our Letters Patents, dated the 7th. of October last, Constitute Sir Thomas Cooke, Francis Tyssen,Esq&c. bearing date the 7th. day of October now last past, make, constitute, ordain, declare and appoint that Sir Thomas Cooke Knt. and one of the Aldermen of our City of London, Francis TyssenEsqGeorge Earl
of Berkeley, Sir John Fleet, Knt. then Lord Mayor of our City of London, Sir Josia Child Baronet, Sir William Langhorne, Baronet, Sir Benjamin Bathurst Knt. Sir John Moore Knt. and one of the Aldermen of our City of London, Sir Sam. Dashwood Knt. and one of the Aldermen of our City of London, Sir Edward des Bouvery Knt. Sir Thomas Rawlinson, Knt. Sir William Gore, Knt. and one of the Aldermen of our City of London, Sir Joseph Herne Knt. Sir Rowland Aynsworth, Knt. John PeryEsqGeorge BounEsqRichard Hutchin∣son, Jun. EsqFrederick Herne,EsqRalph MarshallEsqRichard Acton, John Cooke of Hackney, Francis Gosfright, John Da Bois, Isaac Houblon, Samuel Ongley and Nath. Mounteney Gentlemen, and all and every other Person and Person who were Members of the said Company,And all other the Members of the said or late Company, on the 24th. March last, or late Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East-Indies on the 24th. day of March now last past, who had not before the Date of the said last recited Letters Patents parted with their Stocks in the said Company,Who had not parted with their Stocks; and all and every other Person and Persons who after the said 24th. day of March last past, and before the date of the said last recited Letters Patents,And all others who by buy∣ing Stocks, &c. Were capable to be Mem∣bers of the said Company, To be one Body Politick, By the Name of the Gover∣nour and Company of Mer∣chants of London, Trading into the East-Indies. by buying Stocks or otherwise, had come into, and then remained in a Capacity of being Members of the said Company, should be a Body Corpo∣rate and Politique in Deed and in Name, by the Name of the Governour and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East-Indies, And them, by that Name, one Body Corporate and Politique, in Deed and in Name, really and fully for ever, for Us our Heirs and Successors, We did make, declare, establish and con∣firm; And we have also in and by the said last recited Letters Pa∣tents for Us,And granted and restored unto them all the Ports, Islands, &c. Our Heirs and Successors, given, granted, restored and confirmed unto the said Governour and Company thereby con∣stituted and confirmed, and their Successors, All and every the Ports, Islands, Plantations, Territories, Castles, Forts, Fortifications, Ordnance, Armour, Artillery, Munition, Arms, Guns, Powder, Shot, Victuals, Magazines, Stores, Ammunition and Provisions of War, Ships, Junks, Vessels, Boats, Joynt Stock, Mannors, Lordships, Messuages, Houses, Lands, Tenements, Hereditaments, Goods, Wares, Merchandizes, Cattle, Chattels real and personal, Debts, Dues, Duties, right of Actions and Demand in Law or Equity, Powers, Priviledges, Liberties, Franchises, Jurisdictions, Customes, Rights, Royalties, Immunities and Advantages what∣soever,Which were or might be lawfully enjoyed by them, on or before the 24th. March last, or since, and all other things which were lawfully held, received, used, exercised, or enjoyed, or might or ought to have been law∣fully held, received, used, exercised, or enjoyed by the said Gover∣nour and Company, or late Governour and Company of Merchants of London, Trading into the East-Indies, on or before the said 24th. day of March now last, or at any time before the Date of the said last recited Letters,By Vertue of any Charters formerly granted or confir∣med to them: Patents, by Force or Vertue of any Grants, Charters, or Letters Patents whatsoever, thentofore granted unto them, or mentioned to be granted or confirmed to them, by any of our late Royal Predecessors, Kings or Queens of England, by any Stile or Title of Incorporation whatsoever, or otherwise howso∣ever; To have,To enjoy the Premises to the said Governour and Company hold, exercise and enjoy the Premises to the said Governour and Company, or late Governour and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East-Indies, and their Suc∣cessors, in such and the same manner, and to and for such and the same Intents and Purposes in all things,In the same manner as they might have done on the 24th. March last. as the said Governour and Company, or late Governour and Company might or ought law∣fully to have had, held, used, exercised or enjoyed the same, on or at any time before the said 24th. day of March now last past, as if the same Powers, Priviledges, and Immunities, and other the
Premises,And the Powers by the said Charter, had been particu∣larly recited: Bu under the limitations therein contained. had been by the said last recited Letters Patents particu∣larly granted, and the Letters Patents concerning the same at large recited, Under and subject nevertheless to the Provisoes, Restrictions and Limitations contained in the said last recited Letters Patents, and in other the Charters formerly granted to the said Company. And Whereas,And whereas, in the said Charter of the 7th. October is contained the Proviso fol∣lowing, Viz. in the said last recited Letters Patents bearing date the 7th. day of October now last past, there is contained a Pro∣visoe or Condition in the Words following, (Viz.) Provided always, and upon Condition Nevertheless, and Our Express Will and mean∣ing is, That if the said Governour and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East-Indies, and their Successors, do not accept of, and from time to time,If the Company do not ac∣cept of, and fectually exe∣ce such directions, are rations, &c. and at all times hereafter Act ac∣cording to, and put in due and effectual Execution, and submit and conform in all things unto such Orders, Directions, Additions, Al∣terations, Restrictions and Qualifications relating to the Constitu∣tion, Continuance, Determination, Rights, Powers or Priviledges of the said Company, or the Government thereof, Or of the said Governour and Company or the Incouragement, Management, Regulation or Advancement of Trade, Or of the present or future Joynt-Stock of the said Company, Or concerning any future Sub∣scriptions to be made by way of Increase or Addition to the Joynt-Stock, Or for ascertaining the true Values of the said Joynt Stock, at and during the time of any such future Subscriptions, which, and as We, Our Heirs or Successors,At we shall make before the 29th. September, 1694. by the Advice of our or their Privy Council, shall from time to time at any time before the 29th. day of September, which shall be in the Year 1694. think fit to make, insert, limit, direct, appoint or express in or by any further or other Charter, Letters Patents, or other Writing or Instrument under our or their Great Seal of England;Then these presents to be re∣vokable, Then and in each and every of the Cases aforesaid, It shall and may be lawful to and for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, by Letters Patents under our or their Great Seal of England to determine, revoke and make void these presents, and the Grant hereby made, And from and immediately after the passing of such Letters Patents of Revocation or Determination under the Great Seal of England, These presents, and all the Powers,And all the Powers therein contained to cease. Priviledges, Grants and other things herein contained shall cease, determine and be absolutely void to all Intents and Purposes, any thing to the contrary notwithstanding, As in and by the said last re∣cited Letters Patents (amongst several other Provisoes, Powers and Clauses therein contained) relation being thereunto had, may more fully and at large appear. NOW KNOW YE,NOW KNOW YE, That we considering how highly it Imports this Kingdom, that the East-India Trade should be continued, That We consi∣dering how highly it Imports the Honour and Welfare of this our Kingdom, and our Subjects thereof, That a Trade and Traffique to the East-Indies should be continued, And being well satisfied that the same may be of great and publick Advantage,And being desirous to make the same more National, And being also desirous to render the same (as much as in us lies) more National, General and Extensive than hitherto it hath been (which will be best carried on and effected by a General Joynt-Stock) Have,(which is best to be done in a Joynt-Stock,) have for the Purposes afore∣said, to and for the ends and purposes aforesaid, and in pursuance and part of the Execution of the Power to us reserved in and by the said Provisoe in our said Letters Patents, and herein before-mentioned, by and with the Advice of our Privy Council, and of our especial Grace,by the Advice of our Privy Council, and of our Especial Grace, certain Knowledge and mere Motion, ordained and constituted: certain Knowledge and mere Motion, ordained, constituted and appointed, And by these Presents for Us, our Heirs and Successors, do Order, direct, ordain, constitute and appoint, and the said Governour and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East-Indies,And the said Company de agree to. do hereby accept and agree to, That all and every Person and Persons,
as well our Natural born Subjects of this our Kingdom,That all our Subjects, and Persons Naturaliz'd and In∣deniz'd, who shall hereafter Subscribe and pay down the Summes of Money by them Subscribed in such manner as is herein after-directed, shall be Members of the said Company, as is after ex∣pressed. as Persons Naturaliz'd and endenized, who shall hereafter subscribe and pay down the several Proportions of the respective Sums of Money by them respectively Subscribed, in such manner as the same is herein after directed and appointed to be Subscribed and paid, be, and by the Governour and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East-Indies, for the time being, shall be admitted and become Members of the said Company within the time, and in the man∣ner herein after for that purpose expressed. And our Will and Pleasure is,And Our Will and Pleasure is, That, And we do hereby for Us, our Heirs and Successors, grant unto the said Governour and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East-Indies, and their Successors, And do hereby order,744000 l. be Subscribed direct and appoint, That the Sum of 744000 l. of Lawful Money of England, shall and may be added to the present General Joynt-Stock of the said Company, by the New Subscriptions of such Persons who shall be minded to adventure any share in the General Joynt-Stock of the said Company, and to be paid in to the use of the said Company, in such manner and proportions, and within such time as is herein after-mentioned, for the carrying on and managing a Trade to the East-Indies by a General Joynt-Stock. And for the purposes aforesaid, We do hereby, for us, our Heirs, and Successors, Order, Direct, and Appoint, that a Book, or Books, made of Vellum for the said New Subscriptions to be Inserted,in a Book of Vellum. (within Six days to be provided,) shall be provided within Six Days, after the Date hereof, by the said Gover∣nour and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East-Indies, which shall lie open every Day in the Week (Sundays ex∣cepted) at the East-India House in Leaden-Hall-street,to he open daily from Eight to Twelve, in the Morning and from Two to Six in the Afternoon, till the 10th. January next.London, from the Hour of Eight to the Hour of Twelve in the Morning, and from the Hour of Two to the Hour of Six in the Afternoon, untill the Tenth day of January next inclusive; In which said Book or Books, it shall and may be lawful to and for any person or persons whatsoever, being Natural born Subjects of this Our Realm and Persons Naturalized or Endenized, to pay and Subscribe on or be∣fore the said 10th. day of January now next ensuing, such Sum and Sums of Money, to be added to the present Joynt-Stock of the said Company, as they shall think fit to Adventure in the said Trade, So as no one person shall subscribe more than the Sum of Ten Thou∣sand Pounds;None to Subscribe above 10000. And We do hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, direct and appoint, That if it shall happen, That the New Sub∣scriptions to be made by virtue of these Presents, shall exceed the Sum of 744000 l. in the whole,If the Subscriptions exceed 744000 l. to be reduced to that Summe by the Court of Committees. That then and in such case the Governour or Deputy Governour, and the Court of Committees of the said Company (to be qualified in such manner as is herein after expressed) shall lessen and reduce the said New Subscriptions, to the said Sum of 744000 l.rata pro rata, and in proportion to the several Sums so newly Subscribed to the Joynt-Stock of the said Company. And Our further Will and Pleasure is, And we do hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, Order and appoint, That all and every Person and Persons so subscribing, shall at the time of his or her Subscription,The Subscribers to swear the Moneys subscribed is their own, and for their own use, and not in trust. respectively take an Oath before the Go∣vernour or Deputy Governour, or any three or more of the Com∣mittees of the said Company for the time being, That the Moneys by him or her Subscribed is his or her own proper Moneys, and that he or she Subscribes the same for his or her own Use, and not in Trust, or for the use of any other Person or Persons whatsoever;The Governour, &c. to Admi∣nister the Oath. To which said Governour or Deputy Governour, or any three or more of the Committee of the said Company for the time being, We do hereby
for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, give full Power and Authority; to give and Administer the said Oath, And do hereby Order and direct them, to administer the same accordingly. Provided al∣wayes, and our Will and Pleasure is, And We do hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, strictly require and command, and do order and direct, That all and every Person and Persons, who shall make such Subscriptions as aforesaid, shall at the time of such Subscription, actually and bona fide, pay down or cause to be paid down unto the Committee of the Treasury of the said Company for the time being, or their Cashire,A Third part of the Sub∣scriptions to be paid down, one full and entire Third part of the several Summes of Money, by each of them respectively Subscribed to the said present Joynt-Stock, and shall also pay the Remainder thereof on or at any time or times before the said 10th. day of January now next coming. And further,The rest by the 10th. January. Our Will and Pleasure is, And We do by these presents, for Us, our Heirs and Successors, Grant unto the said Governour and Company and their Successors, and do hereby order and direct, That in all Gene∣ral Courts of the Adventurers of the said Company,In all General Courts every Qualified Member having Such Persons (being Members of the said Company, and qualified as is herein mentioned) shall have for and in respect of such Summes, as they shall respectively have Subscribed and paid in to the Joynt-Stock of the said Company, such number of Votes or Voices in a Ge∣neral Court of the said Company, as are herein after limited and express'd (That is to say) That each Person having One Thou∣sand pound or more in the Stock of the said Company,1000 l. Stock or more, shall have a Vote for every 1000 l. to 10000 l. shall have one Vote for every Thousand pounds, not exceeding Ten Thou∣sand pounds; and if Ten Thousand pounds or more, yet that such Person shall have but Ten Votes whatsoever his or her Stock be.None to have more then Ten Votes, And further, That no Person or Persons who shall have in the Joynt-Stock of the said Company, for his or her own use any Sum less than One Thousand pounds,And no Vote, if less than 1000 l. shall have any Vote or Voice at a General Court of the said Company for or in respect of such Sum being less than One Thousand pounds. And further, We will, and by these presents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, do Grant unto the said Governour and Company and their Successors, And do also hereby Order and Appoint, That all and every Person and Persons who were Members, or free of the said Company by for∣mer Charters or capable to be so,All free of the Company by former Charters, or capable to be so: And all other Persons who shall Subscribe and pay in any Sum of Money into the said Joynt-Stock hereby appointed to be raised, in such manner as is herein before directed, shall be admitted Gratis into the Freedom of the said Company.And all new Subscribers to be free of the Company, gratis; But that all and every Person and Persons who shall not be so qualified as aforesaid, but shall come in by purchase of any part of the said General Joynt-Stock, shall take upon him or her the Freedom of the said Company, and before his or her Admission thereunto, shall pay or cause to be paid to the said Governour and Company, and their Successors, the Sum of Five pounds of Law∣ful English Money,Others to pay 5 l. for it; by way of fine for his or her Admission into the said Freedom: And such Person and Persons, as also all Subscribers to the said Joynt-Stock,who with the Subscribers shall take the Oaths, Viz. upon their Admission shall take the Oaths appointed to be taken by a late Act of Parliament made in the First Year of our Reign, Entituled, (An Act for the abrogating of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and appointing other Oaths) and also the Oath usually taken by all Persons made Free of the said Company, before the Governour or Deputy Governour of the
said Company for the time being, to whom We do hereby for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, give Power and Authority to Administer the said Oaths accordingly. And further, We will, and by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors do grant unto the said Governour and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East-Indies, and their Successors, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the Governour or Deputy Governour of the said Company for the time being,The Governour or Deputy Governour of the Company to call General Courts and Courts of Committees: from time to time to call, and we do hereby order and direct, That they shall call a General Court, and Court of Committees, to be holden for the said Company, which shall consist only of such Members of the said Company, who shall at such time have in the Joynt-Stock of the said Com∣pany,To consist of such only as have a 1000 l. Stock each, in their own right, and have taken the said Oaths. the Sum of One Thousand pounds at least in his or her own Right, and shall have also taken the Oaths appointed to be by them taken as aforesaid; (in which said General Court or Court of Committees, the Governour or Deputy Governour of the said Company for the time being shall be present,The Governour or Deputy to have a Casting Voice in such Courts. And in case of equality of Votes or Voices shall have a Casting Voice). And further also, that all the Members of the said Company so qualified as afore∣said, or the Major part of them, from time to time, and at all times hereafter, shall and may have power and Authority Yearly and every Year between the Tenth and last day of April, to assemble and meet together in some convenient Place to be appointed from time to time by the Governour,Governour, Deputy, and 24 Committees, to be yearly chosen in April. or in his absence by the Deputy Governour of the said Company for the time being: And that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Governour or Deputy of the said Go∣vernour, and other the Members of the said Company, qualified as aforesaid, for the time being, or the Major part of them, being so assembled in a General Court (whereof the Governour of the said Company, or his Deputy for the time being to be one) to nominate and Elect out of the Members of the said Company, a Governour, Deputy Governour, and Twenty Four Committees, each of them being respectively qualified to be chosen into the said several Offices, in manner as herein after is expressed (That is to say) to nominate and Elect one of the Members of the said Company, who shall then have in the Joynt-Stock of the said Company,The Governour to have 1000 l. Stock in his own right: the Sum of Four Thousand pounds at least in his own Right, to be Governour of the said Company for one whole Year from thence next following; and also one other of the Members of the said Company, who shall then have in the Joynt-Stock of the said Company, the Sum of Four Thousand pounds at least in his own Right,The Deputy the same: to be Deputy Governour of the said Company for one whole year next ensuing; And also Twenty Four Members of the said Company, who shall each of them then have in the Joynt-Stock of the said Company,The Committees each 1000 l. the Sum of One Thousand pounds at least in his own Right, to be Commit∣tees of the said Company, for one whole Year from thence next en∣suing. And Moreover, Our Will and Pleasure is, and by these Presents for Us, Our Heirs and Successors, We do grant unto the said Governour and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East-Indies, and their Successors, and do hereby Order and Appoint, That when, and as often, as it shall happen, the Governour, De∣puty Governour, or any of the Committees of the said Company for the time being, at any time within one Year after that they shall be Nominated, Elected and Sworn into their said several Offices, to Die; that then, and so often it shall and may be lawful
to and for the Residue of the Members of the said Company,If any die within the year, others (duly qualified) to be Elected in their stead. quali∣fied as aforesaid for the time being, or the major part of them, within convenient time after the Death of any such Governour, Deputy Governour, or any of the Committees of the said Company; to assemble themselves in such convenient place as they shall think fit, and in a General Court to Elect and Nominate some other Member or Members of the said Company respectively qualified as aforesaid, into the Office or Offices of Governour, Deputy Go∣vernour, and Committees of the said Company in the place and stead of him or them that so died; which Person and Persons being so Elected and Nominated to the said Office of Governour, Deputy Governour, or Committees of the said Company, shall have and Execute the said Office or Offices, for and during the residue of the said Year. Provided alwayes, And our Will and Pleasure is, And We do hereby for Us, our Heirs and Successors, order, direct and appoint, that all and every Person and Persons, who shall hereafter be Elected to the Office or Offices of Governour, Depu∣ty Governour or Committees of the said Company, shall before they be admitted to the Execution of their several Offices,The Governour, Depaty, and Committees before they Act to take the Oaths, Viz. respective∣ly take the Oaths before mentioned, and appointed to be taken by the said late Act of Parliament, Intituled, An Act for the Abro∣gating of the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and appointing other Oaths; and also the Oaths for the due and faithful Execution of their said several Offices, before such Persons, and in such manner as hath been heretofore used and accustomed, by vertue of any former Charters or Letters Patents, and this as often as the Case shall require. And further our Will and Pleasure is, and by these Presents for Us, our Heirs and Successors, We do grant unto the said Governour and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East-Indies, and to their Successors, That it shall and may be lawful to and for the said Governour, and others the Members of the said Company qualified as aforesaid for the time being, from time to time to assemble themselves for or about any the Matters, Causes, Affairs or Business of the said Trade,The Governour and other qualified Members of the Company may Assemble and hold General Courts where they please, in any place or places for the same convenient, within our Dominions or elsewhere, and there to hold a General Court for the said Company, and the Affairs thereof: And that also it shall and may be lawful to or for them, or the major part of them being so assembled, and that shall then and there be present in any such place or places (whereof the Governour or his Deputy for the time being to be one) to make, ordain and constitute such and so many reasonable Laws,and (the Governour or Depu∣ty being present) may make By-Laws for the Companies better Government, Constitutions, Orders and Ordinances, as to them, or the greater part of them, being then and there present, shall seem necessary and convenient for the good Government of the same Company: And the same Laws, Constitutions, Orders and Ordinances so make, to put in use, and execute accordingly; and at their pleasure to revoke or alter the same, or any of them, as Occasion shall re∣quire.and revoke or alter them, And that the said Governour and Company so often as they shall make, ordain or establish any such Laws, Constitutions, Orders and Ordinances in form aforesaid, shall and may impose, ordain, limit and provide such lawful pains,and may impose lawful Pe∣nalties, Fines, &c. punishments and pe∣nalties, by Fines and Amerciaments, or by any other lawful ways and means, upon or against all Offenders contrary to such Laws, Constitutions, Orders and Ordinances, or any of them, as to the said Governour and Company for the time being, or the greater
part of them, then and there being present (the said Governour or his Deputy being alwayes One) shall seem necessary, requisite and convenient for the observation of the same Laws, Constitutions, Orders and Ordinances; And the same Fines and Amerciaments, shall and may by their Officers and Servants, from time to time to be appointed for that purpose, levy, take and have to the use of the said Governour and Company and their Successors,And levy the same to their own use. without the impediment of Us, our Heirs or Successors, or of any the Offi∣cers or Ministers of Us, our Heirs or Successors, and without any account therefore to Us, our Heirs or Successors to be rendered or made; All and singular which Laws, Constitutions, Orders and Ordinances so as aforesaid to be made, We will to be duely ob∣served and kept,All which By-Laws shall be kept, &c. if approved by a General Court, and not re∣pugnant to the Laws of the Land. under the pains and penalties therein to be con∣tained, so alwayes as the said Laws, Constitutions, Orders and Ordinances, Fines and Amerciaments, be first approved by a Ge∣neral Court of Adventurers, or the major part of them, for the time being, and so as the same be reasonable, and not contrary or repugnant to the Laws, Statutes or Customes of this our Realm. Provided alwayes, and our further Will and Pleasure is, and we do hereby for Us, our Heirs and Successors, order and appoint, That the said Governour and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East Indies, or their Successors, shall not at any time here∣after Licence or permit any Person or Persons whatsoever, to Trade or Traffick,No permission to any Person to Trade, or Ships to pass into, or from the East-Indies, on any private account, or any Ship or Ships to Sail or pass into, or from any part of the said East-Indies, on any Private Account whatsoever; and that if any such License or Permission shall be granted, contrary to our said Order and appointment herein before declared, That then, and in each such Case, as well these Presents, as also the said recited Letters Patents,on Penalty of forfeiting this and the last Charter. bearing date the Seventh day of October last past, and all and every the Powers, Grants, Matters and Things therein and herein contained, shall cease, determine and be utterly void, to all Intents and Purposes, any thing to the contrary not∣withstanding. And We do further hereby for Us, our Heirs and Successors, direct, order and appoint the said Governour and Com∣pany, and their Successors, That during the continuance of the said Joynt-Stock of the said Company,No private Contract, No private Contract for the Sale of any Goods or Merchandizes, shall be made by the said Company, to any Member or Members of the said Company, or any other Person or Persons whatsoever (excepting only such Salt-Petre as shall be sold for the use of Us,(excepting Salt-petre for the Crown) our Heirs and Successors): But that all Goods and Merchandizes belonging to the said Company, shall be sold openly and publickly by Inch of Candle,but all Goods Sold at the Companies Candle, and for their account: at their publick Sales upon the Companies Account; And that all Moneys arising by the Sale of any Goods or Merchandizes of the said Company, shall be faithfully, and bona fide, accounted for, and applyed to the publick and common Benefit and Advantage of the General Joynt-Stock of the said Company,and the Money arising there∣by applyed to the Companies use. and of all and every the Persons therein concerned, ratably and according to every persons proportion and share in the said Joynt-Stock, and not to the private Advantage of any particular person or Persons whatsoever. And that no Lot of any Goods or Merchandizes, shall be put up or Sold, which shall exceed the value of Five Hundred Pounds (Jewels excepted).No Lot of Goods, except Jewels, to exceed 500 l. And for the better In∣crease of Trade, and Encouraging the Exportation of Goods and Merchandizes, of the Growth, Product and Manufacture of this Kingdom, It is Our further Will and Pleasure, and we do hereby
for Us, our Heirs and Successors, order and appoint, That the said Governour and Company of Merchants of London Trading into the East-Indies, and their Successors, shall Yearly and every Year, dur∣ing the continuance of the said Joynt-Stock, Export and carry to the East-Indies, Goods of the Growth, Product or Manufacture of this our Kingdom of England,To Export yeatly to India 100000 l. worth of Goods of the Product, &c. of England. so many as shall amount to the Value of One Hundred Thousand Pounds at the least: Provided alwayes, and upon Condition, and the said Governour and Com∣pany do hereby for themselves, and their Successors, Covenant, Grant and Agree to and with Us, our Heirs and Successors, And we do hereby for Us, our Heirs and Successors, order and appoint, that they the said Governour and Company and their Successors, shall Yearly and every Year, during the continuance of the said Joynt-Stock, Furnish,To furnisn the Crown yearly with 500 Tons of Salt-petre at the Prices tollowing; Sell and Deliver out of their Warehouses in or near the City of London, unto the Officers of the Ordnance of Us, our Heirs and Successors, or to such other Person or Persons as We, our Heirs or Successors, shall in that behalf direct or appoint to Our and their Own Use, the Quantity of Five Hundred Tons of good, clean, and Mercantable Sal.-Petre, consisting of One Hundred and Twelve Pounds to the Hundred, when and as the same shall be required by the Master, Lieutenant, or other Chief Officer or Officers, of or belonging to the Ordnance of Us, our Heirs and Successors, or by such other Person or Persons, as We, our Heirs and Successors shall from time to time Appoint in that behalf, We, our Heirs and Successors paying to the said Governour and Company and their Successors, for every Ton of such Salt-Petre, the Summe of Thirty Eight pounds and Ten shillings of Lawful English Money in time of Peace, and in time of War, the Summe of Forty Five pounds of like Money for every Ton of such Salt-Petre. And Our further Will and Pleasure is, and We do hereby for Us, our Heirs and Successors, Command, direct and appoint that all Dividends hereafter to be made of the Profits ari∣sing by the Joynt-Stock of the said Company,All Dividends to be made in Money only. shall from time to time be made in Money and not otherwise. And further, We do hereby for Us, our Heirs and Successors, Order and Appoint the said Governour and Company and their Successors, that they,The Companies Accomptant to Enter in a Book, or Books, from time to time, the Value of the Stock upon Oath; and their Successors shall Cause an Accomptant to keep a Book or Books in the Publick Office, or place of Meeting of the said Company, to be provided for that purpose, and therein fairly enter or cause to be entered from time to time the true Value of the Joynt-Stock of the said Company, the same to be by him attested upon Oath; which said Book or Books, shall from time to time lie open to be Viewed, and perused by all Persons concerned. And also that all Alienations, Mortgages,And also all Alienations and Transfers of Stock Transferrs and Assignments of any Part of the said General Joynt-Stock, to any Person or Persons whatsoever, shall be entered and Registred by the said Governour and Company and their Successors, in the Publick, Ordinary and Common Book or Books to be provided by the said Company for that purpose;to lie open to the view of the Concerneds. and that such Common Book or Books shall lye open from time to time for the View of all Per∣sons concerned. And our further Will and Pleasure is,The Joynt-Stock to continue 21 Years: and We do hereby for Us, our Heirs and Successors, Order, direct, limit and Appoint that the Joynt-Stock of the said Governour and Company
of Merchants of London Trading into the East-Indies, shall con∣tinue for Twenty One Years, to be computed from the date of these Presents, and no longer, any thing herein, or in the said recited Letters Patents, or any of them contained to the con∣trary notwithstanding.A Year before which time Books for New Subscriptions shall lie open for a New Joynt-Stock. And also that during one whole Year next, before the Expiration of the said Term of Twenty One Years, herein before mentioned for the continuance of the said Joynt-Stock, the said Governour and Company and their Successors shall cause, and procure a Book or Books to be kept at their Publick Office or place of Meeting, to which said Book or Books all Persons being Natural Born Subjects, or Naturalized, or En∣denized, shall or may have free access, and therein make new Subscriptions, for the making a succeeding new General Joynt-Stock, as to Us, our Heirs or Successors, shall seem meet and convenient.Provided, &c. as in the former Charter of the 7th. October.Provided alwayes, and upon Condition nevertheless, and Our Express Will and Meaning is, and We do hereby Order, Direct and Appoint, And the said Governour and Company do hereby agree, That if the said Governour and Company of Mer∣chants of London Trading into the East-Indies, and their Successors, do not accept of, and from time to time, and at all times hereafter, Act according to, and put in due and effectual Execution, and submit and conform in all things unto, as well all and every the Orders, Directions, Additions, Alterations, Restrictions, Qualifi∣cations, Matters, and Things herein before expressed, as also all and every such further and other Orders, Directions, Additions, Alterations, Restrictions and Qualifications, relating to the Con∣stitution, Continuance, Determination, Rights, Powers or Privi∣ledges of the said Company, or the Government thereof, or of the said Governour and Company, or the Incouragement, Manage∣ment, Regulation or Advancement of Trade, or of the Present or future Joynt-Stock of the said Company, or concerning any suture Subscriptions, to be made by way of Increase, or Addition to the Joynt-Stock or for ascertaining the true Values of the said Joynt-Stock, at, and during the times of any such future Subscriptions, which, and as We, our Heirs or Successors, by the Advice of Our or Their Privy Council, shall from time to time, at any time be∣fore the 29th. day of September, which shall be in the Year 1694. think fit to make, insert, limit, direct, appoint or Express in, or by any further or other Charter, Letters Patents, or other Writing or Instrument, under our or their Great Seal of England; Then and in Each and every of the Cases aforesaid, It shall and may be lawful to and for Us, our Heirs, and Successors by Letters Patents under our or their Great Seal of England, to determine, revoke and make void, as well these Presents, and the Grant hereby made, As also the said Charter, or Letters Patents, bearing date the 7th. day of October last past herein before-mentioned, And all, and every, or any the Matters, and things therein, and herein contained, and from and immediately after the passing of such Letters Patents of Revo∣cation, or Determination under the Great Seal of England, as well these Presents, as also the said Charter or Letters Patents bearing date the 7th. day of October last past, and all the Powers, Privi∣ledges, Grants, and other things therein, and herein contained, shall cease, determine, and be absolutely void, to all Intents and
Purposes, Any thing to the Contrary notwithstanding. In Witness whereof We have caused these our Letters to be made Patents, Witness Our Selves at Westminster, the 11th. day of November, in the Fifth Year of our Reign. By Writ of Privy Seal, Pigott.
