w3319 r15116 12255699 57430
SPECULUM Matricis Hybernicum; OR, THE IRISH MIDWIVES HANDMAID. Catechistically Composed, BY JAMES WOLVERIDGE, M. D. With a Copious Alphabetical Index. WRITTEN IV Xta MagnaLIa DeI sCrIptor, Anno Domini, 1669. Chronogramma, 1669. Damnosa quid non imminuit dies? Aetas parentum, pejor avis, tulit Nos nequiores, mox daturos Progeniem vitiosiorem. Horat. Lib. 3. Carminum, Ode 6. London, Printed by E. Okes; and are to be sold by Rowland Reynolds, at the Kings-Arms in the Poultrey, 1670.
THE AUTHOR TO THE READER. IT may perhaps be wondred, why the Author should ex∣pose his Book, not only to be tossed by the impetuous waves of the Irish Seas (e're it could set foot on the English-shore) but more to be admired, that he should expose it to be tumbled, and searched by the Accustom∣ed, Ingenious Censure, and
scrutiny, not only of Learned Scholars, but of Grave Ma∣trons, and Expert Midwives. Since also it is manifest, that very many have not only be∣stowed their Oyle, but their Ink upon this Subject; It may not only be accounted Arrogancy and Presumption, but imperti∣nent folly, and improfitable en∣deavours in the Author; either to think to out-do former Writers; or in his own Con∣ceipt to be wiser than the pre∣sent Readers, so as to out-do the one, or out-wit the other. Assuring you, therefore, that his aim is at neither, he hopes it will be candidly received by all. Though the Title-Page
may arrive your view in an Irish Garb,Specu∣lum ma∣tricis; or the Irish Mid∣wives Hand∣maid, &c. with her Hand∣maid bare-foot, and bare∣legg'd; or at the best, in Brogues and Kerchers, (according to the Custome of the Countrey;) yet, be assured, It hath an Eng∣lish dress under an Irish man∣tle; it being never intended for the Irish, (though I hear∣tily wish it may be serviceable to them also, if occasion be,) whose fruitfulness is such, that there is scarce one barren a∣mong them; and whose har∣diness, and facility in bringing forth, is generally such, as nei∣ther requires the nice Atten∣dance of diligent, vigilant Nurse-keepers, or the Art of
expert Anatomists, or the un∣wearied pains and skill of dex∣terous Midwives; being, more like the Hebrew women,Exod. Cap. 1. Ver. 19. than the native Aegyptians; deliver∣ed before the Midwives can come to them. And that this truth may gain the more Cre∣dit; mind a Story related by asDr. Wil∣liam Harvey, de Gene∣ratione Anima∣lium, Chap. de Par∣tu Page 276. An Hi∣story. Learned a Physitian as our Age hath known; who reports it (as he saith) from the mouth of the Lord Carew, Earl of Tot∣ness, and Lord President of Munster, for many years toge∣ther; who also wrote the An∣nals of those times. The Sto∣ry is this; There was an Irish Woman, wife to a Common Souldier, who, though big with
child, accompanied her Hus∣band in the Camp; and where∣as the Army daily was in mo∣tion, marching from place to place; it hapned, that by rea∣son of a sudden flood after a hasty rain, a small Brook began to swell so high, that it hindred the Armies marching for one hour: In which time of the Ar∣mies halting, the womans pains of child-bearing came upon her; insomuch, that she with∣drawing her self to the next thicket of shrubs (without the help of any Midwife, or any o∣ther preparation of Baby-clouts) there, all alone, brings forth Twins; (whom God sure∣ly seeing in their blood,Ezekiel, Cap. 16. Ver. 5.6. said
unto them, live, when no eye pityed them;) both which she brought down to the River presently, and there washed both her self, and them; which done, she wraps them up (not swadled at all) in a course Irish mantle, and carries them at her back, marching with the Army the same day barefoot & bare∣legg'd (as she was) twelve miles, and that without the least prejudice to her health, or to the lives of her children. The next day after, it pleased the Lord Deputy Montjoy, (who at that time commanded the Ar∣my against the Spaniard, who had besieged Kinsale) and the Lord Carew, to be Godfathers
to the Children, being much Admirers of the novelty of the thing. Neither could the Au∣thor suppose, or intend his Book useful to forreign parts, it being published in an Eng∣lish Dialect (no Language be∣ing more current than the La∣tine.) It will therefore conse∣quently be concluded, that it was meant for the English, his Countrey-folk, whether at home, or in forreign Plantati∣ons; and undertaken by the Author, because, in all his Readings of Authors (and those not a few) he had not seen any that had written in so plain and perspicuous a method (as may appear by perusing it,)
and suitable schemes in various figures, sufficient to direct and inform Midwives in their of∣fice: As also, to contribute all things necessary in such cases. The Author therefore com∣mends this Book to the Patro∣nage of the most Grave and Se∣rious Matrons of England and Ireland, the first being the King∣dom of his Nativity, the latter his Countrey, whil'st obliged to it. Farewell. James Wolveridge. From my Study in Cork, Jan. 12 th. 1669/70.
To his deserving Friend, Dr. James Wolveridge, On his Speculum Matricis. IF that Sicilian was admir'd, because He fram'd the Machin which dis∣clos'd the Laws And motions of the greater World, what fame Shall equal be to eternize thy Name: Who greater secrets in so little can Unravel, in this lesser world of man? Volumes that swell, like ore of Gold, have much Of earth and dross, which ne're can pass the touch; But in this little scheme, behold and see The essence and extract of Midwivery. Tredeskin's nut-shell, or that Germane flye, Were ne'r compos'd with greater in∣dustry.
What pangs and throws do others brains torment, (Like Joves, which Pallas teem'd who scarce can vent What they contrive, who labour to ensure That which Abortive proves, and not mature. But thou hadst quick delivery, thy brain Ne're wanted Midwife, neither felt it pain: In this thy true Production, which from thee Came like full-ripe fruit dropping from the tree: The Ladies, sure, their glasses will neg∣lect, When on thy mirrour they shall once reflect, Which teaches to preserve their beau∣ties more Than all their Paints and Washes e're before. Ionathan Ashe, è Coll. Oriell, Oxon. A.M.
Author in Libellum, ejus{que};picta Schemata. QUaeritur ovata quare sit sculpta fi∣gura, Demonstrans faetum pagina quae{que} suum? Omnia credibile est formari Animalia ab Ovo, Posse sui generis tale referre genus. Cernis ut ova trahit solers formica, la∣bore Parvula, quae in cumulos Irrequieta locat. Ovorum ex numero sunt subventanea, (Inertis Molae instar) pullos non paritura suos: Hinc hominum, pecudum{que} genus, genus omne ferarum Fit sterile, & sterilis dedecus arbor habet; Edere sed foecunda mihi sperare licebit, Ova{que} Prolifica ponere fida manu.
Sin secus, Obstetricum nullos Quaesita Ia∣bores Gens hominum, cesset, vel labefacta Ruat. Sic parere, aut calamus doceat parere, precamur: Illud naturae est, hoc erit Artis opus. Anser Ovans alas scriptoribus explicat, artes Inde docens, variis picta{que}; schematibus. Ille meam pennis, si sit culpabilis, Artem Delirare suis, & volitare dedit. Ova traham Reliquos scriptores inter, Acervo Pulchrum erit ex magno tollere delicias. James Wolveridge.
On the Praise, and the happy de∣livery of James Wolveridge, Dr. of Physick, in his labours on the Labour of Women, &c. Delivered by Aquila Smyth, M. D. HEre is the Key unlocks a Cabinet, So quick, so safe, by art not known as yet: More friendly than the gourd o're Jo∣nas head, It breaks the Hymen, and the Maiden∣head. What shall I say! mysterious is thy art, But so, that labour labours in no smart; Thy clouded Genius 'mid'st the Curtain foggs, Swallows thy worth in the Hybernian boggs; Dismantle then thy self, appear to be Happy to all in thy delivery. So the production of thy brain shall make Midwives themselves produce; and for thy sake
Sol teeming thus, man-Midwives out a birth, That is the product to the globe, and earth: But whilst thy brain doth labour, we do too Bring but an Embrion out, which though t'out-do Mountains (full gravidated, but pro∣duce A mouse) when thou dost open natures sluce; So riper seeds are sown on barren ground, So th'Reaper hath a sickly harvest found. The pregnant pia mater of thy brain Doth settle in his place the womb a∣gain: There is no Mola in thy wit, what's here, Of truth is the effect and character. Teeming this nine moneths, we did surely look That thou should'st be delivered of thy Book;
Prodigious Birth! who e're the like did know A child brought forth, straitt to a Midwife grow? Cease nature now thy tyrannies in vain, Here's one doth teach to mitigate a pain, Sets open Natures Gate, so that the birth Walks from the mother-womb to mo∣ther-earth: No throws we have in this, no skreaks, no cryes, No Instruments, no Cupping of the thighes: Here is an Art that after-age will boast, And tell how Wolv'ridge hath deliver'd most With ease, producing forth what's safe we see, To which whole Colledges thy Gossips be. Septemb. 9th. 1669. Cork. Your Devoted Friend and Servant, whilst Aquila Smyth, M. D.
Ad Authorem, Enco∣miastichon. ABdita dum teneri pandis mysteria foetus Numina secretis quae posuere locis, Diversis diversa paras medicamina mor∣bis; Picta refers variis schemata multa mo∣dis; Signa{que} conceptus monstras, signantia sexum, Sive puella siet, sit ve puella puer Obstetricas; varias calamo monstrante figuras, Qua methodo mulier sit paritura doces. Nuribus, Infanti, Medicaris matribus aeque; Dum te nec lactis cura vel ulla latet. Nonjacet Aurato licet ulla puerpera lecto, manu. Ipse struis facili mollia lecta manu:
Parturit ipse liber, dum pro sponsoribus astant Zoilus aut Momus, parturit imo ali∣quid: Quem Matrona gravis si qua lactaverit ulnis, Et dederit Cunas, has vagus orbis agat. Dabam Cork. 17 Calendas Octobris, 1669. Honoris & Amoris ergo dicavit, Jonathan Ashe è Coll. Oriel, Oxon. A.M.
In Authorem, Amicum suum Integerrimum. PErlege (Lector;) opus, Wolv'rigii; quod tibi aperte Ostendit docti pectora digna viri, Hoc; secreta suis naturae vultibus ornat, Ordine perspicuo conspicienda patent: Codice nam clari Doctoris dicta Jacobi: (Alter Galenus, Justinianus Item) Qui quorum merito; studiis, satis acta duorum Voluerat, & Tomos quoslibet ille suis. Hic decus, hic lumen, hic fons sermone Latino Orbis, en! Emeritus tempus in omne micans, Cujus florebit studiosos inter utros{que} Perpetuo Juris, non minus Artis Amor. Danielis Colman. J. V. D. Ex Musaeolo meo in Subur∣biis Borealibus Coreagiae, Idibus Septembris, 1669.
The Author to his Book. GO little Book, I envy not thy hap, Mayst thou be dandled in the La∣dies lap; I hope the Ladies will not thee disdain, Th'art clean, though in a home-spun dress, and plain: Nor mayst thou to a gaudy Garb as∣pire, Thy native Idiom is thy best attire; Yet Phydias and Apelles do declare, Such Schemes of Births in thee accoun∣ted rare; Thou shew'st no monstrous births that may affright, (Though thou might'st do't) but such as may delight, With admiration; then go kiss their hands, Tell them th'art subject unto their com∣mands;
Thy Countrey dress composed for their good, Brooks no scurrilities, if understood By Gravest Matrons, never penn'd, nor meant To be the subject of a loose intent; Nor yet to please lascivious, wanton eyes, Whose thoughts to Venus are a sacri∣fice. Go visit Nunneries, whose chaster fate Perchance may pregnant be without a mate; Except bald time, with his suspected pate Teach th'Abbess Midwivery within her grate; Be there probat'neer but a year, and then, If useless, hope thou mayst come out again. Perlustrate all the World, let women know To help themselves, their children, nurses too. Visit the Nurseries of Learnings fame, Salute those fountains in thy Authors name;
Their pardon crave, whilst not from disrespect They are accosted in a dialect As uncouth to his pen as to their view, which had been drest up in another hiew, Had he been sure to have been under∣stood, (As was his only scope) for publick good; Yet mayst thou be so wheresoe're th'art brought, May't not be said that thou art good for nought: Beware the Press a-while, 'twere better tarry, Lest being prest too hard thou mayst miscarry. If't must be so, those Med'cines of thy own Must cure thy sad Abortion, or else none: Nor art thou smutty to set out thy fea∣ture, But yet mayst shew the curious works of nature.
Teach Ladies Nett-work then, and tell them plain They have a wondrous nett-work 'bout their brain; And yet thy fringed skirt adorn'd may be With ornaments, and by Authority. Here's Vest and Tunick, Amnios, and Chorion, And Jus de corae too, that thou be in fashion: We admit no Allantoides in the least, Because thou treat'st of man, and not of beast. Th'art furnish'd with a Royal Sash (withall, Ne'r out of fashion) Cord, Umbilical; When all is done, then let thy schemes and fashions Succesful prove to future Generations.
To my most Worthy Friend, Dr. James Wolveridge, upon his Book, Speculum Matricis. AN ACHROSTICK. If I were skill'd in Chaldaick, or in Syriack, As others, who might well thy Praises shew; My muse would then compell a Panegyrick Even for the debt which to thy worth I owe; S ith I to that could never yet attain, Which makes thee famous in the Art of Physick, Or imitate thy Great Heroick strain, Lo, I begin to try in tones of Lyrick. Let Grave Physitians greet thee with a kiss, Vnskilful Quacks may hence learn to amend, Expell their poysons, which for want of this Rent many a heart, and brought untimely end: I mean, because they knew not mans first being, Do still mistake; I say't cannot be fit Giving Remedies which in no way are 'greeing Express mens ruine by prescribing it. Your Obliged Friend, Richard Sampson.
An INDEX con∣taining the Contents Alphabetically. A. ABortion what, with its causes and sings. Page 104, &c. How prevented, and cured, pag. 112, &c. Air ambient dangerous in child-bed p. 111.116. After-pains what, their causes, and cure p. 133, &c. After-burden what it is. p. 84, &c. Why so called. p. 90, 91, 92, &c. Must be brought away, and why. Its danger being left behind. How it is hindred in its coming forth. How drawn out. ibid.
Aged women commonly bring forth females, and why. p. 101. They are subject to the falling down of the womb p. 163 Age of the best nurse described p. 141 Allantois part of the secundine (in beasts, but not to be found in men) and is as a girdle p. 90 Amnios the inward membrane of the secundine p. 89, &c. Anger in nurses naught p. 143 Aorta what arterie, and how genera∣ted p. 8 Arterial vein what it is ibid. Astringent powder useful for Mid∣wives p. 30 B. BAgg described. Page 76. &c. In use. Behaviour of nurses to be enquired in∣to p. 124, &c. Birth natural what, and how, described p. 24. How facilitated 110.130 Blood after conception distinguished three waies p. 14.
Bones generated from the seed p. 12. Botches in children, their causes p. 115.145 Brains, how generated, and for what p. 9, &c. Breath stinking argues a child dead, and putrified in the womb p. 79 Breasts sore to cure p. 101 Breeding women, what forbidden them p. 101 C. CApsula of the heart generated p. 6 Cake of the womb what p. 88, 89, &c. Cartilages whence generated p. 11 Cataplasms against a loosness in child∣bed. 137. Against miscarrying, to be ap∣plyed to the navil p. 118 Cataplasme in case of sore breasts p. 102 Caudles in after-pains, and in case any of the secundine be left behind p. 134 Causes of immoderate flowing of the Lochia in child-bed, with their cure p. 119, 120.
Cautions to Midwives in their busi∣ness p. 28, 29 a Caution to the Irish women in a loos∣ness p. 105 Child, when so properly called p. 112 Child-bearing women ought to be cheerful p. 110 Children how overlaid, with the rea∣sons. p. 141. Of their pining away 150 Chorion what, and why so called p. 88 Coats of the Arteries, whence p. 11 Cold in child-bed dangerous, with its cure p. 124 Cold dangerous in Child-bearing 111 Calostrat, what children p. 144 Conception, with its signs 95, 96, &c. Conception in Nurses make the child diseased p. 144 Conditions of Nurses to be inquired in∣to, with her complexion p. 143 Convulsion-fits in infants, whence, and how cured 134, 135 Cordials against fainting fits, p 112. A general excellent Cordial-water, p. 113. Against a nauseous stomack p. ibid.
Costiveness the cause of difficult birth p. 35 Costivenes in breeding women naught, how it may be prevented p. 112 Cotyledons of the womb what p. 104 Courses, why stop'd after conception, p. 14. How they are to be provoked p. 115, &c. They are stirred up by the use of Ve∣nery, & are destructive to milk p. 144 Cranium what, & how generated p. 10 Critical Fevers in child-bed, their cure p. 123, &c. Crying in children discovers want of milk p. 151 Cupping-glasses how, and where to be applyed p. 147 D. DAncing in the child-bearing wo∣men, or running, naught for the child p. 110 Dancing of the child a good exercise for the Nurse p. 147 Danger from being not well purged in child-bed p. 115, &c. a Decoction against too much milk p. 148
Dead child, how delivered of p. 93, &c. signs of a dead child p. 102, &c. 108.131. Diet prescribed for breeding women p. 111. For child-bed women p. 120 Diarrhaea, see Loosness in p. 131.136 Different postures of infants in the womb, why p. 78 Difficult births, their causes p. 34, &c. Distinction of parts, when p. 12 Dreams in the infant discover want of milk p. 151 Dropsies, how distinguished from a Mola, or false conception p. 82 Drunkenness not to be indured in nur∣ses, p. 140 The dura mater, how generated p. 10 E. EAting flesh in child-bed the cause of Fevers p. 124 Eating and drinking to be observed by nurses p. 143 Eight moneths birth not like to live. p. 19, &c. The reasons ibid. Emplaster against abortion p. 113.132 Against Convulsions in infants p.
135, &c. Against the inconveniency of milk to be applyed in the breasts p. 122.146 Embryon what p. 87 Epar uterinum, that is, the liver of the womb, what, its use, and why so called p. 86, 88 Exercise attenuates milk. p. 146. In the nurse good for the child p. 147 Experiments to know if a woman hath conceived or no p. 98, &c. Experiments to try milk p. 126 The Excrements are not voided by the fundament whilst the child is in the womb p. 16, &c. F. FAlse conception what. p. 79. How it differs from a true conception p. 81. How distinguished from a Drop∣sie. p. 82. How delivered of p. 94 Falling out of the womb p. 162, &c. Fainting fits in breeding women, how prevented p. 112 Fevers in child-bed in general, and of a Fever of milk, what it is, with the cures p. 121
Female when conceived, and how known p. 200 Fibres in the first generation what p. 2 Figure of a child of 18 daies old p. 12 Fume, or suffumigation in fits of the mother p. 160 G. GAlea is part of that coat of the secundine called the Amnios p. 87 a General cordial water against all fainting fits, at all times p. 128 a Gibbous infant the cause of a difficult birth p. 35 Glysters for a looseness in child-bed. p. 136, &c. For the retention of the Lochia then p. 116 Gluttony in nurses condemned p. 143 Great breasts, and great nipples in nur∣ses not commendable, why p. 141 Grief in nurses naught for the child. p. 143 Naught for child-bearing wo∣men p. 110 Gripes in the belly of infants, whence p. 149
H. HAndsome children, why some so, & why others unhandsome p. 21 Hastiness in the Midwife not good p. 27, 29 Hasty rising up of the mother naught for the child in the womb p. 110 Hard breasts the signs of the infants thriving in the womb p. 101 Haemorrhoids the cause of difficult birth p. 35 Heart generated, when p. 6 Heat of the seed the cause of genera∣tion of males, they are generated in the right side p. 21 Helmet called the Galea, part of the Amnios p. 87 Heavy burdens carried by the mother are naught for the infant in the womb p. 111 Hysterick fits: see Strangulation of the womb, and mother-fits p. 155, &c. I. INnate heat in infants requires con∣stant aliment p. 150 Infant, when said to be, p. 16 How it
lyeth in the womb, p. 33, &c. How nourished in the womb, p. 14 It at∣tracts the purest blood, ibid. Hath more from the mother then from the father, ibid. Why like their Parents, p. 21 To know whether it thrive in the womb, or not p. 101 Infants participate of the nurses food, and physick, p. 151 How to be re∣ceived by the Midwife p. 29 Impurities are communicated to them by the Qualities of the milk p. 151 Inflations the cause of after-pains p. 133 Inflammations of the womb the cause of difficult birth p. 35 Intemperance in nurses the ruine of their nurseries p. 140 Immoderate flowing of the Lochia in child-bed dangerous p. 118, &c. Juleps in case of retention of the Lochia in child-bed p. 118, &c. Against Convulsion-sits in infants p. 135 K. KNots, as many as are to be obser∣ved in the navil-string, so many males p. 103 L. LAdies may nurse their own chil∣dren with the greatest conveni∣encies p. 135 Leprous infants, how so begoten p. 102 Liver first generated after the coats by the Vena bifurca, p. 4, &c. Is a con∣crete blood ibid. Lochia retained in child-birth, dange∣rous, p. 115 Flowing over-much, dangerous also p. 119 Loosnes in child-bed dangerous, p. 131.135 Lungs, when, and how generated p. 8 M. MAle conceived, how known p. 99 Man, his dignity, and titles, vid. Pref. Manner of generation p. 2, 3 Marrow of the bones what, with its use p. 11 Matrix to be anointed in difficult births p. 40 Meats to be avoided by nurses, what p. 144 Medicines usual in Fevers of child∣birth p. 124
Members distinguished by the tenth day p. 7 Menstrua the cause of strangulation of the womb, or fits of the mother p. 156 Midriff how made, p. 7. The best Mid∣wife described, p. 27 Her posture, p. 28, &c. Her office, Number of her assistants, Her furniture ibid. Midwives are not to take more care of the infant then of the mother p. 93, 94 Milk, how generated, p. 14.98 It is the cause of Fevers, p. 121 Driven back too soon dangerus, with the reasons of it, p. 122 fried by its colour and quality, p. 145 Of milk too thick corrected, p. 146, &c. Too thin cor∣rected, ibid. How to cure the too great abundance, p. 147. The want of milk supplyed, ibid. No milk at all, the worst p. 150 Mirth good in breeding women, p. 110 In the nurse, best for the child p. 141 Mola, or false conception, what p. 79 Mother contributes more to the infant
then doth the father p. 15 Motion too violent in the nurse, naught for the child, and so in the mother p. 147 Mourning either in the mother, naught for the infant in the womb, p. 43 Or for the nurse ibid. Mothers, if able, fittest to nurse their own p. 152 Mother-fits, see strangulation of the womb, p. 155. How cured, p. 159 Mucilage what p. 126 N. NAtural form of birth, what it is p. 24 Nauseousness prevented p. 113 Navil how generated p. 3. How to be cut, ib. How it atracts blood for nou∣rishment, p. ib. Cords of the navil, so many twins 103 Needing what p. 108 Nerves of the back, their original, p. 11 How dispersed through the whole body by a figure p. 13 Nipples, what are the best, p. 141, &c.
Sore nipples to cure p. 137, &c. Nurses the best, described, p. 140, &c. Not to be chosen in poverty, p. 150. Nurses purged to cure the child, why p. 15 Nurses not to rock the infant too vio∣lently presently after suckling it, why p. 153 O. ORiginal of the nerves, p. 10 Of the spine of the back ibid. Oxycrat what p. 129 Oyles, what fit for Midwives, p. 26 Their use in difficult births p. 41 Ointment in case of the Lochia suppres∣sed, p. 118 in case of too immode∣rate flux of them, p. 120 An excel∣lent ointment in a difficult birth, p. 41.126 For sore nipples, ibid. In Hy∣sterick fits p. 160 P. PArsly an enemie to milk p. 144 Passions in the nurse hinder good milk p. 143 Pains in child-bearing, whence they are p. 23.133
Pains after the child-birth, what p. 52.116.124 Pericardium generated with the heart Piles in hysterick fits p. 161 Planets, their aspect, the cause of good features and forms in children, and of bad p. 21 Placenta uteri what, p. 86, 88. But one, though there be never so many in∣fants; Its use ibid. Plenty of milk ever best, p. 142 Po∣stures of the infant many, p. 37, &c. Postures of the infant naturally, how, p. 33 Many praeternatural postures described in sixteen several figures, from p. 37, to p. 72 Their helps re∣solved by way of Dialogue ibid. Potions useful in difficult births p. 134 Powders for sneezing in difficult births, p. 127, &c. Against Abortion, p. 131 Against Convulsion-fits in in∣fants, p. 136 Against immoderate flowings of the Lochia in child-bed, p. 119 Pulsatile veins from the great Artery of the heart p. 7
Purgation of women how long, p. 115 Not being well purged, dangerous ibid. Purge not to be given till seven daies after the birth, in case the Lochia be stop'd p. 117 Pustules and whelks in infants, their cause p. 149 Q. QUalities of milk pass into those that are suckled by that milk p. 152 Quarrelsomeness in nurses naught p. 143 Quicken, when women do p. 17 R. REmedies over-hot in difficult births, how inconvenient, p. 126, &c. Retention of the Lochia in child-bed dangerous, with its causes, and cure p. 116 Riding in the mother naught for the in∣fant p. 110 Rocking of the infant too vehemently presently after sucking naught p. 153
Running in the mother naught for the infant p. 110 S. SColding in nurses not tollerable p. 142 a Scruple what p. 128 Scull, how generated p. 10 Seventh moneth birth may live p. 19 Secundine what, p. 84 Described by figures p. 85 Sexes distinguished p. 99 Sixth moneth birth cannot live p. 19 Signs mortal by the infants motion in the womb p. 20 Sleep in the mother good for the infant, p. 11 Often sleep in nurses is good for the infant p. 141 Sluttish nurses make nasty children p. 140 Sneezing good in difficult births, p. 127, &c. And in fits of the mother p. 159 Soul when infused p. 17 Spine of the back, how generated, p. 11 What it is, ibid. Its use ibid. Stature of the nurse p. 104
Stinking things and smells, how useful in mother-fits p. 161 Stool for Midwives described p. 28 Stone in the bladder the cause of diffi∣cult birth p. 35 Stopping of the terms no sure sign of conception p. 95 Strangulation of the womb a fierce di∣stemper, p. 155 Its definition. What it is, ibid. Parts affected what, the causes, p. 156 Signs of the fit in its augmentation, state, and declination, p. 157 How it differs from a Syn∣cope, or Swouning, 158, &c. How from an Apoplexy, ibid. How it dif∣fers from an Epilepsie, p. 159 Its cure ibid. Strength, how to be restored p. 123 a Suffumigation in fears of Abortion, p. 113 In hysterick fits 160 Superfoetation what 102 Suppositories,p. 124 For infants, p. 136 In the strangulation of the womb p. 255 Sweet smells, how used in fits of the mother p. 161
Symptoms grievous in breeding women, their danger, how corrected, p. 24 In child-bed women not well purged, dange∣rous p. 112 T. TArtness of milk, how corrected p. 146 Terms in child-bearing to help p. 113 Timpany, how caused p. 82 Truncus phrenicus what, p. 7 The trunk of the hollow vein, ascending and descend∣ing p. 5 Tryal of milk p. 135 Twins have so many navil-cords as there are twins, and yet but one Placenta p. 103 V. VEin hollow what, p. 9 Vein two forked what; Its ose, p. 3 The Venal Ar∣terie, with its use p. 7 Venery, and its use, spoyl the milk in the nurse p. 144 Venereous thoughts in the nurse spoyl the milk ibid. Ugly children, the reason why they are so p. 21 Vitious seed the cause of strangulation of the womb p. 156 Virtue of the milk of a male child, if a fe∣male suck it; and of a female, if a male suck it p. 145 Unguent against Abortion, p. 41.126. See Ointment.
Vomit of Oxymell good to attenuate thick milk p. 146 Urine of the infant in the womb, by what passages voided in the womb p. 16 W. WAnt of milk, the causes, and cure p. 147 Waterish humors flowing out of the breasts of its own accord, is an argument of a weak child p. 105 Weakness of the matrix is the cause of the secundine not coming forth p. 90 Whelps dye with sucking women p. 142 Winds sharp and cold not good for the child in the womb p. 106 Women meet helps for man, p. 27 Fit helps for women, by reason of the modesty of their Sex, p. 27, &c. How delivered, ibid. How long to keep their beds in child-bed with safety p. 115 Women above 40 years old bring forth with more difficulty, p. 30 They are to be dealt withal in child-bed, as with wounded per∣sons p. 124 Womb, its natural property to receive seed, p. 1 The falling out of it, p. 162 The signs, ibid. The causes, p. 163. Prognosticks, and cure p. 164 Y. A YEar sufficient for a child to be suckled p. 153 Young women bring forth males most common∣ly, why p. 100, &c. The end of the Table.
THE PREFACE. SInce all Arts and Sci∣ences tend to the use and benefit of Man∣kind, all things by the Almighty Creator being subjected to him, who is no other than a little World in himself: Man would not only be ungrateful to his Creator, but wanting to his off-spring, should he not endea∣vour to improve his whole indu∣stry, Reason, and skill, to propa∣gate
his kind to all posterity. And therefore, besides other helps, as Physical, Anatomical, and Diaete∣tical, &c. The art and skill of Obstetricie (commonly called Midwivery) is none of the least:Non mi∣nor est virtus quam quaerere parta tueri. It being no less virtue and pru∣dence to preserve a child when be∣gotten, than content and plea∣sure in begetting; in both which, both Sexes are, and ought equal∣ly to be concerned; for where the womb proves the tomb, there is neither room for Physick, Anato∣mie, Chirurgery, or diet, &c. or any thing like it. This then being the first work in reference to mans future well-doing, laying aside all other Argumentative circum∣locutions, and deviations; let us,
by way of discourse, examine, and contrive, how that creature man may be preserved, from the begin∣ning of his Conception, to the hour of his birth, and that with safety too to her that bare him. And truly, it may be worth the while, if we consider the excellency of man, whom some call (as like unto God,The dig∣nity of man de∣scribed.  so) The Interpreter of the gods. Pythagoras calls him The Measure of all things; And Plato calls him The Wonder of Wonders. Theophrastus stiles him The Great Pattern of the Ʋniverse. Aristotle terms him A Politick Animal, born for society, whom God made with his face upright; whereas all other creatures look with their faces downward.
Prona{que}Ovid. Met am. Lib. 1. cum spectant ani∣malia caetera terram; Os homini sublime dedit, coelum{que} tueri Jussit, & erectos ad sydera tol∣lere vultus.Hori∣zontem corporeo∣rum & incorpo∣reorum. Divi∣num ani∣mal, ple∣num ra∣tionis & consilii. Mundi Epito∣men, & naturae delicias.  P. 8. ve. 4, 5, &c. Synesius terms man the Horizon of all corporeal and incorporeals. Tully calls him a Divine creature, full of Reason & counsel; whom Pliny also calls the Epitomy of the World, and de∣light of Nature: And whom all with one consent, call, a Micro∣cosme, a little world in a bigger. Of whom, the Kingly Prophet Da∣vid, in Psalme the 8th. saith, Thou hast made him little lower than the Angels; thou hast crowned him with glory and honour, and hast placed him over all the works of thy hands.
Now then, man being so excellent a Creature, who, though the last in the Creation, yet not the least; God making him as after his own Image and Likeness,Gen. the 1 Chap. ve 26, 27. and instru∣cting him with so large a Commis∣sion, (and a blessing annexed to it) as to subdue the Creation, ma∣king all the creatures subject to the dominion of man, whom God had or dained as his Vice-Roy on earth, with this blessing, viz. be fruitful, and multiply, and reple∣nish the earth: Let us make a nearer indagation and scrutiny into the formation of man, as to the order of the generation of the parts, and increase of the infant, according to the daies and times, from the first conception till the
day of his birth: And then, the more we seriously weigh it, and pry into it,Ps. 139. ver. 13. the more, with the Psal∣mist, we shall admire our Creator by our creation, and bless that God that hath cover'd us in our Mo∣thers womb, and praising him, say; We are fearfully & wonderfully made, marvellous are thy works,Ver. 15. Septua∣gint, . My bones . Vers. 16. &c. My fubstance was not hid from thee when I was made in secret; and curiously wrought in the lowest parts of the Earth. Thine eyes did see my substance yet being unper∣fect, and in thy Book all my members were written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there was none of them. And if God, who created
male and female, thought it fit to provide the woman as a help meet for him:Gen. 2.20. Women being most fit to help women in their deliveries, by reason of the modesty of their sex; It shall be the whole subject of this ensuing small Tract, to describe a Midwife, and such a woman too that may be most apt for so necessa∣ry an employment; and then (still aiming at a publick good) decli∣ning that Idiom best becoming the Pen of Doctors,The Latin Tongue. shall shape my Quill to an English Dialect, and (avoiding intricate and Bomba∣stick words, and Acroamatical sentences, where they may be other∣wise expressed) afford such mate∣rial directory assistance in the business of Midwivery, as shall
be suitable to the meanest capa∣city; not presuming to instruct the Learned,. Noctuas Athenas. lest I seem to bring Owls to Athens; but to inform the less knowing. And ending this Pre∣face, we will begin with Genera∣tion it self, and the rest in Order.
SECT. I. Of the True generation of the Parts, and Increase of the In∣fant in the Womb, according to the daies and times, till the time of the Birth. The pro∣perty of the womb.WHen the womb (whose property it is naturally to receive seed unto genera∣tion, as a Loadstone at∣tracts iron, or as Jeat straws or feathers) hath received the seed for generation, and by its virtue hath shut up the seed for generation; Presently, from the first day untill the sixth or seventh, there grow and arise very many and very small fibres or hairs, beginning with a hot motion,See the fi∣gure mar∣ked. by which vital heat the liver with his chiefest organs are generated by a na∣tural
virtue; as this following Scheme may the more illustrate, marked as in the margin. The small first fibres. depiction of an embryo For the vital spirits, giving down seed towards conception, forms and di∣stinguisheth the chiefest members by
the tenth day, being let in by certain veins of the secundine,The navil' how gene∣rated. to which the matrix is fixed, and by which the blood is imported, and of which the navil is generated. But at the very same time three smal spots (not unlike to curds of milk) arise, where the liver, the heart,Nourish∣ment of the Infant by the na∣vil. Vena bi∣furca. and the brain have their places; and then presently a vein directed by the navil, attracts the thicker blood confused with the seed, and makes it fit for nourishment: from whence also there ariseth a vein with two forks, which is generated according to the form of this figure.
depiction of the development of the navel in an embryo In the one of which branches there is a collection of blood, of which first the liver is generated by a natural facul∣ty.The gene∣tion of the Liver. From whence it easily appears, the liver to be a congealed and concrete blood: and also it may be manifest,
how many and various veins it hath prepared and fitted, for the expulsive and attractive virtue. But in the other branch are generated those textures, or rather web of veins, with the dilatation of other veins, as of the stomack, spleen, and intestines, in the lower part of the belly. And from hence immediately all veins are recollected together, as so many branches into one trunk, in the upper texture of the liver towards the hollow vein;Venae Cavae truncus as∣cendens, descendens Diaphrag∣ma. truncus descendens. and this trunk by and by sends down branches to make the mid∣riff, and directs not a few branches to the lower parts, even to the very thighs: and then the heart, with his veins ex∣tended into seed from the navil, is ge∣nerated by a vital virtue,Spina dor∣si. and is directed towards the spine of the back, as is de∣monstrated in this figure, 3.
depiction of the development of the liver and the branching of veins in an embryo But those do attract the hottest and more subtile blood,The gene∣ration of the heart. Pericardi∣um, vel Capsula Cordis. of which the heart is generated, incased in a membrane, naturally fleshy and thick, necessary up∣on the account of so hot a member. But the hollow vein extending it self,
and penetrating the inward concavity of the right side in the heart, &c. de∣rives thence blood for the nourishment of the heart. From the same branch al∣so of this his vein, and in the same part another vein ariseth, called, by some,Truncus Phrenicus, vel Dia∣phragma∣tis. by some, the immoveable, or quiet vein; because, according to the account of the pulsa∣tion of other veins it beats not at all, but lyes quiet; ordained for this end,Vena Co∣ronaria. that it should let go the purest blood to the lungs, being vested with a double tunicle like an Arterie, from whence it is called the Arterial vein.Vena ar∣teriosa, er Pulmona∣ria. But in the left concavity of the heart there are two Arteries, that is to say, the Venal Ar∣terie, and the Great Arterie, which carries a great pulse with it, and diffu∣seth the vital spirits by the blood of the heart into all the pulsatile veins of the body. For, as the hollow vein is the original of all veins, by which the bo∣dy doth attract its whole nourishment of blood; so,Aorta. Venae p∣satiles Aorta. from the Aorta (or great Arterie) all pulsatile veins are derived, diffusing the vital spirits through the
whole body. For the heart is the foun∣tain and original of vital heat, without which no creature or member can thrive. Arteria Venosa.Under the abovesaid Arterie in the left concavity of the heart, another vein ariseth called the Venal Arterie: And, although that be really a pulsatile vein, and doth direct the vital spirits, yet ac∣cording to the manner of all pulsatile veins that have blood, It hath but one coat, and therefore made for that end, that it should derive the cold air from the lungs to refresh the heart, as also to attemper its over-much heat. The gene∣ration of the lungs.And, because veins issue out from both the concavities of the heart, and are inserted into the lungs, and of which the lungs are formed; for the vein that proceeds from the right concavity of the heart produceth the most subtile blood, which by small fibres dispersed here and there, is changed into the fleshy substance of the lungs. But from the great vein of the heart (viz. the Aorta) and from the great vein of the li∣ver
(viz. the Vena Cava,Vena Ca∣va, the great vein of the li∣ver, whence the brest, arms, and thighs proceed. or hollow vein) the whole brest is generated, and so successively the Arms and Thighs. depiction of the development of the heart and arterial veins in an embryo Within the time aforesaid also is generated the highest and chiefest part of this noble structure,The gene∣ration of the brain: the Brain; in
the third Region of this mass; for the whole mass of seed being filled with the animal spirits, that contracts a great part of the genital moysture, and con∣cludes it in a certain concavity wherein the brain may be formed: but, as to the out-side,The Cra∣nium, or the Dura mater. The Scull. it is inveloped with a certain covering, which being toasted and dried with heat, is brought into a boney substance, and becomes a scull, as appears by this precedent figure. But the brain is so formed, that it may conceive, retain, and change the natures of all the vital spirits, from whence also proceed the beginnings of all Reason, and of the Senses: For, as veins have their original from the liver,The ori∣ginal of the nerves. and as arteries have their rise from the heart; so also nerves being of a softer and milder natural existence, arise from the brain, and are not hollow as the veins are, but solid; for they are the first and chiefest instruments of all the senses, by which the motions of all the senses, by which the motions of all the senses, by reason of the vital spirit, are justly made.
After the nerves,The origi∣nal of the pith of the back-bone, called the Silver cord, Eccles. cap. 12. ver. 6. from the brain also is formed the pith of the back-bone, not of an unlike nature from the brain, so that it scarce can be called marrow, because it hath no likeness to marrow, either by sight, or in substance; for the marrow is a kind of superfluous ali∣ment, arising from the blood of the members,The mar∣row, what, and how generated. The Spi∣nalis me∣dulla, what. appointed to moisten and make the bones of the body grow; but the brain and pith of the back have their original from the seed, not depu∣ted for the nourishment and growth of the other members, but that by them∣selves they might make private parts of the body,The brain and Spina∣lis medulla ordained for the use and motion of the sen∣ses. for the use and motion of the senses, that from thence all the other nerves may take their rise. For, from the pith of the back many nerves arise, from which the body hath sense and motion, as may appear by the difference betwixt the vital and animal faculties, as hath been before hinted. Cartila∣ges, bones, &c. gene∣rated from the seed.Moreover, here it is to be observed, that from the seed it self cartilages, bones, coats of the veins of the liver,
and of the arteries of the heart, the brain with the nerves, and again the tunicles, and as well other pannicles or membranes as those that wrap up the infant, are generated; but from the pro∣per blood of the infant is the flesh it self ingendred, and all those parts that are of a fleshy substance; as the heart, the liver, and lungs: And then at length all these grow together by the men∣struous blood, attracted by the small veins of the navil, which are observed to be directed with their orifices into the womb.All parts distinct by 18 daies. All which are distinctly made by the eighteenth day of the first moneth, from the very conception, at which time it may be called seed, but afterwards it becometh to be, and is called a child;When cal∣led a child. which the Ancients have comprehended in these two ver∣ses, Sex in lacte dies, ter sunt in sanguine trini, Bisseni carnem, ter seni membra figu∣rant.
depictions of an embryo in the womb and of the development of the nerves The lesser figure denotes the Nerves derived frō the Back and dispersed through the whole. The explanation of the larger figure see in the following page. Cross sculpsit'
Englished thus, Six daies in milk, thrice three the seed's in blood; Twice six makes flesh, thrice six makes members good. FF Sheweth a young one of 18 daies (though some hold it but 14 daies in which all the members may be discerned apart.) GG The four Umbilical Vessels meeting in one. HH How the Umbilical Vessels be∣come thick by degrees, that that doubt amongst some may be resolved, whe∣ther they spring from the womb, or no. III Sheweth how the Umbilical veins and arteries are spread throughout the Chorion by infinite branches. KKK Sheweth the membrane called Amnios, in which sweat and urine are gathered together, in which the infant swimmeth, and sits as safe as in a Bath.
SECT. II. Of the Nutriment of the child in the womb, and by what nou∣rishment it is preserved, and when it groweth up to be an Infant. Infant, how nourished.WHilest the young one is in the womb, it is nourished by blood attracted by the navil; by which it is, that women after they have con∣ceived have their terms stop'd;Why cour∣ses stop'd after con∣ception. for then the infant begins to crave, and at∣tracts much blood. For the blood pre∣sently after conception is discerned by a three-fold difference.A three∣fold dist n∣ction of blood after conception. The first and purest part of it the young one attracts for nourishment. The second, less pure and thin, the matrix forceth upwards by certain veins to the breasts,Venae mamma∣riae. The gene∣ration of milk. where it becomes milk, by which the infant is nourished so soon as it is born. The third, and more impure part of the
blood, remains in the matrix, and flow∣eth out with the secundine, both in the birth, and after the birth: Hence it is that Hippocrates saith,Hippocra∣tis Aphor. lib. 5.39 & 52. there is much affinity betwixt the flowers and the milk, since the one happeneth to be made out of the other. And Galen al∣so, by reason of this thing,The infant hath more from the mother than the father. elegantly adviseth, that the infant hath more from the mother than from the father; for this reason, because the seeds are first increased by the menstruous blood, and then by these the infant is present∣ly nourished in the womb; and again, being newly born, it is nourished with milk: And, as roots have more nou∣rishment from the earth than the plant that bare them; (that is, from whence they came): so also infants receive more from the mother than from the father. And hence he saith that it comes to pass, that so much more is attribu∣ted to the mother, by how much more she contributeth more towards gene∣ration. But the infant being now formed,
and perfected in the womb,When an infant. How the urine a∣voided. in the first moneth the young one sends forth u∣rine by the passages of the navil; but that conduit being shut in the last depiction of a foetus in the womb moneth, they vent it by the privities; (of which more when we come to treat
of the secundine (or after burden, with its coats.) Whilest the infant is in the womb, it avoids nothing at the fundament, because hitherto it hath sucked in nothing by the mouth. After the 45th. day, as Hippocrates▪ adviseth,The soul when in∣fused. Animae crean∣do infun∣ditur & infunden∣do creatur. it receiveth life, and together with that a soul (according to the opinion of many) divinely infused, for that then it begins to be sensible, and from that time it may no more be called a young one, but an infant, according to the precedent figure. And, though at this time it may have sense, yet it wants mo∣tion, being as yet very tender, but of the time of the motion, Hippocrates gives this account, viz. If you account the daies double from the time of con∣ception, you will find them quicken; and the time of quickening being trip∣led, makes up the day of the birth.Quicken, when. As for example, A rule to know it.If the infant be formed in 45 daies, it will stir in 90 daies, which is the middle time that it lies hid in the womb; for in the ninth moneth it will
come forth, and make haste to the birth; although females are often∣times born in the tenth moneth. And so much for the formation, increase, and perfection of the infant, according to the account of daies and times.
SECT. III. How the infant doth in the womb the fifth, the sixth, the seventh, and eighth moneth; and also of the difference of sexes, and forms. AFter the third and fourth moneth the infant useth a more plentiful nourishment, by which it groweth more and more untill the time of birth shall come: Therefore it is to be un∣derstood, that when it is born in the sixth moneth, it cannot in nature live; because, though it be formed distinctly, yet it is not of its just perfection. But if it be born in the seventh moneth,Why an infant born in the se∣venth mo∣neth may live. it may easily live, because then it is suffi∣ciently perfect. And, whereas those that are born in the eighth moneth can rarely live; whereas, such as are born in the seventh moneth are often times
living, it is not without reason; for on the seventh moneth the infant is ever moving towards the birth, at which time, if it be strong enough, it comes to the birth, but if not, it remaineth in the womb till it groweth stronger, (viz.) the other two moneths. After the motion at seven moneths end if it be not born, it removes it self into some other place of the womb, and is so weakned by that motion, that should it come to the birth in the following eighth moneth,Two mor∣tal signs by the in∣fants mo∣ving. it cannot live by reason of that motion; and neither is the in∣fant indangered by this only, but by a double motion. The first is, that when after the motion of the seventh moneth, it is born the eighth moneth, (as afore∣said.) The next is, because (by reason of the influence of the stars) every se∣venth moneth produceth a dangerous and hurtful motion to the infant; for the Sun is ever standing in an opposite sign at that time, and because the 8th. moneth is ever nearest unto Saturn, an enemie to all that receive life.
And it is to be conceived,The dif∣ference of the sex. Hippocra∣tes Aphor. v. Book, and 48. that the males are generated in the right side of the matrix; but females in the left, out of the left testicle; for the right side, by reason of the Liver is hotter, but the left cooler; but principally the abun∣dant heat of seed is the cause of the generation of males. Of infants being like their pa∣rents.And, because males are sometimes like their parents, is from the virtue of the seed, that the infant should most re∣semble those whose seed is most in vir∣tue. But 'tis believed that the motion of the stars can do somewhat,Stars have influence. The reason of handsome and un∣handsome children. as when the seed is conceived under the aspect of some good Planets, this makes an excellent form; but when under the aspect of some untoward Planet, then it produceth an ugly shape, and un∣beautiful form. CC Denotes the Kidneys of each side. DD The emulgent veins on the right side.
EE The emulgent Arteries on the right side. F The trunck of the hollow vein. HH The emulgent Arteries on the left side. LL The spermatick veins on the right side. K The spermatick Arterie on the right side. M The spermatick veins on the left side. aa The Ureters cut off. oo The feminine testicles. PP The broad ligament like Batt wings. qq The trunk of the great Arterie. BB Vessels like Vine-branches. Y The shaft of the womb. R The bottom of the womb where the infant lieth.
depiction of a uterus with foetus This figure sheweth the Womb Anatomized and how the Infant lyeth in it. The parts are descri∣bed in the following page. Coss sculpsit
SECT. IV. Of the due time and form of the Birth; and what are the causes of pains in Child-bear∣ing. THe ninth moneth being now at hand, the nourishment of the in∣fant in the womb beginneth to fail, by reason of that bigness to which the in∣fant is grown; or now being big, it requires much nourishment, which, be∣cause it cannot longer attract by the small veins, and by the navil, it is mo∣ved with great struglings and force in the womb, insomuch, as it breaketh the ligaments, the veins and coats in which the infant is involved (I mean the se∣cundine) with the other coats, of which hereafter, and according to this figure, fitteth it self toward the birth. What are the pains in Child-bearing?By this indication Midwives and other women which sometimes are as∣sistant
unto pregnant women, may ob∣serve the true pains of a woman in tra∣vail, which in truth are nothing else but the force of the infant now perfect, by which they are enforced and tossed, and with which they contend down∣wards, that they may go forth; for the membrane being broken by that force, and the womb open, the humors begin to flow down, of which the infant be∣ing now freed, he presently is sensible of the air, and being desirous of this life, is turned toward the out-let of the matrix, with his head towards the orifice of the same: And this (see the precedent figure) is the form of a na∣tural birth;A natural birth, what if the head tend forth to the out let, with the hands drawn down to the sides, and plac'd on the hips, as in the last figure. An unnatural birth (of which more at large, God willing, hereafter) may be said to be where any of these conditions are wanting, or de∣fective; therefore let the Midwife take care that she be timely prepared for the reception of any birth, with all ne∣cessary
depiction of a uterus with foetus correctly presented for birth A Naturall Birth. Cross sculy
conveniences, as with a fit stool,The Mid∣wives fur∣niture. a sharp knife, astringent powder, a sponge, swathes, &c. warm oyle of Lillies, with which she may aptly an∣oint both the womb of the woman, and her own hands: but of that also more particularly hereafter. Let us now, in the next Section, make inquiry for the fittest and best Midwife, with whom we may discourse. There is a good woman called Mrs. Eutrapelia, who promised to undertake the office, and to be satisfied with directions. And see, here she comes, and offers discourse.
SECT. V. A Dialogue between Eutrapelia the Midwife, and Philadel∣phos the Doctor. Eutrap. Sir, I understand you are in∣quiring after a woman that may make a fit Midwife; the employment being such a necessary and publick good; I should be willing (if your Worship, and other Learned Physici∣ans think me fit) to be serviceable in my generation, and to take upon me that employment. Dr. Philadelphos, Your name, I be∣seech you, Mistress. Eutrap. Sir, my name is Eutrapelia; and I am she that last night promised to wait on you this morning. Philad. Are you she? Welcome Mrs. Eutrapelia, your name bespeaks you fit for the work, as being a well-bred woman; therefore give me leave to
tell you what kind of person a Midwife ought to be, and that in the subsequent description: A good Midwife described.The best Midwife is she that is in∣genuous, that knoweth letters, and having a good memory, is studious, neat and cleanly over the whole body, healthful, strong, and laborious, and well instructed in womens conditions, not soon angry, not turbulent, or hasty,Exo. 1.15. Shiphrah Puah. Exod 1.17. and ver. 20 and 21. unsober, unchaste; but pleasant, quiet, prudent; not covetous, but like the He∣brew Midwives, such as fear God, that God may deal with them, and that the people may multiply and increase after their hands, and that the Lord may build them houses. By this description I tell you only how the best Midwife must be quali∣fied; let me hear from you somewhat of your experience and skill, that I may the better judge of your abilities, and approve of them. First, then Mrs. let me know how women are delivered? How wo∣men are delivered.Eutrap. Women are variously de∣livered, some on their bed, that is to
say, o'rethwart the hardest bed, with their faces upward, with their feet clo∣sed, doubled, and covered. But if she be not so tired out that of necessity she must be delivered on the bed, remove her to the stool:The stool described. now the stool must be strong, and cut with a hole, in the shape of the moon, as high as a Barbers chair,The Mid∣wives pe∣sture. that the Midwife sitting upon a lower stool, may the better bring the infant from the upper parts; the wo∣mans infant from the upper parts; the wo∣mans face being still from her.Her office. Then let her attend with her finger dipped in warm oyle of sweet Almonds, or Lil∣lies, moved about the orifice of the ma∣trix, that the secundine (called the after∣burden) may the easier fall out.The num∣ber of her assistants. Then let those that are about her (which need not be above three at a time, that is to say, on each side one, and one at her back) perswade her not to cry out,Not . but to keep in her breath what she may, that the spirits may descend, and be ex∣posed downwards, to depress the Dia∣phragma (or Midriff) especially when her throwes are upon her. If the follicle
depiction of a birthing stool B. the Back of the Stoole o o o o. the feete a a. rests for the hands r r. the ring in shape like the Moone c c c c. the Cloth round the ring to keepe out the Aire etc: Crofs sculpsit
be not broken after a long while, it may be broken, carefully, with the nail of the finger, and thrusting the finger in by degrees to open it. But often times the orifice openeth naturally, by reason of the humors that flow out by it. But alwaies this caution must be observed by the Midwife,A Caution. that the infant fall not suddenly out, lest that endanger too sudden a quassation both of the head and shoulders. But the humors flow∣ing, and the orifice so open, the Mid∣wife may take hold of it, and moving it to and fro, bring it to the birth (ac∣cording to the natural posture described before in the fourth Section) which must be done at such a time when the orifice of the womb openeth it self,Against over-haft∣ness. and not otherwise, lest with hastiness the flux of blood (which alwaies at∣tends the birth) be too immoderate,Falling out of the matrix. and so the matrix it self come forth. When the infant begns to come forth, let the Midwife take and receive it in a cloth in her hands,Infant, how to be received. and let it come down together with the secundine.
After the child hath rested a while, the navil must be cut four inches in length, with a sharp pen-knife, being sufficient∣ly tied with a strong double silk in two places, and cut betwixt the knots, to prevent as well a flux of blood in the infant as in the mother. After it is cut off, dry up the coagulated blood, with burnt silk, or some astringent pow∣der, of which, take this description; An astrin∣gent pow∣der.℞. of Aloes, Frankincense, Dra∣gons-blood, of each a drachm; of burnt Harts-horn, sealed earth (called Terra sigillata) fine flour, of each two drachms; of the wooll of Hares shread small, half an ounce; of these make a fine powder. As to the washing of the child, and swathing, I need not give you any ac∣count, I suppose you take it for grant∣ed, that most women understand that I only here shew you the shape of the stool I use, which, I hope, you will not disapprove of, though all Midwives (nay few) have them, or use them. Dr. Philadelphos, I like, Mrs. the use
of your stool, as being most useful, and especially by reason of the skirt of cloth that usually ought to be aboutn="*" Of a black co∣lour. it, to keep away the air, which gives me occasion to give you one necessary admonition by the way.A Caution. Therefore let all Midwives take heed that they ex∣pose not their women that are in la∣bour to the cold air, but rather that they cover the privities with the secun∣dine also whilest it is yet hot, or else with warm clothes presently after the birth. For, believe me, (neither is it only my opinion, but also the opinion of the most Learned Doctors) that there is nothing worse to child-bearing women than the cold air,Rodericus a Castro parte, 2 lib. 4. Cap. 12. because that entring into the womb, the womb it self is distended, waxeth cold, and swelleth, and its orifices are shut, from whence cometh the menstruous mat∣ter, and thence arise grievous symp∣toms, and often times death it self. But as to the suppression of them, and their cure, we shall (by divine assistance) treat more largely e're we leave this subject in hand.
This precedent figure is the form of a child lying in the womb (according as cut in Tho. Bartholinus, in Page 197.) naked, and out of all its coats, both proper and common. The de∣scription of it appears by the explana∣tion of these letters in it, viz. AA Shews the parts of the Chorion diffected, and removed from their pro∣per place. B A portion of the membrane Amnios. CC The membrane of the womb diffected▪ DD The placenta Uteri, or hepar ute∣rinum, being a fleshy substance full of many vessels, by which the infant re∣ceives its nourishment. E The varication of the Vessels which makes up the navil string. FF The navil string by which the Umbili or vessels are carried from the placenta to the navil. GG The infant, as it lyes perfect in the womb near the time of travel. H How the umbilical vessels are in∣serted into the navil of the infant.
SECT. VI. Of the site of the child in the womb. The in∣fant, how it lyeth in the womb.THE infant in the womb lyeth altogether bowed and contra∣cted together, his knees to his belly, and head to his knees, the anckles being joyned to the buttocks, cross-legg'd, his hands lifted up towards his head, on which he so leaneth his head, that his eyes seem to be fixed to the thumbs of his hands, the one placed on the temples, the other on the cheeks; in∣somuch, that white spots may be seen in the skin, as if they had been fretted the one against the other. The former part of the body tends towards the low∣er part of the belly of the mother (if it be a male) and the hinder part towards the back; but if it be a female, the po∣sture is clean contrary. But the usual posture is as in this figure which goeth before.
SECT. VII. Of difficult births, whether prae∣ternatural, or whether they proceed from Causes external or internal. DIfficult births from external cau∣ses may be either, first, from ex∣cessive heat, dissolving the strength of the women; or second, excessive cold, condensing the womb;Their can∣ses. or third, from sweet things, often applied to the no∣strils of the woman, that by smelling to sweet things she may recover her strength and faintings; for sweet smells do attract the womb upwards, and so render the birth more difficult. Difficult birth from internal causes may be either, first, from the woman; second, from the womb; third, from the infant; fourth, from the mem∣branes of the womb. 1. From the wo∣man, as when she is too angry, too fear∣ful,
or too modest; or if she be in age above 40 years,Women of above 40 years bring forth with difficulty. from whence the mus∣cles of the womb may be concluded to be dry, and so the less extensible; or, when she is so thick and fat, that the passages be narrow: Or, 2. From the womb it self, as, when it is so small, & nature so weak and feeble that it cannot expell the birth: Or, if there be any in∣flammation,Inflamma∣tion. The stone. Costive∣ness. Haemor∣rhoids. or other preternatural af∣fect in the privities, be it the stone, or haemorrhoid's, or extraordinary costive∣ness; all which may so compress the womb with their weight, that it can∣not expell the birth. 3. Is from the in∣fant it self, as if it be of an unusual big∣ness, of a great head, or a monstrous birth, hydropical, gibbous, (that is crook-back'd) full of wind, dead in the womb, or lying there in a posture be∣yond nature; as when it comes over∣thwart, with the feet forward, and not the head, or if the thigh before the head. 4 th. From the membranes of the womb, as when they are so forcibly broken by the child in the womb that
the moysture floweth thence, leaving the infant behind, that when the child should come forth, that moysture fail∣eth, and so the membranes being dryer, maketh the birth the more dif∣ficult; or when it is so firm and sollid that it is broken with much difficulty, and so makes the labour the harder.
SECT. VIII. Of the Schemes, Fashions, and Figures of the birth lying in the womb, and how they are born, or may be born. THE postures of the infant in the womb are generally four: First, they offer to come with their heads for∣ward (which is the natural birth.) Se∣condly, with the feet forwards. Third∣ly, overthwart. Fourthly, doubled; to all which the Midwives care and skill is required, but especially in the three later. But chiefly very many po∣stures and schemes have been observed, and are to be found by continuance of practise; for that child that comes with his head forward, sometimes hath his head right as to the orifice of the matrix, but the rest of the body crooked, and sometimes overthwart: and some∣times the infant pitcheth his head either in the former part from the orifice, or
backward, or comes crooked; and some∣times also these schemes are without any tye as to the bottom of the matrix, and sometimes with it; sometimes al∣so it puts forth one hand, or both, so as that they are twisted above the head: sometimes it cometh forward, with its feet asunder, and those fixed in the parts of the womb; sometimes the feet being doubled, it endeavours to come forth with the knees forward; sometimes it is so doubled, that it shews forth its lit∣tle buttocks like one that is sitting; or contrarily may be so doubled, that you may find the soles of the feet joyned to the head in the orifice of the matrix; but those that lye o'rethwart, some∣times lye on one side, and sometimes with the face upwards, and sometimes downwards: But if there be twins, then that which presenteth it self fairest, must be laid hold on, and the other put back. As to all which, the next 15 or 16 Sections will not only furnish with schemes, but with directions. Hither∣to having described the Midwife and
her office, together with the site of the infant in the womb, as natural; to∣gether with difficult births in general, and their causes. It is reasonable, (good Mrs. Eutrapelia) that we discourse of praeternatural births because those bring the greatest danger with them, both to the mother and infant. SECT. IX. Scheme the first. Of praeternatural Births. DR. Philad. Courteous Mrs. Eutra∣pelia, If you perceive a child come with his feet forwards, and the hands drawn downwards to the thighs, according to this next ensuing form, How will you deliver the woman?
depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position Eutrap. In this, I will take care to be furnished with Oyles,Answer. and convenient liniments, and only to help the coming forth of the infant, by anointing and cherishing it, lest it go back again, but that it may come forth the same way as
it began. But first of all I shall take care, that both arms of the infant so stretch∣ed downwards, be so secured by me, that the infant may not have power to draw them back again, but that I may compell it to come forth, after this very same manner: But if the in∣fant breaking forth after this manner, and by reason of its bigness as well as his arms drawn down, be so streightned by the narrowness of the matrix, that of it self it cannot wholly come to the birth; then the womb of the woman is to be annointed with oyle of Lillies,Oyles. Opus est Elleboro. or sweet Almonds, and some sneezing Powder of Hellebor, &c. blowed up into her nose, to help the sending forth of the birth, and the womb gently to be compressed with both hands, that it tend not upwards, but downwards, as it ought, untill it comes forth entirely.
SECT. X. Scheme the Second. DR. Philadel.  But, tell me, I pray, Mrs. Eutrapelia; What if an in∣fant come with the feet forward, and the hands lifted up above the head, and not drawn downwards to the thighs, (as in the following sigure) what course will you take with most safety?
depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position Eutrap. Sir, I am not at all to receive it so lying,Answ. except the infant be very small and little, and the matrix so ex∣tensive, and open, that it may be hoped a safe delivery, both to the woman and to the child; neither must I receive it
before the matrix and the infant be di∣ligently anointed. But it were much better to thrust back the infant into the womb, and to turn it to the right form, which may be done after this manner. Let the woman lye on her back upon a bed, with her buttocks raised higher, and her head lower; which done, I must swathe her belly toward the mid∣riff gently, that I may drive back the infant again into the womb, by which means it may give an occasion of co∣ming forth in another form; but above all, I must take care to turn the face of the infant toward the back of the mo∣ther, and then I must lift up the buttocks and thighes of the infant toward the navil of the mother, that it may hasten toward a lawful birth: and there can∣not be a safer experiment in this case, (as I conceive) which is also most use∣ful in such births as come praeternatu∣rally.
SECT. XI. Scheme the Third. PHiladelphos;  I pray forsooth tell me, If the infant happen to come forth but with one foot, and the arms let down to the sides, but the other foot turned backwards; How will you help? Eutrap.Answer. In this case, Sir, I must not trouble the woman, but must bring her to her bed again, and so by the as∣sistance of other women, bend her, and turn her after the same manner as was formerly proposed, putting back also the other foot into the womb; which done, she must often tumble her self upon her bed, till I find the infant in some measure turned, and the woman brought fitly to her labour, and helped with all means possibly to be used. And this kind of tossing and tumbling may be used in all births, where the infant
depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position appears after an unapt manner: In the mean time, when there is need, she ought to be refreshed with such Physi∣cal means as may be proper. But if it shall happen that either by the rolling to and fro of the woman, or my indu∣stry,
that the foot so bent back come right to the birth; then I must take care that (laying hold of the arms otherwise drawn downwards toward the sides) I bring the infant handsome∣ly out, so as is answered in the first Chapter. SECT. XII. Scheme the Fourth. PHiladelphos;  If an infant lye a-cross on the one side, or on its back, with the hands and feet up; how will you help it? Eutrapelia;Answer. Sir, In this case and con∣dition, I must not trouble the woman, nor expect the infant to be born so ly∣ing, which without some way of turn∣ing is impossible. Therefore I am to take care that I reduce it to the true form of a natural birth, by lifting up
depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position the buttocks, and directing the head to the birth; and if this course succeed not, to see that by often rolling upon the bed, as aforesaid, the infant return to its right form of lying.
depiction of a uterus with foetus
SECT. XIII. Scheme the Fifth. PHiladel. Tell me, Mrs. Eutrapelia,  What if the infant happen to ha∣sten to the birth with his arms and legs distorted and crooked, according to this figure; How then will you help?
depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position Eutrap.Answer. As things so stand, Sir, I must not endeavour the birth of the child, but must bring her from the stool to the bed, where I must press back the womb as before-said, or must desire her to roul her self about, till the infant
depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position
is turned to a more commodious po∣sture: And if this course prevail not, I must endeavour to joyn both feet to∣gether, and, if possible, must bring down the hands so to the sides, that I may direct it to the birth. But the safest way is, that it be converted, in the womb, to its right posture. SECT. XIV. Scheme the Sixth. DR. Philadel. Tell me, Midwife,  what if the infant fall down with both the knees bent, and the hands hanging down to the thighs; How will you go to work? Eutrap. Here, Doctor,Arswer. I must with my right hand lift up both knees up∣ward, till the feet happen to come forth foremost, then with my left hand I must lay hold on the feet, and with my right hand keep the hands to the
sides, and encourage the infant toward the birth. But if this way be not thought safe enough, I must bring the woman to the bed, where lying in such a posture as before, she shall so roul her self up and down, till the infant come to a better and more commodi∣ous posture. SECT. XV. Scheme the Seventh. DR. Philadel.  But, Mrs. Eutrapelia, What if the infant come out ha∣stily with one hand, and the other hand down towards the side, and the feet stretched out streight into the womb, according to this figure; How will you receive it?
depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position Eutrap. May it please you, Sir,Answer. I am not at all to receive it so, nor to suffer it to proceed farther toward the birth; but must bring her to the bed, where her head must lye lower than her but∣tocks; then I must swath her belly
gently, that the infant may fall back a∣gain into the womb: but if it fall not back of its own accord, I must put in my hand, and press back the shoulders, and must reduce the arm that hanged out to the side, that it may be disposed of to a natural form in the womb, and so may come forth easily. SECT. XVI. Scheme the Eighth. DR. Philadel.  But, Mrs, Suppose the infant come forth with both hands stretched forth above the head, and the feet streight stretched into the womb, which is here figured, and is much more dangerous than the for∣mer?
depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position Eutrap. 'Tis true, Sir,Answer. this posture is much more dangerous than the former; but I shall take all the care I can to bring back again this birth into the womb wholly. And first of all, I shall annoint my hands, and the womb of the
woman, with oyles for this purpose, (for this requires no small labour) then, if possible, with my other hand shall drive it back so by the shoulders, that it may wholly fall back into the womb: And again, lest the infant should return to the same form of birth, I must put in my hands, and bring down the arms of the infant to the sides, and by that means bring it to the form of a natural birth. If this course take not, I must bring the woman to the bed, where, after she hath lain quiet a while, I must pro∣ceed after the same manner as I have before delivered: and if this also be to no purpose, and that it neither be chan∣ged to another form, she must be brought to the stool; and the womb, by the help of the women that are as∣sistants, must be depressed on both sides, and downwards: And (my hands be∣ing annointed as before-said, together with the womb, and both the arms as they come) I must do what I can to joyn them together, and so receive it as it comes forth. And in this birth, there
is the less danger, if that I or any other Midwife do our duties with all possible diligence, and in case the infant be not too weak. SECT. XVII. Scheme the ninth. PHiladel. But I beseech you,  Mrs. Eutrap. How will you deliver a woman of a child that falls down with its buttocks forward, and the hands spread over the head, according to this figure?
depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position Eutrap. Here,Answer. Sir, I must annoint my hand as above-said, and putting it up, must lift up the fundament of the child, and turn the head to the Birth. But, in this case I must not make too much haste, lest it fall into some worser form;
neither is it possible that a child should be so born, without great loss to the mother and the infant; therefore, if it cannot be turned with the hand, she must be brought to the bed, where, if she be very weak, she may be refresh∣ed with convenient meats and cordials, and then often proceeded with as is said before, untill the infant shall come to a more commodious form of birth. SECT. XVIII. Scheme the tenth. DR. Philad.  But sometimes (Mrs.) it happens that it offers it self with its shoulders forwards, and the head turned backwards, but the feet and hands lifted up, as in the ensuing fi∣gure; How will you help here?
depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position Eutrap. In this case, Sir; I must in the first place move backward the shoulders of the infant, that it may first appear with the head forward; and this may easily be done, because the shoulders being but a little up, the head
of it self will fall down to the orifice of the womb, as being nearest to it. But if there must be any other way at∣tempted, she must be brought back to the bed, and then so stirred and rouled, and used according to those directions formerly hinted. SECT. XIX. Scheme the Eleventh. DR. Philadel. Mrs,  I fear I trouble you with many Questions; be pleased to satisfie me in this, and four or five more, and I shall forbear. What then if the infant incline to the birth with the hands and feet together, as if it stood upon all four, with the back upward into the womb, (as in this figure) What, I say, will you do?
depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position Eutrap. Here,Answer Sir, I must take care, lest some danger happen from this dif∣ficult and unshapely figure; therefore I must do thus. I must so move up the feet of the infant, that I may handle the head, and do what I can to direct that
first to the birth: I must also move up the arms, lest of their own accord they fall down to the sides of the womb. And if this way succeed not, she must be brought back to the bed, and the same means used for the turning of the infant as hath been formerly descri∣bed. SECT. XX. Scheme the Twelfth. PHiladel. Sometimes,  Mrs. it falls out, that (contrary to the former shape) the infant falls down upon its breast, with the hands and feet cast backward into the womb, as in this fi∣gure; what will you do in such a con∣dition?
Answer. depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position Eutrap. Truly, Sir, this case is the most dangerous of all hitherto propo∣sed. First, therefore, I must carefully annoint both my hands, and also the womb of the woman; which done, I must enquire after the arms of the in∣fant,
and lay hold of them so, till I can lay hold of the head also, and with all care hold it so fast, that I may direct the head first to the birth; next I must dispose of them to the sides; for this being done, the birth will come forth the sooner, and with less danger; but if this succeed not, it will be safest to bring the woman to the bed, and to proceed as formerly shewed; that, if perhaps, by this kind of delay, the in∣fant may accommodate it self to a more fit posture for the birth. SECT. XXI. Scheme the thirteenth. DR. Philadel. There being the same reason in twins as in a single birth,  except that the single birth is natural, and the twins not so; certainly the same method must be observed (Mrs.) Tell me then, if there be two or more,
and all come fair with their heads to∣ward the birth; What is to be done? depiction of a uterus with twin foetuses in an abnormal birth position Eutrap. Here,Answer. Sir, I must observe that which lyeth readiest and fittest in the womb, and first receive that, and not to let the other go till the first is
born, lest it turn into another shape by sliding back again into the womb; but the one being born, I must presently lay hold on the other. Now, this birth will be easier, and without danger, be∣cause the first birth hath made the way for the second so plain, that it may come forth without any difficulty at all. But in this birth I must take care that I bring forth the after-burden timely e∣nough,After-burden. lest that the womb, being freed from her infants, presently fall down, and so keep in the secundine or after-burden with great danger. SECT. XXII. Scheme the fourteenth. DR. Philadel. But,  Mrs. What if there be twins, and they both come praeternaturally with their feet forward, as in this figure; what course will you take?
depiction of a uterus with twin foetuses in an abnormal birth position Eutrap. This birth,Answer. Sir, is dangerous enough, and yet it is to be mended by the prudence of a discreet Midwife. Wherefore, I must anoint the womb of the woman, that the passages may be the easier for the infant; which be∣ing
done, I must take care to lay hold of the arms of one of them, and bring∣ing them down to the sides, secure them so, that I may lightly promote the head to the birth; and the first be∣ing born, I must presently proceed with the other after the same manner: but if I can lay hold of neither of their arms, so that there is no good hopes of a hap∣py birth, I must have recourse to the former method; if at least the infants may come into the world by that pains and conversion which is wrought upon the bed. SECT. XXIII. Scheme the fifteenth. DR. Philadel.  I come now to the last praeternatural birth of twins. If then there be twins, (these form being compound as of a natural and praeter∣natural birth) the one coming down
with the feet, what is to be done in this case? depiction of a uterus with twin foetuses in an abnormal birth position Eutrap.Answer. Where infants offer them∣selves after this manner; I must first bring forth that which presents it self with a natural form, and must move
up the other, that is with the feet for∣ward, and if possible, cause it so to re∣turn into the womb, that that birth al∣so may be disposed of to a natural birth; but if it cannot be converted to be in a better posture, I must lay hold present∣ly on the hands, and encourage it to the birth. But it were safer that this should be brought to a natural form; to which end I must diligently en∣deavour it, by anointing, directing, mo∣ving it, tumbling and rouling the wo∣man, lest perhaps the womb be hurt by the form of such an unnatural birth, and the privities swell withn="*" See the page to∣ward the later end of the fifth Section. wind, from whence the birth cannot come forth without danger, or be hindred too long: All which danger may with pro∣vident care be avoided, or at the least very much corrected and amended.
SECT. XXIV. Scheme the sixteenth. DR.  Philadelphos; Courteous Mrs. Eutrapelia, I have hitherto trou∣bled you with many Questions, that I might not only be sure of your abilities, but also give testimony of your suffici∣ency, if need require. I have now on∣ly one Question more, and then I have done, as to these postures and schemes: And this, though the last, surely is a miraculous posture. What if the in∣fant be so involved in the womb (the head and the neck being of such a length) that it is so bent back, that the face lyeth betwixt the buttocks, the right hand to the left region of the reins, but the left hand to the knee of the same side; the right legg being a∣cross the left, in form of the letter X, and both leggs bent up toward the breast?
depiction of a uterus with foetus in an abnormal birth position Eutrap.Answer. Worthy Dr. This case is the hardest of any that hitherto you have propounded to me; and though it may never fall out to be so in one a∣mongst 5000, yet (because, in your de∣scription of the best Midwife, you tell
me that a Midwife must have a good memory) I remember a learned Do∣ctor, not long since acquainted me with such a posture, which he told me he had from the hands of an expertn="*" Guli∣elms Fa∣britius Hildanus, Century, the sixth; Observa∣tion, Lxiv. Chi∣rurgeon and Physitian, whose wife al∣so was an expert Midwife; and the course the Midwife took in such a case, he told me was this, which must serve also for my answer, because I think there cannot be a better. After the wo∣man had been eight daies in labour, and given over by all Midwives as despe∣rate, being in a violent Fever, with no throws, but very weak, and (by rea∣son of hot medicines given to expel the birth, and strong wines given to sup∣port the spirits) those humors that usu∣ally accompany the infant had so flown out,Blood and water. that the genitals were so dry and closed, that they would scarce admit the probation of two fingers. This me∣thod was used: First, instead of wine, she gave her good store of Almond∣milk; and because her belly was very costive, she gave her Clysters; and to
keep up her spirits she gave her Cordi∣als, (of which in their order.) She laid plaisters to her hand-wrists, and anoin∣ted the whole region of the belly, hips, loins, the rump-bone, and privities,Os sacrum. with anodyne Oyles, with emollient and re∣laxing Unguents; and then she made a triangular bagg stuff'd with emolli∣ent and relaxing herbs, boyled in wa∣ter, according to this description, (and of which more hereafter.)
depiction of a triangular bag used as a hot compress during labour It is of such a bigness, as that it might cover the lower part of the belly, and the privities, and with tapes fitted to the corners was applyed hot, and con∣tinued on some hours; after which, though her hand were well anointed,
she could scarce thrust in the top of her finger into the orffice of the womb, the womb was so closed,Called the Os pubis. and the infant so depressed toward the share-bone, by reason of the precedent throws and pangs. But at length, when with much labour and industry the genitals were somewhat dilated, that she could get in her fingers farther, she found the loyns and the right hand of the child first offer it self to the birth: that there∣fore she might correct this monstrous and so inverted posture of the infant so doubled and twisted, and either per∣swade the head or the feet to come for∣ward, she useth the best of her skill, but to little purpose, the genitals were so narrow and streight. But yet not giving off her endeavours, she did deliver her within eight hours after she came to her assistance; but the child was dead. Dr. Phila. Mrs. You give a very good account of an expert Midwives pra∣ctice, which you may follow with safe∣ty, expecting the succcess from Heaven;
but it is no wonder the child should be still-born, (as you phrase it;) for being so turned and doubled, the child must of necessity be strangled in the womb. Having thus run through births, as well natural as praeternatural, I shall give you the reason (and that in my own opinion) why these births are of so va∣rious & different postures in the womb, observing not alwaies the same posture: and 'tis thus.The rea∣son of these different postures. Because the infant swim∣ming in water, and moving it self, sometimes this way, sometimes that way, and is bent and tumbled several wates; insomuch, that sometimes it is strangely entangled with its own na∣vil-cord, which I am confident you have seen in your own experience of∣tentimes.
SECT. XXV. Of a Mola. DR. Philadel. We have hitherto,Quest. Mrs, discoursed of births natural and praeternatural; there is some∣what more not like these, but often with them, and without them, which Physitians call a Mola, but you call it a false Conception: I pray, Mrs, there∣fore, what is that Mola, or false Con∣ception? Answers A Mola, or false Con∣ception, what.Eutrap. A Mola, (Mr. Doctor,) ge∣nerally called a false conception, is a hard inform tumor, full of pores, (like so many ugly eyes) scarce to be cut by a knife, of a stony substance to touch, and round, appearing sometimes at the entrance of the womb, sometimes over the whole womb, and is generally thought (by then="*" Fernelius, lib. vii, cap. de faemi∣narum se∣mine. Learned'st Doctors) to be begotten by the woman her self without the help of a man. (Qualis &
quanta ea sit vis declarant rudiores moloe quas faeminae quando{que} proprii duntaxat seminis vi,Fran. Va∣lesii con∣troversi∣anum, lib. 11. cap. 6. in fine. Ex pauco semine ea{que} impure. nullo viri concubitu concipi∣unt;) And so another Dr. in these words (I beg your pardon, Mrs. that I am enforced to use authorities in La∣tine) (some affirming that it cannot be without the seed of the man.) Valesius, as before quoted.Hinc cognosces, quod faemina saepe ex se sola solet utero concipere; foetus ta∣men ad perfectionem nunquam perducitur; ex his tamen imperfectis conceptionibus quae dicuntur, molae matricis generantur & informia carnis frusta. And there∣fore inanimate, because not generated by two,N et affectu quod . without the help of a man (I say) by the force of her own seed, mixing it self with much menstruous blood, reteined in the womb, which by immoderate heat it changeth into the shape of flesh, and that altogether prae∣ternatural, as is the stone in the bladder, and in the fingers of gouty persons, &c. Dr. Philadel. Well, Mrs. since 'tis so (as in truth it is; tell me, I pray,
wherein it differs from a true Con∣ception?The dif∣ference be∣twixt a true and false con∣ception. Eutrap. It may, Sir, be like a true Conception in three respects, yet differ in six. As first, 'Tis true that a false conception stoppeth the monethly terms as doth the true. Secondly, The belly also doth swell, and the breasts grow big. Thirdly, There is an alteration both in the colour and appetite; but yet they differ in these six ensuing following waies; as, First, A false conception hath no or∣dinary nor periodical motion, neither doth it stir from side to side, except it be pressed. Secondly, In a false conception the belly is harder, and the feet are much more swelled. Thirdly, The woman is more heavy and unweeldy, and not so nimble as with a true conception. Fourthly, The breasts swell not so much as in a true conception. Fifthly, The whole body grows soft,
and consumes away in a false concep∣tion, but not so in a true. Sixthly, a false conception may be moved in three moneths, but the child stirreth not till after three moneths, or usually in the fourth moneth: And again, the birth of an infant never ex∣ceeds the eleventh moneth, whereas a false conception may continue for four∣teen years,A Mola may lye 14 years. or as long as they live. Moreover, there may be a Tympa∣nie caused by air included in the womb.Tympany, what. Hydrops u∣terinus. Or else there may be a Dropsie, by rea∣son of the many humors contained in the womb, both which may give a false supposition of being with child; but these also are easily distinguish'd from a false conception. A Tympanie may be moved from place to place, but not the other: A Tympanie will sound, if lightly strucken, but not the other; and a Dropsie, caused by those many humors as aforesaid, will shew some marks, being depressed with the fingers, whereas a Mola is hard, and yieldeth not to the pulsation or de∣pression
of the fingers. And lastly, in both these most commonly the thighs swell, but in a false conception or mola the thighs wither, and are lesser. Now having discoursed of these things, Sir; if you please, in the next place, let us discourse of the secundine, or after-bur∣den. Dr. Philadel. I shall, Mrs. very wil∣lingly.
SECT. XXVI. Of the Secundine, or After-burden. DR. Philadelphos, Come then, Mrs. if you please, tell me what the Secundine is. After-bur∣den, what. Eutrap. The Secundine is that in which the infant lyeth in the womb, and may be called a second house, or covering, made by the womb for a re∣ceptacle of the infant; and it hath with it three membranes; but how Phy∣sitians name them, I know not. Dr. I will inform you then, if you please, with their names and uses; and describe them to you in these two figures following, which are explained by letters also, as may appear. The explanation of the first Figure. BBB Signifies that part of the Se∣cundine called the Chorion, which is the
depiction of the placenta
prop of all the vessels of the young one. CCC Denotes the branches of the Umbilical veins and arteries dispersed through the Chorion. EEE The membrane called Amnios, and is the thinnest of all the mem∣branes, and is white, soft, and shining, with few (and those very small) veins and arteries dispersed among the folds; and this is the very next coat to the in∣fant, and is the receptacle for sweat and urine; that membrane called Allantois not to be found in men, though an Urachus be to be found. DD Denotes all the vessels meeting about the navil, by which the infant is nourished.
P. Q Denotes the membrane cal∣led Amnios, and is the first that invol∣veth the infant. RRRR The Liver,RRRR. Epar ute∣rinum, or, Placenta uteri. or cake of the womb, or after-burden, by which the infant receives nourishment, and this is fastned to the womb. SS The inward and outward veins. m.m.m. The Umbilical vein, with its branches dispersed into the after-burden, by which the child is nourish∣ed, and upon which it lyeth, as upon a pillow, though in the Amnios it swim∣meth as in a bath. VV How all the vessels meet about the navil. b.b.b Denotes the infant newly born, annexed to the secundine, the navil-string not cut. Dr. Philad. You see, Mrs. these Schemes, with their uses and explana∣tion; I shall now discourse more par∣ticularly of the membranes themselves. The after-burden,Of the se∣cundine. commonly called the secundine, so called, either because
depiction of a new-born infant attached to the placenta Chorion Amnios
it is as it were a second place, mansion, and receptacle of the infant from the womb;The Se∣cundine what, and why so called. or else, because this membrane is called the after-birth, or second birth, as coming forth after the infant, which, if it stay behind, brings great mischief, as shall be spoken to at the later end of this Treatise and Section. Av , The first Galea.The first membrane is called Amni∣os, and this membrane covers the infant from the head to foot; insomuch, that part of it sticks to the head of the infant when it is born, which they call a hel∣met, though this is not alwaies, being left behind with the secundine in diffi∣cult labours: this is so called from its softness and thinness; others resemble it to white paper, or a shirt, and is the thinnest of all, in which is found great plenty of humors, caused of urine and sweat, in which the infant swimmeth as in a bath, and lyeth so easie and se∣cure, lest it should fall foul against those neighbouring parts that are harder; and besides that, when the membrane is broken in the birth, this water break∣ing
out, may make the passages by the neck of the womb more plain and slip∣pery for the infant; and this mem∣brane also is every where concluded within the second,, The se∣cond. which is called Cho∣rion, because it wraps the infant like a ring; and this immediately compasseth the former, to which it is joyned as it were in a round figure, like to a cake, whose inward and hollow part it co∣vers and involves, and doth extend it self to its dimensions, and can scarce be separated from it, but doth firmly knit and bear up the vessels of the after∣burden,Epar Ute∣rinum. which immediately sticks to the womb by a certain fleshy mass that is formed, being round, and of somewhat a ruddy colour, not compassing the whole infant, by reason of innumerous springs of veins and arteries by which the blood is inter-woven, as if it were poured in, and by which the infant is nourished. This towards the infant is smooth, but that part which is towards that fleshy round mass, is rougher.
Of the Placenta Uteri, or Epar Ute∣rinum.This round fleshy substance is called the liver of the womb, or the cake of the womb; which, having (a paren∣chyma) such a substance as the liver hath, no wonder if it should make and prepare blood for the nourishment of the infant. On that side towards the womb it is rough, and unequal, like clefts in a bak'd cake; and being cut in this part, it sheweth an infinite com∣pany of fibres, which, if you trace, they will bring you to the orifice of the veins themselves. And, although there be twins, or more, yet there is but one placenta; for into one placenta so many navil-strings are inserted (in divers places) as there are young ones;Embryones. though it may differ as to the bigness, accord∣ing to the body and condition of the infant, yet the ground is still the same in the diameter.The use of the Pla∣centa.  The third. . The use serves as a support of the unibilical vessels, for which it serves as a pillar; it is also called (secundae) the secundine. The third is called Allantoides; 'tis a coat betwixt the Chorion and Amnios; 'tis
difficulty. Be it as it will, wheresoever these make but the least stay, I must en∣deavour, all that I can, to bring them forth: for when they are deteined lon∣ger than their due time, they cause bad symptoms,Symp∣toms. as a horrible stench, which fumes up to the stomach, heart, liver, midriff, and so consequently to the brain; from whence ariseth great pains in the head, at the heart, decay of spi∣rits, faintings, swounings, often Con∣vulsions, cold Sweats, Apoplexies, E∣pilepsies, sometimes Gangrenes, and often death it self: but of this Cure, hereafter, Sir, I shall beg your ad∣vice. Philadel.Quest. Mrs. you shall have it at your pleasure; you answer expertly; tell me now how they must be per∣swaded out? Eutrap.Answer. I shall, Sir; I must first an∣oint my left hand with convenient oyles, and after I have laid hold of it, must not violently draw it away,Secundine, how to be brought away. nor yet force it directly downward, lest I draw down the womb and all together;
but I must shake it lightly and gently to and fro, till I perswade it to follow my intention; and whilest they are thus reteined, I must refresh her with Cau∣dles,A Caudle∣broth. or Panatells, wherein the yelks of Eggs in Wine, with some Saffron and Cinnamon strewed; or broth of a Hen or Capon, with mace, saffron, and cin∣namon boyled in it. As to other means, where the danger is more, I think it ever best and safest to consult with learned Physitians, or with experienc'd Ladies, whose Closets are furnished with choice praescriptions which they have had from Doctors, in such ca∣fes. Philadel. But,Quest. Mrs. we have former∣ly discoursed of Births, natural, and praeternatural, with their respective schemes. Tell me now,A dead child, how delivered, and how of a Mola. how you will deliver a woman of a dead child? and how of a false Conception, or Mola? Especially, where no pains or throws are, which are most commonly occa∣sioned by the motion and force of the child only alive (as hath been shewed
in the 21th. Page, and 4th. Secti∣on?) Eutrap.Answer. Here, Sir, is great danger and difficulty. I have, by Gods blessing, with safety to the women, delivered them of many a dead child, and of a Mola, or false Conception, also; and believe the method of curing one of them, will serve to cure the other; as I have been informed by learned Phy∣sitians; but where Chirurgical Instru∣ments, or other Physical means must be used, I ever recommend such a case to learned Physitians, and Chirurgeons, expert in Anatomy, both for assistance and direction.
SECT. XXVII. Of the signs of Conception in ge∣neral, and the different Sexes in particular. DR. Philadelphos. Good Mrs. Eu∣trapelia,Quest. vouchsafe me your ob∣servations about Conceptions,Signs of Concep∣tion. and let me understand what are the signs of Conception in general; and what signs distinguish the Sexes? Eutrap. Although, Sir,Answer. 'tis hard to know whether a woman hath con∣ceived yea or no, yet it may be conje∣ctured by many experienced Argu∣ments; as, for instance, First, it is thought a credible sign of Conception, if a woman either the tenth day after coition, or sooner, per∣ceive, by reason of any humors, any of her terms, be they whites, or reds.Stopping of the courses no sure sign. And, though the stopping of those be accoun∣ted for a sign, yet that fails often, be∣cause
it may be as well before concep∣tion as after. But, waving this, let us find out other marks and prognosticks of a true conception, gathered from the state and condition of the woman her self, being seriously examined from head to foot. Secondly; pains and giddiness in in the head, and a mist over the sight, if they meet together, these portend con∣ception. Thirdly, the apples of the eyes are lessened, the eyes swell, and become swarthy; the veins of the eyes grow red, and are full with blood; the eyes fink, the eye-lids are remiss; divers colours are seen in the eyes, and are ob∣served in a looking-glass; the veins betwixt the eyes and the nose are tur∣gid with blood, and are seen clearer; the veins under the tongue are some∣what greenish. Fourthly, the chest is warm, and the back cold. Fifthly, the veins and arteries are turgid, and the pulse easier; the veins
in the breast are first black, then either yellow or blew. Sixthly, The breasts grow big, and hard with pain; the nipple grows red; if she drinketh that which is cold, she feels cold in her breast. Seventhly, there is a great loathing of meat and drink, and destruction of the natural appetite, with longings af∣ter various meats, with an absurd ap∣petite, a continual vomiting, and weak∣ness of stomach, sower belchings, loath∣ing of wine, an inordinate pulsation of the heart, sudden joy, and after that, as sudden grief; pains about the navil,Invicem cedunt do∣lor & vo∣luptas. heaviness about the loins, swelling to∣ward the bottom of the belly; inward pricking in the body; chilness of the outward parts, after coition; reten∣tion of the seed seven daies after co∣pulation; about the beginning of con∣ception a shooting pain about the back and belly. The courses are stop'd; for those veins from which they flow carry the blood (through certain holes that are at the end of them) for the nourish∣mentAcetabule,
of the infant by the navil; and part of it is conveyed upwards into the breasts,Milk, how generated. and there is prepared for milk. Eighthly, the thighs swell with pains, but the body is weaker, and the face pale. Ninthly, the belly is costive, by rea∣son of the compressure of the inte∣stines. The urine is white, with a cloud swimming at the top, wherein are to be seen many atomes, like those ob∣servable in the beams of the sun: but, when in the first moneth many of these sink to the bottom, and the vessel in which it is, being shaken, it seems to be drawn out like to wooll. In the la∣ter moneths the urine is reddish, or yel∣low, it becomes blackish, with a red cloud at the top. I will here-with re∣late to you two experiments,Experi∣ments. by which it may be known whether or no a wo∣man hath conceived.First. And the first is this; Stop up a womans urine three daies in a urinal, at the end of which strain it (or, rather drop it through fine
linnen) and if she hath conceived, you shall see little creatures like to lice; if these be red, 'tis a token of a male;Signs of a Male. but if white, they portend a female. But this is said to be sure;Experi∣ments. If a womans u∣rine be put in a brass Bason, and stand there one night; if you put into it a bright needle, if she hath conceived, that needle will be bespeckled with red spots; but, if otherwise, it will be rusty all over. Dr. Philadel. These, 'tis true,Quest. may be promiscuous signs of Conception. But, Mrs. how know you the Sex, whe∣ther male, or female? Eutrapelia. By these signs, Sir,Answer. First usu∣ally; as First, If she hath conceived a male, the right eye moves oftner, and is better, as to its native colour, than the left. The belly is sharper about the navil.Second The right breast groweth tur∣gid before the left, and the nipple is sooner changed.Thirdly. The milk increaseth sooner, and if it be milked out, and set in a glass in the sun, it will grow into a clear mass, not unlike to an oriental
pearl; as also, if the courses appear about the 40th. day after the Concep∣tion. The right cheek is redder,Fourthly. and the whole colour of the face better, neither is she so heavy as otherwise; and the first stirring on the right side is the six∣tieth day, and that strongly too; and the right foot moves first in walking; and in arising from a seat, the right foot is first apt to bear up the body. The pulse is more frequent on the right side than on the left.Fifthly. Signs of a Female.Now, the signs of a female are con∣trary; and these are most commonly the signs. The first motion after con∣ception is selt the 90th. day,The 90th. day. and that first in the left side. Secondly, Females are born with more sickness; the thighs and privities swell, the colour is paler, the appetite stronger, and yet apt to loath that which is contrary to it. Thirdly, the Courses appear about the 30th. day after conception. Youth bring males.Fourthly, the age of the woman is very considerable; for the younger
women most commonly bring males, by reason of their greater heat in the womb: And the more aged, females,Aged, fe∣males. by reason of the defect of heat contracted in the matrix, by their age; and fe∣males are more often generated by such Patents that are more cold and moist by nature, and of seed that is too moist, cold, and liquid. Dr. Philadel. Since you have given such a character of the signs of Con∣ception,Quest. and the distinction of Sexes; let me know by what signs you appre∣hend the infant to be well, and thrive in the womb, or not. Answer: Sign of the infants thrivingEutrapelia, I shall, Sir. And first, if it be well, the breasts will be hard; but if otherwise, they will be flaccid, and a waterish humor will flow out of them (like to milk) of its own accord. Secondly, if the courses flow too often out of the womb in the time of child-bearing, it is an argument of an unhealthy child. And, moreover, the fattest women commonly bring forth the weakest insants.
Thirdly, if a woman bring twins, the one a male, the other a female, there is great danger of the female, because they are nourished by a different ali∣ment in the womb: but if they be both females, there is the less danger. Fourthly, if the child be gotten in the time of the monethly terms, they are mix'd with untoward humors; from whence it is experienced that many le∣prous infants are begotten. Superfaeta∣tion, what. Aristot. Hist. Ani∣mal. Lib. 7. C. 4. Fifthly, if there be superfaetation, the last conception seldom liveth. Now, superfaetation is, when a woman having once conceived, conceiveth again after a certain time, which sometimes hap∣peneth. Hence the Poets feign Iphi∣cles and Hercules to be twins by Alc∣maena the wife of Amphitrio; the first, begotten by Amphitrio; but the last, viz. Hercules, begotten by Jupiter. But this by the way, although more instan∣ces might be alledged nearer home. Signs of a dead child.Sixthly, if a Dropsie overtake the praegnant woman, and that her nose, cars, and lips look red; it is a sign of a dead child.
Seventhly, if the infant come forth after the ninth moneth, 'tis oftentimes very weak. Eighthly, if a virgin conceive before her first flowers, it proves a lusty and perfect child. Lastly, all these things praemised,Note. Midwives also usually observe, that as many knots as they find in the navil∣string of an infant, so many males, they say, she will have. But, so much for Conception. Tell me now somewhat of Abortion, with its Causes and Signs.
SECT. XXVIII. Of Abortion. DR. Philadel. Tell me,Quest. Mrs. Eutra∣pelia, what is that which you call Abortion, or miscarrying? Eutrap.Answer. It is, to bring forth an untime∣ly birth; which may proceed from di∣vers causes, and those either internal or external. First, from internal causes, as, from the infant it self;Internal Coyledons, what. as, when the Cotyle∣dons (that is, the mouths of the vessels ending in the womb through vvhich the blood is conveyed into the vvomb from all parts of the body) are so infirm, that those vessels, by reason of their rarity and vveakness, are sooner broken; and so of consequence, and Abortion. Secondly, if the tunicles (that is, the secundine) vvherein the infant is vvrap∣ped, be so vveak, that it break, and the humor contained therein flovv out, by vvhich the matrix is slippery & vveak,
and the infant being destitute of those humors, faileth. And also, vvhen vi∣rulent moistures flovv forth, and pro∣voke the expulsive faculty of the vvomb. Thirdly, the third cause is, vvhen the Woman is so vveak and consuming in her self, that she vvithdravvs the nou∣rishment from the infant; insomuch, that it hath neither matter to grovv by, nor to generate the parts and members of it. Fourthly; the fourth cause may be the wideness of the orifice of the womb, and its overmuch moysture, and an evil temperature of qualities and ventosities included in the womb; as also Ulcers and Apostemations in the womb, besides other distempers; As are, too many Courses, too great a Flux of blood,A caution to the Irish, where these distempers are Epi∣demical, and Spo∣radical. too great a Looseness of the belly, or, too great Costiveness; a Tenasmus, (called commonly a Need∣ing,) a Cough, a constant Sneezing, and all things that shake the body too much; and lastly, any acute sickness,
which doth so afflict the womans body, that, by them, the infant is deprived of its nourishment. Quest. The exter∣nal causes of Abor∣tion. Answer.Philadel. Now then, Mrs. pray in∣form me vvhat are the external causes of Abortion. Eutrap. Sir, the external causes are many. As, first, to fall, to run, to leap, to ride, to exercise too immoderately, and to be smitten vvith strokes. Again, too much cold, and too great heat; for over-much cold killeth the child, and too great heat intercepts the air from the infant, and so suffocateth it in the womb; and this may be done by hot baths, if women use them in the first moneths after their conception. Thirdly, Stinking smells, as the snuff of a candle, or lamp, newly extinguish∣ed. Fourthly, an absurd appetite, and manner of eating and drinking; as, to cat salt, coals, dirt, &c. by which, either ill humors, or a dangerous thirst are procured. Fifthly, too great hunger; for by over∣much
fulness the infant is sooner suf∣focated, the passages appointed for nourishment being the sooner ob∣structed. Sixthly, immoderate exercise and labours, overmuch sleep, and a conti∣nual laziness, unseasonable and unrea∣sonable watchings; besides other ac∣cidents: As, sudden fury, great wrath, over-much fear and sorrow, sudden joy, and a dull appetite, longing for that which is not to be had, unsatiable copulation and lust. Dr. Philadel.Quest. You have now disco∣vered the causes of Abortion. What, I pray, (Mrs. Eutrapelia) are the signs of Abortion? Eutrap.Answer. Sings. The signs of Abortion are twofold. First, before conception in those that use to miscarry; as, super∣fluous moysture, sudden and unusual fatness against nature, which was wont to be of slender and lean constitution, or, which are ever pained about the loyns and kidneys, or fall suddenly in∣to other dangerous diseases.
Signs of Abortion.Secondly, the signs of Abortion af∣ter conception are these, viz. when the breasts that at first were turgid and hard, are observed to grow flaccid and soft of a sudden; if there be too great a flux, and a continual flowing, of the terms. Moreover, if there be horrors, colds, pains in the head, or a swimming there be in the eyes; these be sure signs of Abortion. Dr. But,Quest. what are the signs of a dead child? Answer. Of a dead child.Eutrap. Where the child is dead, Sir, there is no motion perceived; when the eyes of the woman sink, when her colour is turned into a tawny white∣ness, when there are great pains about the navil and loyns, when, by reason of the lower parts being compressed, there happeneth a Strangury, aA Need∣ing.enes∣mus. Again, when the ears, the lips, the top of the nostrils are taken with a pale coldness, and the face swells, and the belly (though it sinketh not yet) groweth soft; so that lying to either side by the touch there may be per∣ceived
a hard mass;Stinking breath a sign that the child beginneth to putrifie. as also stinking breath, an argument that the infant doth begin to putrifie. These are ma∣nifest signs of a dead child. The cure whereof I leave to the care of the ex∣pert Physitians and Chirurgeons.
SECT. XXIX. Rules for Child-bearing Women. EUtrap. According to your promise, I beseech you, Doctor, lay me down some Rules to be observed by Child-bearing women. Dr. Philadel. Good Midwife, I shall, and that very necessary ones too, that she may know how to go on safely through (by Gods blessing) to the last hour, or by neglecting them, may make her delivery the harder: and I shall re∣duce them under ten heads. First, let her be chearful; (not break∣ing her self with mourning, and care∣ful anxiety) for this doth exhilarate the infant,Res sex non natu∣rales. and stirs up all the faculties, and confirms it in its parts and mem∣bers. Secondly, let her avoid all violent motion, and abstain from all hard la∣bours, not rising up too hastily, not leaping, running, dancing, riding; not
lacing her self too streight, or carrying too heavy a burden; but surely sleep is very fit for her. Thirdly, let her beware of sharp and cold winds, of excessive hear, anger, perturbations of the mind, affrights & terrors, over-much venery, and of in∣temperancy of eating and drinking. Fourthly, let the diet of breeding women be frugal, and moderate, ab∣staining from gross meats hard of di∣gestion; let her eat eggs, chickens, land∣fowl, birds of the mountains, &c. va∣riety of broths, grewels, panadoes, mutton, veal, lamb, kid, rabbets; she may use in her meats nutmeg and ci∣namon; she may drink wine mode∣rately. Fifthly, in the first four moneths let her open no vein, use no cupping or scarrifications, fontanells, nor use any pills, or other Physick, without the ad∣vice of a prudent Physitian; for in these moneths the ligaments of the child are very tender, soft, and feeble; and there∣fore the easier destroyed, and the nou∣rishment kept from him.
Sixthly, if it shall happen that the woman be too costive (by which many miscarry) let her boyl spinage,Against Costive∣ness. and let∣tuce, well buttered, with salt and vi∣negar, or wine; which, if they will not move the belly,Supposito∣ries. let her use supposito∣ries, with honey, and the yelk of an egg, or of Castile-soap: and if these common things will not do, let her ad∣vise with an expert Physitian. Seventhly, if it happen that she con∣ceive with grievous symptoms,Symptoms. and af∣ter conception is troubled with fain∣tings, let her take this Cordial follow∣ing. Take of Sorrel-water, and red-Rose-water, of each one ounce; of Cinamon-water one ounce;Against fainting. of Ma∣nus Christi pearled, (called in the Shops Saccharum tabulatum & perlatum sim∣plex) half an ounce, or as much Diamar∣gariton: this may be taken as need re∣quires. Eighthly, if she fear that she may come too soon (that is, before her time) as in the seventh moneth, or some other unscasonable time, and feels throws, as
of child-bearing, occasioned by im∣moderate exercise; too great costive∣ness, from a Fever, or some other dis∣ease;A suffumi∣gation. Let her sit over a suffumigation of Frankincense; for that contributes no small strength both to the matrix, and to the infant also. Ninthly, if she nauseate her meat, she may use a plaister of Mastich to her stomack, and take this following Cordial every morning, fasting, to strengthen her stomack. The Cor∣dial.Take syrup of Pomegranates one ounce and half; of Mosch and Amber-greece, of each two grains; of Lignum Aloes finely powdered, one scruple; of Cinamon half a scruple; the water of Sorrel three ounces; let these be mingled, and drank off blood-warm.Against terms it Child∣bearing. Lastly, if, whilst she goeth with child, she perceiveth her terms, let her eat milk made boyle with red-hot steel, and in that let Plantain and Comfrey be boyled. But, in all these cases, let her advise with learned Physitians, which will direct them with medicines,
and advice from time to time. I shall now treat of some few distempers inci∣dent to child-bed; and leave you some choice Remedies in the following Se∣ctions; and then wind up all.
SECT. XXX. Of the Retention of the Lochia, (in Child-bed) known by the name of Courses (though im∣properly so called) and of their immoderate Flux. THE retention or suppression of the Lochia in Child-bed,Hippoc. lib. de na∣tura pueri. by the consent of Hippocrates, as well as other Learned Doctors; (to which daily ex∣perience may be added;) brings the greatest inconveniences to women,Purgations of women in Child∣bed, Hippo. ibid. and often death it self. I shall therefore in this Section treat of the purgations of women in Child-bed, which Hippo∣crates determines to be at the most but 40 daies,By the Le∣vitical Law 33 daies was in case of a male, Levit. cha. 12. verse 4. and for a female, 66 daies, ve. 5. if the women bring forth a female; and 30 daies to a male. But withal saith, that a woman is passed all danger after 20 daies purgation: Now, if women be not sufficiently purged in Child-bed, either it causeth a great
A swel∣ling, hot and red.Phlegmon in the womb, by reason of the inflammation of the blood; or else those lochia being carried to some higher part, bring dangerous affects to the part that receiveth them; as, Squi∣nancies, Pleurisies, Fevers, Frenzie, Nauseousness, Unquietness, Dropsies, and what not?Cause. The cause of their re∣tention is (generally) cold, by reason of the ambient air which the woman re∣ceiveth in her delivery;Ambient air. (perhaps through the improvidency of Mid∣wives; who, most commonly, take more care of the child than of the woman;) or else, by reason that the woman may be delivered in some cold, moist room; which cold suddenly rushing into the inward parts of the womb, suddenly stoppeth them.See Sect. the fifth. Therefore Mid∣wives must not only be very wary in this case, as hath been already hinted in the latter end of the fifth Section, (to which I refer you) but also proceed to the Cure.The Cure. A Glyster. First then, this Clyster may be given: Take of the roots of Marshmallows,Aristol∣chia ga & . long & round Birth∣wort,
of white Lillies, of each half an ounce; of the leaves of Mallows, Pel∣litory of the wall, Mercury, and Vio∣lets, of each half a handful; of Cha∣momel flowers, Melilot flowers, El∣der flowers, each twoA pugill is as much as may be held be∣twixt the thumb and two fin∣gers. pugills; of the seeds of Dill, Foenugreek, and Seseli, of each two drachms; let these be boyl∣ed in spring-water, till a third part be consumed; strain it, and to ten ounces of the straining, dissolve the yelk of two eggs; of Sal-Gemm, and unguent de Arthanita, each one drachm; oyle of Dill, and of Bayes, each half an ounce; of these make a Glyster. A bagg.You may also make a bagg trian∣gular, (whereof you see a description, with its use, in the xxvth. Section) in which you may quilt these herbs fol∣lowing, being grosly bruised and poun∣ded. Take of the roots of long and round Birth-wort, of Gentian, Ange∣lica, Bryonie,Cyclami∣ne. Sowbread, of the herbs of Mugwort, Balm, Savin, Orgamint, and Calamint, of each one handful; of
the flowers of Chamemile,Ingredients for the bagg. Tansy, and Elder, each half a handful; of the seeds of Dill, Caraway, Anniseeds, and Seseleos, each one drachm: These being mash'd, and pounded, and quilted into a bagg big enough to cover the lower part of her belly and privities, and well secured with strings, must be boyled in spring-water, and applyed warm;Two baggs best to be applyed, the one hot, whilst the other groweth cold. but it were better to have two bags, to apply as they grow cold. The belly, hips, and thighs, which, by rea∣son of the consent of parts, must con∣sequently sympathize with great pains, may be anointed with this ointment: Take of the oyle of Chamomile,The oint∣ment. Lumbrico∣rum Catello∣rum. Hiperico∣nis. Dill, and of the oyle of Eggs, oyle of Worms whelps, St. John's-wort; with these mixed anoint the parts abovesaid warm. At night you may let this Ju∣lep be given: take of the waters of Balm,A Julep. and Mugwort, of each one ounce; of the water of Cinamon distilled with∣out wine, one ounce; Confection of Alkermes, half a drachm; of Lauda∣num, two grains; of syrup of Poppy,
half an ounce: the bagg may be re∣newed as need shall require, warming it in the liquor in which it was first boyled; the next day you may repeat both the Glyster and the bagg, and ex∣pect good success: After which, if the woman be plethorick,A Purge. you may purge her with Manna, and syrup of Roses, in broth, and this may be given after seven daies lying in. I come now to speak somewhat of the immoderate flowing of them,Immode∣rate flow∣ing of the Lochia. which must be considered as well as being stop'd, there being dan∣ger in either: for 'tis well observed by Hippocrates, Hipp. Aph. 51. Lib. 2. Omne ni∣mium ver∣titur in vitium. The Cau∣ses. that every thing wherein is excess, is an enemie to nature: Therefore let us endeavour to stop them in their over-much flowing, with a very great caution, lest by stopping them all together, there follow worse effects. It happens many times, that both after the birth, and miscarrying, that there floweth out such a quantity of blood, by reason of the eruption or apertion of the vessels, immoderately, or, by reason of the great fervor of
the blood proceeding from the use of over-hot Remedies in laborious births. To remedy them; Then, First, use such alimentary food, as may incrassate and thicken the blood;Cure by Diet. as, Panadoes, Gellies, Rice, in the broth of Calves-feet, Pears, boyled Quince, and Roast-meats whereon the juice of Pomegranates have been sprinkled, yelks of eggs.Drink. Their drink may be red Wine mix'd with water, wherein steel hath been quenched; then the blood may be drawn by revulsion to the up∣per parts, either by Phlebotomy, or Cupping-glasses under the papps, &c. Stupps dipp'd in [vinegar & water,] applyed to the loynes with an ointment.The whole belly must be swathed; there may be stupps dipp'd in Oxycrat, and applied to the loyns; after which, take of Unguentum Comitissae two oun∣ces; of juice of Plantane one ounce, beaten well together: these things be∣ing not hard to be gotten, I tender to you; but when they will not be stop'd by these means, 'twere best to have re∣course to Learned Physitians for ad∣vice.
SECT. XXXI. Of the Fever of Milk. EUtrap.Quest. You have already discour∣sed of the danger of the secun∣dine being left behind, and the Lochia stop'd: now, Sir, be pleased to let me know what may be the reason why women fall into Fevers, although nei∣ther the Lochia be stop'd, nor any part of the secundine left behind? I shall, good Mrs. Eutrapelia;Answer. for those Fevers that accompany women in Child-bed are never without dan∣ger; of which I shall give you an ac∣count; some of them being critical, others putrid, others symptomatical. I call that a Fever critical, which I call a Fever of milk; so called,Fever of milk, what, and when. because a∣bout the third or fourth day after child∣bearing, the milk begins to have a more plentyful recourse to the breasts, whi∣ther it is carried with some force, by reason of the motion and agitation of
the blood converted into milk for the nourishment of the infant: although this kind of Fever doth not happen un∣to all women, neither doth it usually continue above three or four daies,Febris Ephemera. be∣ing dissolved by sweating, and needs little other remedies (most commonly,) if the Lochia be not stop'd.The cau∣ses. Cautions in driving back milk to soon. The causes may be, the driving back of the milk too soon (which ought not to be) which doth over-run the blood, and settle there; or else, because that the brests being filled with milk, and distended very big and full, the vessels for blood are so compressed, that they will not admit of that blood that floweth thi∣ther; insomuch, that the blood being hin∣dred in its circulation, beginneth to rage over the whole mass of blood, whose spirits being inordinately stirred up, and confounded, take heat, and begin to boyle, and leaving the womb, posses∣seth the whole mass of blood, and so perhaps turn into putrid and malign Fevers;Putrid. amongst which, many happen to be symptomatical;Sympto∣matical. as, a Squi∣nancy,
a Pleurisie,Peripneu∣monia. an inflammation of the lungs, a Dysenterie, and the Small-pox or Measels: but these symp∣tomatical Fevers being from the same fountain ofA Bloody Flux. Blood out of its ves∣sels.extravasat blood, (which most times turns into Apostemations, Tumors, and Inflammations, if not prevented) will bear the same Analo∣gie of cure, with respect to the parts they invade: but to begin with critical Fevers. The cure of which consists, first,Cure of critical Fevers. in an exact observation of diet, that the impurities of the blood, and the due purgation of the humors, the evil affe∣ctions of the womb may be corrected, and the strength impaired may be re∣stored.Strength, how re∣stored. Diet. Wherefore, let her diet be Oatmeal-caudles, with white-Wine, and all mix'd, wherein a top of Baulm, Speremints, Mugwort, or Orgamint may be boyled; as also, Panadoes, and Water-grewels, &c. with these she must be fed for a week at the least, by often supping; forbearing nourish∣ments that are stronger and solid; as also all manner of flesh, which are
usually the cause of those Fevers;Eating flesh in Child-bed the cause of Fevers. for women in Child-bed must be dealt with not only like those that are grie∣vously wounded, but like those whose mass of blood is disturbed, and so apt to be incensed with the least flame. The next care conducing to the cure is,Cold. to prevent outward colds, (as hath been formerly observed,Section 5th. and 31th. in the 5th. and 31th. Sections.) Wherefore, I would advise, that women be kept in their beds for five daies at the least after their delivery. I know 'tis usual for them to rise at three daies end; but this to be sure, the longer women contein themselves in their bed, the more secure they are from danger. The third observation is, that by a gentle proritation of the blood, the Lochia be continued; and to this end Midwives usually give Sperma Ceti,Usual me∣dicines. Irish slatt poudered, or Saffron tinged in white-Wine, or Marrigold-flowers in posset-drink. If the belly be costive, it may be moved either with a Violet confect made for a suppository,Suppos to∣ty. or some
gentle emollient Glyster, (avoiding stronger Glysters.) Where there hath been vomitings, thirst, and want of sleep, occasioned by the great pertur∣bations of the blood, and stopping of theLochia.Lochia; I have known Laudanum mix'd with Saffron, each two grains, and given in posset with good success. Instead of cooling Juleps,Julep. you may use this rather, of which you may give three or four spoonfuls often times in a day: take Pennyroyal-water, Balm-water, each three ounces;Aqua Bryoniae composita. Hysterical-wa∣ter, two ounces; Tincture of Saffron, two drachms; a20 grains Scruple of Castoreum tyed in a fine rag, and hanged in the glass. Here also may be used Bezoar∣dical medicines, such as provoke sweat; but these, as also the cure of those symp∣tomatical Fevers before hinted, I leave to be considered of by Learned Phy∣sitians, to whom it is safest to have re∣course in such cases of danger.
SECT. XXXII. Dr. Philadelphos. I shall, Mrs. Eutrapelia, in this Section, afford you a Miscellany of Me∣dicines, such as are most useful for you to have with you; and conclude all. DR. Philadel. Mrs. Eutrapelia,Oyles. you may remember, in the latter end of the 4th. Section, I gave you an ac∣count of those things that a Midwife ought to be furnished withal, wherein mention was made of oyles, which usu∣ally are,Difficult Births. oyle of Lillies, of sweet Al∣monds, or Chamomile, mixed. I shall offer you one ointment, in hard and dif∣ficult Births: take of new butter not salted, and washed in Mugwort-water, two ounces; theThe mu∣cilage is the quin∣tessence of seeds and fruits boyl∣ed to gelly, and strein∣ed. Mucilages of Line∣seeds, Figs, and the seeds of Marsh∣mallows, extracted out in the water of
Savine, of each half an ounce; oyle of Lillies, half an ounce; make a lini∣ment, with which frequently anoint the neck of the womb; you may use also sneezing-powder, made thus:Errhine, or Sneezing-powder. Take long Pepper, Castoreum, Betony, white Hellebore, sweet Marjoram, Cloves, each a drachm, made into very small powder, and kept for use; which may be snuff'd up into the nostrils, to cause sneezing; or, of white Hellebore,An other. and Castoreum, powdered; this potion also may be given. Take of Cinamon,A Potion. of the bark of Cassia fistula, of Dittany, of each one drachm and half; of white Sugar, as much as all; let all these be made into a fine powder, and of it drink two drachms, in that posset wherein Lineseed hath been boyled, or else in white-Wine. Or this,An other. Take of Cassia fistula powdered, two drachms; RedA sort of red Pease, Ciceri ru∣bri. Cicers, half a handful, let them boyl in white-Wine and water, of each as much as will suffice, adding at the length two drachms of Savine, strein it, and adde to it half a drachm of Cina∣mon,
and six grains of Saffron, and make a potion. Or this, Take Aegrimony,Another. Betony, Vervain, each a handful; Confection of Al∣kermes,A scruple is twenty grains. a scruple and half; Sugar and Cinamon as much as will suffice to aro∣matize it, the herbs being first boyled in posset-brink. I shall give one gene∣ral Cordial water, which I shall not only commend to Midwives to have ever by them, but also to other Gen∣tlewomen; it being a general Cordial water against most distempers. Thus then; Take Baulm, Betony, Pellitory of the wall,A general Cordial∣water. sweet Marjoram, Cowslip flowers, of the flowers of Rosemary and Sage, each a great handful; of the seed of Annis, sweet Fennel, and Co∣riander, Caraway and Gromel, of each half an ounce; of Cinamon, Lico∣ras, and Nutmeg, all bruised, each one ounce; of Juniper-berries, one ounce and half; let the herbs be shred, and infused in a gallon of Brandy in an earthen pot well leaded, for the space of a fortnight; afterwards strein it,
and put in twelve ounces of Loaf-su∣gar,Note, that a gallon of Brandy added to the ingre∣dients af∣ter strein∣ing, makes as good water as the former, if ordered so. and of Musk and Ambergreece, each two grains, tyed up in silk, and hang'd in the glass: you may put in another gallon of Brandy, after the first is streined. Against immoderate flux of the Courses. Take of the roots of Tormentill, two drachms; Bole-armeniack the best, one drachm; the species of Hyacinth,Powder. half a drachm, all made into fine pow∣der: of which, take half a drachm once in three hours, in this following Julep. The Julep.Take of theRes. Aq. Scordii composit. compound water of Scordium,Dracon∣tii. Dragon-water, &Ulmariae. Mead∣sweet, of each three ounces; ofAceti Theriaca∣lis. Trea∣cle-vinegar, an ounce; syrup of Coral, two ounces; burnt Harts-horn, half a drachm; make a Julep.
To facilitate the Birth, drive out the Se∣cundine, false Conception, and dead Child. Take of the Trochischs of Myrrh, one scruple; of Borax half a scruple; of Saffron three grains; make a pow∣der of these, and take them in white-Wine, or the decoction of Mugwort in Posset-ale; after which, drink a draught of the same Posset, with some few drops of oyle of Amber, or oyle of Juniper-berries infused in it. Or this, A Posset.Take Mother of Time, one hand∣ful; of Pellitory of the wall, and Cha∣momel-flowers, of each half a hand∣ful; of Fennel-seeds, and Licoras, each half an ounce; Figs slit no. six; boyl these in three pints of Posset-ale, till one pint be consumed; then sttein it, and of this drink a good draught thrice in a day. The next Receipt shall be directed to the false Conception, and dead Child. As thus; Take Styrax
Calamita, Myrrh, Cinamon, Cassia lig∣nea,From the Apotheca∣ries. To pro∣voke the flowers, expell a dead child, and false Concepti∣on. of each half an ounce; Mummy, two drachms; Saffron, half a drachm; make all these into fine powder: this may be taken in white-Wine, a drachm at a time, for a week together, or more. To prevent Abortion. Take Sanguis Draconis, Red Coral, both made into powder,A powder to be taken in broth, &c. of each one drachm; of Ambergreece, three grains; of Bezoar stone, four grains; of this powder, a scruple at a time may be ta∣ken, either in Mace-ale, or Broth, or Posset-drink, wherein Plantane, Com∣frey, Knot-grass, Bramble-leaves, Peri∣winckle, with some Cinamon, have boyled. Or this, A second powder,Take Kermes-berries, two drachms; red Coral, and white, of each one drachm and half; of Amber, one scruple; make these into pow∣der, and put them into a Poch'd-egg, and sup it up; do so till all be done. Or this,
A third powder.Take Mastich, Frankincense, Sang. Dracon. Myrtill-berries, Kermes-ber∣ries, Bole-armeniack, each half a scru∣ple; and take a drachm of the pow∣der, and fill the hole, whence the stone is taken out in a Date; moysten it in sack, and wrap it up in a paper, and put it under hot embers to be warmed; and, let those that fear Abortion, eat it often. A Cara∣plasme to the navil.Take a hot manchet out of the oven, cutting off the crust, dip it in Musca∣dine, and strew it with the powder of Nutmegs and Cinamon, each as much as will suffice; and apply this hot to the navil of the woman. A plaister from the Apotheca∣ries.Take of Emplaster ad Herniam, Cae∣saris, each half an ounce; Cocci Baphici, one drachm, made into powder; Em∣plaster of Diacalcythios, one ounce; and with as much oyle of Myrtles as will suffice, make a Plaister to be spread on leather, and applyed between the hips. Here may be used Unguentum Comitissae to the loins.Unguent.
Of After-pains. Causes of After∣pains.After-pains may proceed from the acrimony of the blood, being thinn and sharp; or, from the grumous part of it, being thick, and clotted; which na∣ture endeavouring to discharge it self of, as to the setling of the womb, cau∣seth these pains:Inflations. Ambient air. As also Inflati∣ons, by reason of the ambient air, seems to imitate those pains, with the Child∣bearing, which are not only Sympa∣thetical, but Symptomatical; this be∣ing so usual, few women are free from it: And,Cure. because they often cease within two or three daies, they seldome require a Physitians help. Neverthe∣less, that Julep before-mentioned in the 32th. Section, is very useful. Or else,The Julep in the 32th. Se∣ction, mar∣ked with this * Aste∣risk. Take the inward bark of an Elm∣tree, and burn it to ashes; to which, adde Cinamon made into powder, some 10 grains of Cinamon to one drachm of the ashes, and drink it with white-Wine. Or else,
Take of oyle of sweet Almonds, two ounces; syrup of Violets, one ounce; water of Penniroyal, half an ounce, for a draught. Potion. After∣pains from windiness.If the cause be from wind, you may give a drachm of Barberries in powder, in the water of Vervain, or Baulm. But, most usually, these pains are eased by Caudles made with half white-Wine,Caudles. and half water, wherein Spermints, Baulm, Penniroyal, or Mug∣wort have been boyled. I will give you the form of a Cau∣dle, which is not only of great use in the sending forth of the secundine (in case any piece of it should be left be∣hind, as sometimes it may happen) but also to help nature in its work of throwing out this grumous blood; (which is the cause of the After-pains) And this is it; A Caudle, in case any part of the Secundine be behind.Take Oatmeal, and Hempseed, of each a sufficient quantity, with a top of Baulm; boyl these in a sufficient quan∣tity of white-Wine and water, of each a-like, and with the yelk of one egg, make a Caudle.
Of Convulsion-fits in infants newly born. Take the best Sack and Sugar mull'd, and give it the first thing it takes; this will discharge the stomack of that vis∣cuous flegm that ever accompanyeth infants;Convulsi∣ons, from viscuous phlegm possessing the sto∣mack and nerves. and not only warm the sto∣mack and nerves, (for all Spasms and Epilepsies proceed from the nerves be∣ing oppressed with cold, or gross, phlegmatick humors) but prepare it for future nutriment. If these prevail not, use this ensuing Julep and Plai∣ster. The Julep.Take Black-cherry water, red-Rose∣water, and Dragon-water, of each two ounces; one top of Rosemary, of Li∣coras, a drachm; of the flowers ofFlores Tiliae. Linden-tree, of the Lillie ofLilia Convallia. Convall, of each a pugill; boyl them till a third part be consumed, and sweeten it with Sugar-candy; give the infant often of this, together with this Plaister. The Plai∣ster.Take Mithridate, two drachms;
Saffron, one scruple poudred; spirit of Wine, some few drops; Capons-grease, as much as a small nut; make a plaister to be spread upon a small piece of scarlet, and applyed to the pit of the Stomach. And, if the child be costive,Supposito∣ries. put up a Mallow-stalk butter∣ed, or a Violet Confect, as Supposito∣ries; this powder is good. TakeRad. Paeoniae. Piony-roots and seeds;Dictamni albi. Diptany; Misleto of an Oak, of each half an ounce; of the seed ofSeminis Atriplicis. Orach; of the scull of a man,p Visci Quercini. each two drachms; red Coral and Hyacinth prepared, of each a drachm and a half; of Elks-hoof prepared, half an ounce; Musk, fix grains; Leaf-gold, half a drachm; make a powder of this; give ten grains, or twenty grains in the Julep aforesaid, in a spoon. Of a Diarrhaea, or a Looseness in Child-bed. Philad l. A violent looseness in child-bed is not without danger; to prevent which,
these Glysters may be given safe∣ly. n="1"Two Gly∣sters.1. Take Rice, one drachm and half; of Cork finely grated, two drachms; Red-rose-leaves, half a handful; strein these, and make a Glyster, after they have been boyled in a pint and half of milk to a pint; the things that remain may be applyed to the navil in form of a plaister. n="2"Cataplasm.2. Take milk a quart, boyled to a pint; of Diascordium, half an ounce; the yelks of two eggs in form of a Cau∣dle; make a Glyster:Caution. but here care must be had, that by too astringent means the Lochia be not suppressed. Of sore breasts in Women. To pre∣serve brests against the inconveni∣ence of milk. An Em∣plaister.To preserve the breasts, that if they nurse not their children, the milk of∣fend not, or, being extravasate, cause Apostemations; Take Virgins wax white, four oun∣ces; Spermaceti, two ounces; of Gal∣banum dissolved in strong vinegar, one
ounce: Make an Emplaister, to be laid on the breasts, and continued for many daies; let it be spread upon lin∣nen: if the breasts should tend to break, then,A Cata∣plasm, if the breasts should break, to be spread upon the wooll. Take a Sheeps head, wooll and all, bruise it, and boyle it in water e∣nough, till it be all to mash. In the top of the streined liquor of which, boyl Rice enough to make it to the consistence of a Pultiss; to which, add some Saffron, and apply it, and the wooll over it.Clefts in the nip∣ples. If the nipples be sore with fissures and clefts; First, wash the furr and stuff off from the nipples, as clean as may be; with red-Rose-water, as hot as may be endured; Then use of white wax, one ounce; of Sper∣maceti, half an ounce;1 Oint∣ment. the marrow of Staggs-bones, two ounces; oyle of St. John's-wort, one ounce: apply this. Or,2 Oint∣ment. Take Goats-suet, one ounce; oyle of the yelks of Eggs; oyle of sweet Almonds; oyle of Henbane, and Pop∣py, by expression, of each half an ounce; the fat of Geese, Capons, and Ducks, of each three drachms; of Litharge;
of Silver; white Lead washed;Ground∣sel stampt, and apply∣ed, driveth back milk, preventeth Inflamma∣tions.Tutia prepared; of red Lead, of each one drachm and a half; of Pompholyx; burnt Allom; white Sugar-candy pow∣dered; of Olibanum, of each one drachm; of Saffron, one Scruple; of Camphire, and Opium prepared,Flax card∣ed, and smoaked over Fran∣kincense, with which cover the breast. of each half a scruple: mingle these, and with as much white wax as will suffice, make of these an Unguent.
SECT. XXXIII. Of Nurses, and the best Milk. SInce the choice of a Nurse is of so great a concernment;Philadel. (as upon which, the future being of the infant consists) surely this,Nurses not sluttish. then, requires ma∣ny serious considerations. For, though she may have milk enough, yet perhaps not good enough; or the woman either sluttish, or unhandy, or careless in the swathing and dressing of the child; by which many children (like new vessels,Quo semel est imbuta recens ser∣vabit ode∣rem Testa¦diù. which will keep the savour of that li∣quor they are first seasoned withal) are sluttish or slovenly so long as they live; or else (being abused at nurse, are di∣stort and Ricketty; full of botches, nasty, and nauseous to their own pa∣rents. And many, through the intem∣perancy of their nurses, who, by drink∣ing, to increase their milk (and per∣haps make it bad enough) sleep so se∣curely and profoundly, that they over∣lay
their nurseries in the night,Children, how over∣laid. Often sleep good. and the children dead by their sides in the mor∣ning. Therefore let Nurses sleep so of∣ten, that they may hear the least cry of the infant. But this as introductory to a larger discourse and description. Let the Nurse, then, be of a middle stature,The Nurse described; with her Complex∣ion, her Age. and good complexion; active, not fat, (and of a sanguine complexion, if pos∣sible) and not in poverty; not under twenty years of age, nor above forty, but rather of twenty five, or thirty years of age, as aMedio tutissimus ibis. mean bewixt both. Let not her nipples be great, lest it make the child of a wide mouth,Her nip∣ples not too big. because it cannot suck without the contraction of the lips together; and, lest by forcing the tongue into too narrow a compass, it hinders the swallowing of the milk. Next, if the nipple be too small,Not too small. the child is apt to let it slip out of the mouth, and cannot handsomely hold it, so that the infant being frustrated of suck, and yet still exercising sucking, hurts the cheek, and attracts some kind of humors thither, which oftentimes
become praeternatural tumors; and oftentimes the cheeks of the infant seem as if they were stirred out of their pla∣ces. Thirdly, by the consent of all, the Nurse must have a large breast (though some think that not so material,Pectorae late jacens mammis Virgil. mo∣retum. Great breasts not good. and others are of opinion that she ought to have large breasts) because there is more milk collected together in great breasts than ought; and being there, is corrupted, to the prejudice of the Nurse. Wherefore, lest the milk should continue there too long, it is best to have a lusty young child to suck it a∣way, or else to use some other way; (as,Young whelps kil∣led with sucking of women. by the use of young whelps; whom I have oftentimes seen dye with sucking womens milk; surely the reason must be, because the milk wasOf ano∣ther na∣ture. heterogene∣ous; or else, because grumous, and corrupted) or milked out some other way; especially, when the Nurse per∣ceives her self prejudiced by it. But it is ever best,Plenty of milk ever best. that she abound, rather than want milk; and then in this case it is best they be big, though all Nurses
need not have big breasts; for there may be as much milk, if not more, in a lesser brest, than in a great one. Our next enquiry will be into the manners and behaviour of a Nurse. The best Nurse then is, she that is mild, chaste,The Nur∣ses Condi∣tions. sober, courteous, chearful, lively, neat, cleanly, and handy; because bad con∣ditions, as well as good, are suck'd in with the milk, and so radicated, that it is a hard matter to pull out the bad conditions, and leave the good behind, but that there will be a remainder of the bad conditions, perhaps so long as they live: wherefore, let not the Nurse be of an angry, malepert, and saucy disposition, shameless, scolding, or quarrelsome; not gluttonous, but so careful of her nursery, that she nei∣ther eat or drink that which may be hurtful to the infant:Her care in eating and drinking. That she do no∣thing to anger her self, to grieve, or sad her self;Passion hinders the good milk. Mirth. for such passions will pre∣sently distribute themselves, to the pre∣judice of the infant; than which there is nothing of more efficacy to destroy
the goodness of the milk. Neither is it sufficient that they abstain from the use of their husbands;Absti∣nence from Venery not sufficient. but when they have wanton thoughts, and lascivious minds, wholly upon Luxury and Ve∣nery, they cast off all care of their nur∣series, and dreaming at night of that which their minds run on in the day,Somnians dixit quae vigilans voluit. Terent. Comaed. and by other filthy pollutions they in∣fect the milk. So also, by the use of their husbands the Courses are stirred up, by which both the plenty and good∣ness of milk is derived another way; and so the child robbed of its nutri∣ment; or else the Nurse conceiveth with child, and so the infant becomethColostra∣ti. diseased and Ricketty, by sucking grumous, curdy, and unwholsome milk, and is the worse for it during life. Therefore let all those things be avoided,Meats to be avoided by Nurses. that either do, or are suppo∣sed to provoke lust; as, junkets made with spices; also onions, leeks, garlick, and all salt meats are to be avoided: persly,Persly, an enemy to milk. and smallage, some say, have a peculiar malice to the increase of milk:
besides that, it doth increase lust, and is an enemy to the growth of infants. Again, that Nurse were best, that hath lately been brought to bed of a boy if to nurse a boy, the milk of such a Nurse being better tempered.The ver∣tues of the milk of a male, and of a fe∣male. For the milk of a male child will make a fe∣male nursery more spritely, and a man∣like Virago; and the milk of a girl will make a boy the more effeminate. As to the milk, let it be a mean,The con∣ditions of the milk. betwixt thick and thinn; which you may per∣ceive, by dropping it upon the thumb∣nails; for if it be too thinn, it will run off the sooner; but if thicker,Tryal of the milk. it will stay the longer: let it be sweet, and plea∣sant, both to the smell and taste; not offending the palate with rancidness, sourness, sharpness, or saltness; or the nostrils with any strange quality. Let it be can did to the sight,By its Quality. in it self equal in each particles, not infested with brown, yellow, green, blue,Colour. or any other evil colour; or, as sometimes, with various colours and substance; as, with lines, and streaks upon it: but let that
milk be most praise-worthy, that makes as much curd as whey; which may be tryed by this Experiment,Experi∣ment.viz, Put some of this milk into a glass, and put in some Myrrh, or Rennet; which be∣ing stirred together, will curd, and then may the contents be seperated: the tryal is, that if there be most whey, then is the milk thinner in its substance; but if most of curd, 'tis thicker: yet all these may be corrected and amended; for that which is too thick may be mended by an extenuating diet,Corre∣ctives of milk too thick. Vomit. and the flegmatick matter may be avoided by a vomit of Oxymel, and Exercise before meat, the better to consume and atte∣nuate the thickness of it. Of milk too thinn. Di. Alica.The thinness of milk is amended by contrary food, such as doth incrassate it: as Formenty of Wheat, and Rice; Hogs-feet, Calves-feet, Trotters, and sweet Wine, unless somewhat else be in the way to hinder it. Sometimes it happens that the milk is more tart than it ought to be:Sharpness, &c. wherefore then, all diligence must be had to feed upon such
meats as are of the best juice, till that acrimony at least be attempered. Want of milk, the Causes.Sometimes there is little or no milk in the breasts; as after some sickness, or notable distemper, now turned into a chacochymical habit, or any other of what kind soever, that possesseth those parts, or is the morbifick cause: but that shall not be our business to consi∣der of now. Now, if these be not the causes, let the Nurse use supping meats, as Broths, Possets, &c. and eat plen∣tifully, and use frictions to her breasts and duggs,Exercise, and dan∣cing of the child, good for the Nurse. Cupping-glasses. Fomenta∣tions. exercising her hands and her arms by domestick Employments; or instead thereof, let her dance the child, by which the aliment may be recalled into those parts. Sometimes cupping-glasses to the breasts, with a fomenta∣tion of emollient herbs boyled in wa∣ter, and applyed warm, either sponges, or wollen-clothes; after which,Embroca∣tion. em∣brocating them with oyle of Lillies. The seeds of Fennel, and the roots of Parsnips boyled in Barley-water,What food is best. and buttered. The broth of Hens, or Ca∣pons,
with Cinamon and Mace. Or Poch'd-eggs, with the seeds of Annis, and Dill; and all things else that are hot in the first and second degree, are good.Earth∣worms. Worms, such as come out of the earth, (not out of a dung-hill,) six or seven of them dried, and powdered, and drank in Barley-water sugared, for a fortnight together: All these may be of good use in the defect of milk. But now let us see to the inconveniency (if there be any) in too much milk. If the milk abound too much,Milk in too great a∣bundance. A Decocti∣on. which some∣times is (though seldome) blameable; Then use the decoction of Myrtle∣berries, and red Roses, and with clothes dipped in it, lay them on the breasts. Or else clothes imbibed in Vinegar, wherein Cummin-seeds bruised have been infused with Myrrh and Cam∣phire. The in∣convenien∣cy of too thick milk.By reason of the thickness of the milk, all those excrements that the child should send forth, are intercepted; as by Stool, by Urine, &c. The passages for transpiration are stuffed up, so that the
progress of the aliment being stop'd, of necessity the milk must be regurgitated, and vomited up; after which will fol∣low much flegmatick matter, a sure ar∣gument of crudities.Cause of Botches, &c. Sometimes there will arise botches, and apostemations about the body; much matter, and snot, and quittor will come out of the nose, and corners of the eyes, and eye∣lids; and the appetite will be lost. Of too thin milk, the cause of gripingsContrarily, from the thinner and sharper sort of milk, the belly is looser than it ought, being troubled with pin∣ches and gripes in the belly of the in∣fant: Also, very angry pustules and whelks will arise about the body, like the small Pox; and the body groweth weak by little and little,Cause of pustules. the infant not caring for food; for the strength of the appetite will be more remiss, by reason of the acrimony of that which the in∣fant desires; so that it is not much sen∣sible of that aliment which it hath; and that aliment of which it is sensible is naught, and vicious.
Of over∣much milkNow, from the over-abundance of milk, the infant oftentimes, when it sucks, is over-whelmed, being so puffed up, and the belly distended, as if it would break; untill by much pissing, or breaking wind, it is slacker. But where there is too much scarcity of milk,Of too lit∣tle milk. here the infant being altogether destitute of its nourishment, will pine away;Maras∣mus. and all the parts of the body being starved, in those years when it most wants nourishment, by reason of the vehemency of the innate heat,Vehemen∣cy of the innate heat. and that habit of body (that the least blast will puff down) which requires much, and constant aliment. By all which, women ought to be the more provi∣dent, lest all these mischiefs happen, (especially, not to make choice of such a Nurse,A good caution, not to choose a Nurse in poverty. Another Nurse to be chosen. whose poverty must needs starve her self, and her nursery; and if they should so happen, to amend them, as hath been said before) e're they grow incurable, and require the help of ano∣ther Artificer that may cure it. Or, if the fault in the milk cannot be cured
and amended in the Nurse, (which she hath contracted,) Then you have no more to do, but presently to look for another Nurse, that hath none of these inconveniencies; that so the infant may have suck enough, which is all it re∣quires; for want of which, you may hear sad ejulations, crying, and weep∣ing. And this may be discovered by their dreams,Dreams. as by the often motion of the lips in the cradle, as if they were sucking when they are a sleep. The infant partici∣pates of that food which the Nurse eats or drinks.Neither is it strange, that the infant should be sensible of, and participate of whatsoever food (as meat, drink, and physick,) that the Nurse taketh: which maketh our modern Physitians purge the Nurse, to cure the child. And this also is concluded on by Hippocrates; Hippoc. Epidem, vi. That if a woman take any purging Physick, she purgeth her child also. So, Galen reports of Goats, feeding in Asia, where Scammony did grow, did communicate a purging faculty to their milk. And so the milk of Asses, gene∣rally accounted the best in Consump∣tions,
is counted better, if the Asse be fed with Capillary herbs, such as are Maiden-hair, &c. And again, when young Goats suck Sheeps-milk, the rough hair shall lose its coursness, and become like a fleece of wooll: and so contrarily, when lambs are brought up by Goats, their wooll groweth the more hairy. If then the qualities of the milk pass into those that suck them,Qualities of the milk pass into those that suck them, and so im∣purities. (as without doubt they do) it is easie to gather, that other impurities follow thither also, neither is it improbable. Surely then, we ought to take no less care of the Nurse than of the child; as in her diet, exercise, physick, &c. since, whatsoever conduceth to the benefit of the Nurse, tends to the good and wel∣fare of the infant. I have been the larger in this Section of Nurses, and Milk, because tender in∣fants can neither make choice of their Nurses themselves; nor discover, or plead for their wants: Their own mo∣thers, surely, (if they are able) both by duty, and nature, being the most fit to
nurse their own children;The great∣est Ladies, and all Mothers, fittest to nurse their own chil∣dren. which the greatest Ladies may do, with the great∣est conveniences; by reason of their plenty of all things; besides, their at∣tendance of servants, who can bring their nurseries to them at all hours, be it by night or day, and take it from them again, not to disturb their rest: which also, they may intend at their own pleasures.The time of sucking not above twelve moneths. The longest time that a child need be suckled, is not to be above one year. I shall leave only one caution for Nurses, and wind up this Section: and 'tis this. Let Nurses ever milk out some milk e're they suckle the child; and after it is suckled,Nurses not to rock the infant too violently after suck∣ing. that they rock it not too much presently after, lest violent rocking disturb the meat in the stomack; or the other parts draw away the milk in the stomack, as yet unconcocted.
SECT. XXXIV. EUtrap. Sir, I was unwilling to in∣terrupt you in your discourse, (it being so profitable) till you had done: and truly, Sir, I must beg your pardon, if I mind you of some distempers inci∣dent to women, and are peculiar to the womb; and though there may be more, yet I shall trouble you but with two: And the first is, concerning your judge∣ment of Fits of the Mother; and the second, of the Falling out of the womb; which sometimes hapneth after hard Labours, or an unskilful Midwife. Philadel. Mrs. Eutrapelia, I shall readily do both, as well to satisfie You, as other Ladies, whom I am willing to gratifie.
Of Suffocation of the womb, com∣monly called, Fits of the Mo∣ther.Section, 34. AMongst all the fierce distempers that women are affected with, the strangulation of the womb is ac∣counted none of the least. This, by the Latines,Uteri suf∣focatio. is called the Suffocation of the womb, and so by the. Greeks; which we render, Hysterical Fits, from a. word which signifieth, The womb: It is called by most women, The Mo∣ther Fits, and that from another Greek from . word, which signifieth, the Matrix; which is from another word, which sig∣nifieth, a Mother; because women, after they have brought forth, are Mo∣thers; and hence, Fits of the Mother. Which is,What is the suffo∣cation of the womb. a retraction of the womb to the upper parts, making the princi∣pal parts fellow-sufferers of the distem∣per. For although the womb may be concluded to be moved out of its place,
yet, except it be carried downwards, it never causeth a suffocation: for a suf∣focation is nothing else but a defect in breathing: Therefore it is necessary, that the upper parts that serve for Re∣spiration be affected,The parts affected, what, and how. and carried up∣wards, by reason of that suffocation; and amongst all, the chiefest are, the heart, lungs, the midriff, and the brain, to which the force of the affection cometh, viz. to the heart, by the veins and arteries, and so to the lungs; to the brain and midriff, by the nerves and membranes of the spine of the back: The cause is from the womb,The cau∣ses. which being full of some naughty humor, as menstuous blood;Menstru∣ous blood, Vitious seed. or vitious and putrid seed offendeth the noble parts, with some stinking, malignant, sharp, gri∣ping, cold vapours.The symp∣toms. The symptoms that follow are various, either accord∣ing to the greatness of the efficient cause, or the variety of some qualities, or natures; for some women are with∣out any sense or motion, and seem to have no pulse at all, or at least, that
very small and weak; and sometimes lye without any manner of breathing at all that can be perceived. Others there are, that neither want sense nor motion, and seem not to be troubled with any passion of the mind; but they faint, and very hardly fetch breath: some also seem to have Convulsions in their joynts, as in their hands, arms, feet; but these generally are the signs of the fit at hand, viz.Signs of the Fit co∣ming in augmente. A dulness of the mind, a laziness, weakness of the thighes, paleness, and clamminess about the face:Signs of the Fit present. but when the fit is come, then there cometh a profound sleep, like those in an Apoplexy, or Lethargy; the mind is dotish, the senses are in∣tercepted, the voice ceaseth, the thighes are contracted, the cheeks look red, and the face is swelled.Signs of the decli∣nation of the distem∣per. But when the suf∣focation declineth, a certain moysture distilleth from the privities, with great rumbling and murmuring of the belly; and the womb by little and little is re∣laxed, and so the sense returneth. This disease is moved also bySuppose of the moon. course; as is
the Falling-sickness, and doth most of all infest young women desirous of hus∣bands; and that about Autumn, and the Winter: as also, those that are childless, or unfruitful, or such whose womb is chilled upon any account. This differs fromHow it differs from a Syncope, or swour∣ing. fainting Fits, in this, (viz.) In a Syncope there is no pulse, but in the strangulation of the womb, there is ever a pulse, though small, rare, weak. In fainting Fits, or swounings, there are cold sweats, and paleness of the face; but in this the countenance is plump,How from an Apo∣plexy. and ruddy. It differs also from an Apoplexy; for women that have these Fits have not their parts de∣prived of sense and motion; and, al∣though their senses be benummed, yet, if they are pinched, or pricked, they are sensibly disturbed, and will make signs with their hands, that they are strang∣led; now it is clean contrary in an A∣poplexy: And again, those in an A∣poplexy do snore, which is never seen in these hysterick Fits.
How they differ from an Epilep∣sie, or Fal∣ling-sick∣ness. Spasmus Cinicus. A distorti∣on of the mouth.Lastly, these Fits differ from an E∣pilepsie, or Falling-sickness, in this; that these parts affected are not contra∣cted with Spasmes, or Convulsions; neither do they foam at mouth, except the woman be vehemently suffocated; and especially, when an Epilepsie is not stirred up out of the womb it self, as oftentimes it doth happen. Having thus discoursed of the causes, symptoms, and signs, we now come to the Cure.The Cure. First then, let the lower parts be strongly rubbed with clothes, and tyed with strong ligatures; as also, let Cupping-glasses,Cupping∣glasses, how to be used. be applyed to the hips, groynes,Os pubis, or Pecti∣nis. Beware the navil. share-bone, (but not to the navil.) Next, sneezing is commended, (to which Hippocrates agrees.). Aphor. lib. 5. & 35. And, though I have given you one Receipt for a sneezing-powder, in the beginning of the 31th. Section, which is proper not only in difficult births, but here also; I now will leave with you the Receipt of another powder,A sneezing powder. which shall be this; Take white Pepper, Mustard-seed, Pel∣litory of Spain, Castoreum, of each a
scruple; Euphorbium, and white Hel∣lebore, of each one scruple;Twenty grains make a scruple. and make a subtile powder, which may be used so long as there is no redundance of hu∣mors perceived in the head.Supposito∣ries. Supposi∣tories are good: as, Take of Agarick Troschisc. of the species of Hiera lo∣godii, of each a drachm;60 Grains make a drachm. of Rats-dung, Figs, Rue-leaves, and Cummin-seeds, all made into powder, and with honey made up into a Suppository. An Oint∣ment.Take oyle of St. Iohn's-wort, of Orange-flowers, of Rue, of each one ounce; oyle of Mace by expression, half an ounce; of a Beasts gall dryed and powdered, six drachms; Venice-Treacle, half an ounce; Spiders alive, in number forty; infuse all these for ten hours in a vessel well stop'd on the em∣bers, that it neither boyle too fast, not evaporate too much; of this make an Ointment, with which anoint the back, and loynes, and the navil, avoiding all cold. A fume to sit over.A Suffumigation of Nutmegs pow∣dered, and set in a close-stool to burn,
receiving the smoak by sitting over it, is excellent. Stinking things to smell to.Stinking things are ever best to smell to, such as are Partridge-feathers, old Leather, Brimstone, burnt all; Assa∣foetida, Castoreum, Galbanum, Rue, ma∣laxed with Vinegar: Contrarily, all sweet things are proper to be tyed to the thighes in a bag, but not smell'd to.Sweet things best to be tyed to the thighes. The scrapings of Goats-horns, and Assa∣foetida, mixed, and burnt, is excellent. Take Assafoetida dissolved in distilled vinegar, of Castor prepared into pow∣der,Pills. of each a scruple; Laudanum two grains, made into six Pills, and taken just before the Fit. Lastly, if these Fits proceed from the stoppage of the flowers, those me∣dicines must be given proper to pro∣voke them; but if from the retention of the seed,Quod si ex retento se∣mine affe∣ctio prove∣niat, nul∣lum propo∣nerem nffectae mulieri praestnntius auxilium quam viri sui frequeates amplexus. Hieronymus Pulverinus, Cap. XCI. de Strangulatione U∣teri. then let nature here be their best director; except they could con∣strue the authority of * Learned Physi∣cians, with whom, let them advis.
SECT. XXXV. Of the coming forth of the womb. IN the last Section, Mistriss, I de∣scribed how the womb might be moveable upwards, yea, & from side to side. I now come to speak of its mo∣tion downwards, which sometimes is so low, that it cometh forth, and is to be seen outwardly; and that which hangs out doth appear like a soft,The signs. Scrotum. and round tumor, and like the Testicles of a man; but the pain and the heat pos∣sess the privities, and bottom of the belly; and the urine, distilling by some and some, vexeth the privities. The causes may be many; as, The cau∣ses.First, when a woman, from on high, falleth upon her hips, those skins and membranes which support the womb, and tye it to the neighbouring parts, being broken. The second cause is, by extraction of the Secundine, as hath been formerly
set forth, in the 26th. Section & that through the unskilfulness of the Mid∣wife. The third Cause is, by a sudden and immoderate flux of blood; as is usually in Abortions, as hath been shewed in the 5th. Section. The fourth Cause is, by an artificial extraction of a dead child, or over∣much holding the breath, to blow; or carrying of too great a weight. The fifth is, oftentimes, through over∣much humors, and the defluxions of them; and often bearing of children; which makes those Appendices, to which the womb depends, relaxed, and loosed. The sixth and last is, through some vehement passion of the mind, being af∣frighted with the sudden tydings of the loss of children, incursions of enemies, dangerous Sea voyages; and sometimes from neither of these,Old age. but from old age it self, or much weakness. But now, as to the Cure; in which, observe these Prognosticks by the way;Progno∣sticks. That when
this affection is new, the womb is easi∣ly reduced to its proper place; and be∣ing right put up, it continues there, espe∣cially in the prime of age; and may both conceive, and bring forth again; but in riper years, it becomes contra∣cted; it may be put up truly, but upon the least occasion slips out again. And in short, this; All fallings down of the womb, which are not, and cannot be cured by proper means, shew that the Appendices (as aforesaid) are either lax∣ed, or broken. The Cure.The Cure is, First, to provide Gly∣sters to be administred, by which the strait gut may be discharged of gross and hard excrements, and the bladder of its urine, by some pipe fitted for the purpose; for sometimes it happens, that the womb being in a streight betwixt those two,Nascim intester∣cus & Urinam. cannot be reduced into its proper place. The first may be done by Glysters, the latter with a pipe put up in the neck of the bladder;Fistula urinaria. which done, the womb may be put up by this fol∣lowing method. Let the Patient lye
with her face upwards, her hamms bent backwards, and thighes spread abroad; after which, foment it with the deco∣ction; of Beets, Mallows, Marsh∣mallows, Lineseed, and Foenugreek,A fomen∣tation. made in spring-water. Then make a pledget of wooll wrap'd up in a linnen∣rag, to the proportion of the privy∣part; which being dipped in the juice of Acatia and Hypocistis, dissolved in red Wine, apply it to the womb;To be bought at the Apo∣thecaries. and so without violence press up all that which is come forth: After which, foment the wholeThe share-bone. Another fomenta∣tion.Pecten with this fomentation. Take red Wine a quart, red Rose-leaves, Bramble-leaves, Plan∣tain, Myrtle-berries, Shepherds-purse, Hagtaper, Horse-tail, and Comfrey∣roots, applyed with sponges; using af∣terward the oyles of Mastich and Myrtles to the place, and Unguentum Comitissae to anoint the Reins. Now, because the main of our drift is to cure the falling out of the womb upon difficult births; adde this method to the former. First, purge her with one
drachm of Pulvis sennae compositus ma∣jor,A Purge to be bought at the A∣potheca∣ries. given in broth, or Mace-ale, twice or thrice: then, Take the leaves of Plantain, of Withy, of Medlars, of the Oake, of Sloes, of red Brambles, of red Roses, of each a handful; of the roots of Tormentill, Comfrey, and Bistort, ofBalau∣stia. Pomegranat-flowers, of Cypress-nuts, of each an ounce; of the seeds of Annise, two ounces: let these be grosly bruised, and sewed up in a bag;A bag used. (of which you have a de∣scription in the 24th. Section of this Book.) Boyle these in Smiths water, such as they use to quench iron, and ap∣ply it warm four times a day, wearing it continually, well trust up. — Si quid novisti rectius istis,Horat. Candidus imperti; si non, his utere mecum. . FINIS.
Imprimatur, Tho. Tomkyns. Ex Aed. Lamb. Maii ult. 1671.
