17263 S105168 99840898 5442
A MANVAL OF PRAYERS NEVVLY GATHERED OVT OF MANY and diuers famous authours aswell auncient as of the tyme present. Reduced into. 13. chap. very commodious and profitable for a deuout Christian. PRAYER, IS GOOD, WITH FAS∣TYNG AND ALMES. TOB. 12 1. Pet. cap. 4. Be wise therfore & watch in prayers. But before all things, hauing mu∣tual charitie cōtinual among your selues. CVM PRIVILEGIO. 1583.
Aug. in Psal. 42. This is the Iustice of man in this life, Fasting, Almes-deedes, Prayer. PRAYER IS GOOD WITH FASTING AND ALMES TOB. 12 Ibidem in serm. 59. He that wyll haue his prayer to flye to heauen, muste make it two wynges, Almes-deedes, & Fasting, and it shall spedelye ascende and bee harde.
THE COLLECTOVR AND traunslatour of this presente Ma∣nual, to the Catholicke and Chris∣tian Reader. MOst deare Coūtrymē vvhose desires are to serue God in holines of life, crauing aide for the acccomplishment of your religiouse intentes at the handes of his Maiestye, by the merites of Christe, and intercession of the blessed virgin Mary, and all Angels and saynts: to the intente that you may proceede day∣ly from one vertue to another, and to be helped by the labours of God his ser∣uauntes and sayntes, (vvhoe from time to time to increase the deuotions of the people, haue lefte manye holye prayers and exercyses, as a treasure for to com∣forte and strengthen the dull soule of man) I haue thought good to collect and translate certayne deuoute prayers ve∣rye fitte and conueniente for this time,
vhich is done the more vvillingly in respecte of the greate and zelouse desire that many of our poore countrye hath, rather to occupye them selues deuoutly by begging pardone for their sinnes, thē curiously by searching the secrete mis∣teries of God, to spende their time in vn∣profitable and insolente contradictions, tendinge to no other ende, but onely to rooe out of the mindes of christian ca∣tholickes all true fayth, firme hope, and perfecte charitie, vvhich dayly by de∣uotion and other spirituall exercyses is vvonderfully increased, to the greate admiration, euen of the very aduersa∣ries of all pietie and catholicke religi∣on, as doth vvell appeare to the vvhole vvorld sēce the time that some vertuous, holy & learned men haue applyed some parte of their time in compyling, trans∣lating and collecting particular vvorks of deuotion, vvhich in the iudgement of many are presently more necessary, than
farther to treate of any controuersie, sec∣inge that heresie is grovven to suche rypenes, that the simplest man of all, can novv discypher the poyson hid vnder her: but deuotion is so decayed that the learned thēselues haue neede of helpes for to attayne thereunto: yet is it not my mynde that any man shoulde so tye him selfe to any deuoute prayer, or to anye number of prayers here colected, that thereby he shoulde omit the accustoma∣ble publique prayers of our holy mother the Catholicke Churche, as hereafter more at large I haue noted. Farther good Christian Reader I am to let thee vnderstand, that thi litle Manual hath bene collected and translated in greate haste, and vpon earnest requeste of dy∣uers godlye and vertuouse catholickes: yet not vvithout the iudgemente and o∣pinion of some number of the learned sorte in this studye, vvhoe finde it very conuenient and necessary for this time,
specially for that they are collected and translated out of dyuers famous and ho∣ly Authors, as vvell auncient as of the time presēt, and are to the great increase of deuotion published in many countries and in dyuers tongues, before this my collection & translatiō: vvhich if I may request to be gratefully accepted of thee good catholicke and christian Reader, it shall gyue me the radiar occasion, to take the lyke paynes in any such profi∣table action, vvhich hereafter maye be offred: and thus vvishing, that increase of grace to the reader, vvhich I desire to my selfe, and desiring hartye repen∣taunce to be vvrought in the hartes of all my deare country-men, I bid thee gentle reader hartely fare-vvell. Thy harty welwiller to commaunde in Christe Iesus. G. F.
THE ARGVMENTE OF THE Chapters. HAuinge expressed the causes that moued me to the collection and translation of this ma∣nuall, I am now to lay downe a direction whereby thou mayest with more facili∣tye finde out such particular prayers as semeth beste to thy discrete deuotion: that seeing the particular praiers of this booke deuided into certayne chapters, thou mayest as tyme, place and necessi∣tye requireth, vse these kynde of pray∣ers, whiche shall bee moste to Gods glory, thy owne soules health, and the profit of thy euen-christian. The firste and second chapters are such, as whereby the Christian Catho∣licke may learne and knowe howe to craue the ayde and succour of God in all his endeuours, enterpryses and acti∣ons, which that daye he purposeth and meaneth to take in hand: and before he goe to bed, to thanke God for his beni∣fites receyued that day: and to knowe
how to examine his conscience, calling to minde his sinnes committed the day past: but specially in the seconde chap∣ter, the catholicke man may learne howe to behaue him selfe at the tyme of the dreadful misteries, which christian peo∣ple commonly call the Masse. Further he may there learne what to craue of God, and what kinde of meditations to vse in the Church, and withall howe to moue him selfe to spirituall deuotion. The rest which are ten chapters, are put in a seuerall Index, whereby the ca∣tholicke shall easely finde what prayers are thought moste conuenient for eue∣rye day in the weeke: that so he may as leasure and deuotion serueth him, reade either the whole, or parte, as they are set downe in this Index folowing.
Read vpon. Soundaye these chap. 10. Prayers to the holy Tri∣nitie. 8. Of thankesgyuing to God for his benefites. Vpon. Moundaye these chap. 11. To the B. Virgin Marie and to the holy Saintes. 3. For obteyning remission of sinnes. Vpon. Tewesdaye these chap. 4. For ayde and comfort in tribulations and afflictions. 5. For obteyning of God ne∣cessaries for body and soule. Vpon. VVednesday these chap. 9. For the Churche, our friendes, and others. 13. For the departed soules. Vpon. Thursdaye these chap. 5. For obteyninge of God, necessaries for body & soule. 8. Of thankes-gyuinge to God for his benefites. Vpon. Fydaye these chap. 3. For obteyninge remission of synnes. 6. Prayers of the lyfe and Passion of our Sauiour Iesus Christ. Vpon. Saturdaye these chap. 13. For the departed soules. 9. To the B. Virgin and to the holy Saintes.
THe firste weeke shall be read the chapters which are put in the firste rankes for euery daye: and the nexte weeke after, the chapters put in the se∣cond ranckes: So shalt thou reade ouer all the within named ten chapters in the Index twyse euery moneth, and some of the sayed chapters foure tymes: As for the other three chapters they are con∣uenient at certayne times, and for cer∣tayne persones, for which cause they are not meete to be put in order with the o∣ther as aboue named. But those that haue neither time nor leasure to read euery day a whole chap∣ter, may yet reade of the same chapter some of the sayde prayers, and suche as they thincke conueniente for the ad∣uancement of God his glory, their pro∣fit and for the profit of others: notwith∣stāding, in no wise may they omit their dayly prayers, or those prayers which they ought to say in Masse time. Also when any holy day falleth, that you haue no saynte by name in your chapter of Saintes, then must you take one of the prayers which be common to any Apostle, Martyr, Confessor or Vir∣gin.
Further it is necessary for all deuoute Catholickes to knowe, that the accusto∣med prayers vsed in the Church accor∣dinge to the auncient and laudable ma∣ner of our forefathers, and obserued by continuall practise of both the learned and vnlearned, (to the greate glorye of God, and increase of deuotion, religion and pietie of lyfe) are not to be omitted for the desire that any may haue to any speciall prayers either in this or anye o∣ther pamphlet, translated or collected by any priuate persons, which is done to moue men to deuotion, but not to withdrawe men from obedience or any receyued Catholicke custome or tradi∣tion. And therefore I counsayle the Catho∣licke Reader that of deuotion hath ac∣customed him selfe to these prayers fo∣lowing, not to omit thē in any case (for they are not deuised by the wit and pri∣uate deuotiō of mā, but by the holy spirit of God, the Author and delyuerer of all trueth) which are the seuen canonicall houres in the Breuiarye or in the Pri∣mer, commonly called our Ladyes mat∣tins: the seuen penitentiall psalmes, with
the lytanies: the dyrige for the soules departed: the houres of the holy Ghost: the houres of the Crosse: prayers of the passion: the fiftiene graduall psalmes: the beades which consisteth in a certayne number of pater nosters, angelicall sa∣lutations, with the Creede of the Apos∣tles: commonly is called the Rosarye of our Lady. Thus hauinge gyuen thee an order (gentle Reader) to vnderstand this litle Manuall of prayers, with my opinion touching the vse of the same: I will con∣clude with earnest request and humble supplication vnto thee, desiring thee to remēber me in thy vndistracted deuo∣tions, saynge this prayer folowinge for me and others, whose helpes I vsed in collecting this sayed worke out of ma∣ny authors, and translating many pray∣ers out of latin and french into this our vulgar tonge. O Omnipotent almightie and euerli∣uinge God, haue mercye vpon thy seruaunt N. for the loue of thy sweete sonne our sauiour Iesu Christ, the true lighte and lyfe of all that shall be saued:
O Iesu the seconde person in Trinitie, equall God with the Father and the holy Ghoste, conserue and keepe him in thy grace, fauour and loue, and suffer him not to be drawen from thee through a∣ny suttle perswasions of the enemy: O holy Ghost proceedinge from the father and the sonne, the comforter of the e∣lect: the inspirer of all good giftes: the onely schole-maister and teacher of all truth: graunte that through thy giftes he maye euermore dwell in thy trueth: replenishe his harte with all charitable desires and heauenlye inspirations ne∣cessarye to his saluation: graunt this O holye Trinitie for the bitter passion of our Sauiour: by the merites and intercession of the gloriouse Virgin Marye and all Angels and saintes. Amen.
S. Peter. 1. cap. 4. Be wyse therefore: and watche in prayers. But before all thinges ha∣uing mutual charytie continual a∣monge your selues, &c. PRAYER, IS GOOD, WITH FAS∣TYNG AND ALMES. TOB. 12 Aug. in Psal. 42. This is the Iustice of man in this life, Fasting, Almes-deedes, Prayer.
THE FYRSTE CHAP∣TER CONTLYNINGE QVO∣tidiane or dayly prayers, accom∣modated & prescribed to cer∣tayne houres or times bothe for the day and night. A briefe exhortation to praye conti∣nually extracted and taken out of Saint Chrisostome. In lib. De orando Deum. IT is very meete and profitable, that we occupy all the course of our life in prayer, that thereby our harts may receaue cōtinually the sweete dewe of gods grace: of the which all persons haue no lesse neede, than trees and herbs haue of the moysture of waters. For as trees
can not bringe furth fruite except the rootes be cōforted with moy∣sture: in like maner, it is impossible for vs to be replenished with beau∣tifull fruites of pietie, if our hartes be not refreshed by prayer: for which cause we ought to forsake our bedds, and preuent the sonne-rising, in gods seruice. The like we ought to do when we goe to meate, & at night when we muste of necessitye take our rest: yea it behoueth at all houres, to offer some one prayer to God, to the ende both daye and nighte together, might be spent in pray∣er: especially in time of winter, it is conuenient to imploye the most parte of the night in prayer, and so to spende the time vppon our knees in diuine seruice. Tell me I praye thee, how canst thou beholde the sonne, if thou
doest not honour him firste, that made thine eyes to see that moste beautifull light? How can ye goe to the table to eate, if you do not first honour him who geueth and furnisheth vs daily with such great benifites? How canst thou truste to passe the darcke night, and to auoyde such dreames & thoughts as may come to thee, if thou de∣fend not thy selfe by prayer. If thou be not countergarded by prayer, thou shalt easely yelde thy selfe to wicked spirites, which goeth cōtinually about vs, espying if they can perceaue any one vnar∣med, that soudainly they may de∣uoure him. But if they see him furnished with prayer, they retyre present∣lye, euen as wicked theeues when they see the sworde towardes them.
Hoolsome meditations and exer∣fice for the morninge. 1 Fyrst presently in the mor∣ninge when thou art awake, thou shalt pray to God, that he woulde so lighten the eyes of thine hart, with the holy lighte of his holy spirite, that thou be not allured or entyced to consente to sinne, & so consequently seduced to death. 2 Secondly after thou art risen, blesse thee with the signe of the crosse, saying the prayer that fo∣loweth. 3 Thirdly when thou art appa∣reled, goue not thy selfe present∣ly to babling or ianglinge, or to vaine thoughtes or fansies: but lift vp thy harte vnto God in silence, and prepare thy selfe to saye these prayers folowing. 4 Fourthly after prayer, thou shalt purpose firmelye and con∣stantly
in thy selfe, not to com∣mitt willingly that day any thinge, whereby God or thy neighbour might be offended. 5 Fyftly it shall be very necessa∣ry besides these afore-sayed, to call to minde thine affayres, and with quicknes of spirit sett downe with thy selfe howe thou wilt spēd the day to come. A prayer in the mornyng vvhen ye avvake. Dauid in Psal. LIghten myne eyes O Lorde, leste at any tyme I ouersleepe in sinne, & leste myne enemy doe saye, I haue preuailed against him. VVhen ye doo aryse. F. Sonn. 5. tract. 11. Christ. Inst for. IN the name of oure Lorde Iesus Christe crucified, I doo ryse: he bless me,  me, eepe
me, saue me, and bringe me vnto euerlasting lyfe. Amen. Pater noster. Aue. Credo. & Confiteor. A morning prayer vvhen ye are rysen. Ex Viridario spirit. O Heauenly Father, omnipo∣tente and euerlastinge God, vnto thee I yealde innumerable thankes, whiche haste vouchsafed to keepe me this nighte through thy great mercy, and I beseech thy aboundaunt, clemencye, that thou graunt me so to spende the day to come, in fayth, hope, charity, pa∣tiēce, feare & carefulnes of minde, that my seruice maye please thy heauenly Maiestie. A morninge prayer vvhereby to com∣mende thy selfe to God. B. Aug. cap. 40. Medit. O Holy Trinitie heare me most miserable sinner, and keepe
me from all euill, from all occasi∣on of euill, from all mortall sinne, from all the deceptes and wilynes of the deuill, and of mine enemies visible and inuisible, by the pray∣ers of the Patriarkes, by the me∣rits of the Prophets, by the suffra∣ges of the Apostles, by the con∣stancie of Martyrs, by the faith of the Confessours, by the chastitie of Virgins, and by the intercessi∣on of al Sainctes, which haue plea∣sed thee from the beginninge of the worlde. Amen. A prayer to he sayed goinge out of the house. Ioan Fab. in prec. Christ. O All ye holy Angels and saints of God, I beseech you, that your intercession may geue me ayde and power, that no enemie may hurt me in the way that I shal walke, neither sleepinge nor wa∣kinge,
and that neither fier, nor wa∣ter, nor any other noysome thing, doe oppresse or harme me. Amen. A prayer desiring God to order and directe vs. De imit Christ. li. 3. cap. 16. LOrd God thou knowest what thing is to me most profitable to doe, this or that, after thy will. Geue me what thou wilt, as much as thou wilt, and when thou wilt. Doe with me as thou knowest best to be donne, and as it shall please thee, and as shal be most to thy ho∣nour: put me where thou wilt, and freely doe with me in all thinges after thy will. Thy creature I am, and in thy handes, leade me, and turne me where thou wilt. Loe I am thy seruaunt redie to all things that thou commaūdest: for I desire not to lyue to myselfe but to thee, would to God it might be worthe∣ly
& profitably to thy honor. Amē. A prayer to perseuere in goodnes. Imitatio Christ. li. 1. cap. 19. HElpe me my Lord Iesu Christ, that I may perseuere in good purpose, and in thy holy seruice vnto my death, and that I may now this present day perfectly beginne, for it is nothinge that I haue done in time paste. An exersise to be dayly vsed in medita∣ting the passion of our Lord & Sauiour. An Exhortation. If thou wilt profit and growe in the loue of God, thou must haue an often and frequent memorie, & as it were an I∣mage before thine eyes, of thy Lord and Sauiour crucyfied for thee: and it shall be verye profitable for thy dayly exer∣cyse, to call to thy mind (with a deuoute and diligente attention and considerati∣on) one or moe of these fiftiene litle me∣ditations, and in the ende of the same meditation, say the prayer folowing for the same purpose O mylde and innocēt Lamb. &c.
Medita. 1. O Good & gracious IESV, thou beinge highest and almightie God, of the infinite charitie wher∣with thou louedst me, wouldest be made man, thou didest vouchsafe, to be borne in a stable, to be laide downe in an oxe stall, and after that to be circumcised, and to flee into Egipte. Thou didest vouchsafe to be baptized, to fast, to be tempted, to watch, to teach to preach, and to heale the dyseased. Thou diddest vouchsafe to suffer manifolde la∣bours, painfull cares and persecu∣tions three and thirtie yeres, and at the length to come to Hierusalem and to suffer death for me. This prayer folovving is to be sayed af∣ter one or moe of these meditations, as the leasure of the deuoute person shall serue, accordinge to the tyme and deuo∣tion
that the partye shall haue. O Myld and innocent Lambe of God, thus hartely thou didest loue me, these thinges thou didest for me, these paines most meekely, most patiently and louingly thou sufferedst for me. VVhat shall I ren∣der againe vnto thee? I adore, laud, and glorifie thee, I praise thee, and geue vnto thee thankes as hartely and as well as I can. All haile sweete IESV, the sonne of the liuing God king of all kinges, the very king of glorie. All haile the precious stone of the diuine nobilitie, that quick∣neth and geueth lyfe, the flower that neuer fadeth of mankinds high dignitie. O mercifull and kinde re∣deemer, haue mercy vpon me for thy goodnesse sake. Put awaye all my sinnes. Destroye and mortifie in me what soeuer displeaseth thee. Make me one according vnto thy
blessed harte, making me like vnto thy holy humanitye, Graunte, my Lord, that I may to my litle power, most diligently folowe thy blessed lyfe and vertues. O blessed father celestial, I offer vnto thee, the most holy incarnation, conuersacion, & passion of thy most deere beloued sonne Iesu, for my saluation, and for the saluation of all men, as for full amendmente and purgation of all our sinnes and offences. Graunte most mercifull father by the same onelye begotten sonne of thyne, vnto them that are alyue, mercy & grace, and vnto the soules depar∣ted, rest and lyfe euerlasting. Amen. Medita. 2. O Good and gracious IESV, thou dideste eate the pascall lambe in Hierusalē with thy dere-beloued disciples: and arising from supper, thou diddest gidd thy
selfe about with a Towel, and pow∣redst water into a bason, and knee∣ling vpon thy knees, thou meekely didest washe the feete of thy disci∣ples, and wypedst them with a To∣well. Medita. 3. O Good and gracious IESV, thou, before thou shouldest suffer, did bequeth a most excellēt good thinge vnto thy children, leauinge for vs thy most sacred body to be our meate, and thy most precious bloude to be our drincke. There can no witt nor vnderstanding pe∣netrate and throughly see the bot∣tomles deapth of this thy charytie. Medit. 4. O Good and gracious IESV, thou cominge vnto the garden of Oliuet, begannest to feare and to be heauy: whereupon thou saidest vnto thy disciples.
My soule is sorowfull vntill death. And then diuided & sondred from them, thou settest thy selfe vpon thy knees: and fallinge vpon the earth flatte on thy face, thou pray∣edst vnto thy father, and fully and wholly thou resignest and yeldest thy selfe vnto him sayinge: Father thy will be done. And at length through most payn∣full agonye (where-with thou was greuouselye opprest and afflicted) thou swettest throughout all thy body a bloodye sweate. Medita. 5. O Good and gracious IESV, thou kindled and burning, with the ineffable desire to redeeme me, thou wentest to meete thyne ene∣mies, and suffered Iudas the traitor to kisse thee: and suffered thy selfe to be taken, and to be bound with all confusion and shame: and most
indignely to be ledd with bondes from thence, and that of most vile and wicked persons, vnto Annas: where thou suffered most mekely, a verye sore stroke on thy face, most iniustly geuen thee of a most vyle manciple and slaue. Medita. 6. O Good and gracious IESV, thou being fast boūd like a notori∣ous malefactour, wast led vnto the house of Cayphas the high Priest: where the Iewes moste vniustely condemned thee, and most filthi∣ly and vily all bespetted and spau∣led thy royall and moste amiable face, and most spitefully they laied on thee manye a sore buffette and blowe, and skornefully in mock∣age they did blindfolde and couer thy face, and strykinge thee, they with mocke & scorne sayed: Pro∣phecy Christ, who is he that stroke
thee? doinge vnto thee innumera∣ble iniuries all that nighte. Medita. 7. O Good and gracious IESV, thou in the morninge was brought before Pilate: and with most sweet and pleasaunt countinaunce, cast∣ing thine eyes downe, stoodest be∣fore him in the iudgemente hall. And when thou wast moste falsely accused of the Iewes, and many a rebuke and reproche was geuen thee: thou most meekely heldest thy peace and madest no answere. Medita. 8. O Good and gracious IESV, thou was sente from Pylate vnto Herode: This Herode of a vayne and curious minde, couetinge to see some miracle at thy hande, as∣ked and demaunded many things of thee. And the Iewes sturdi∣lye accused thee still. But thow
amonge all these, mooste wisely heldest thy peace. For this cause Herode and all his, despysed and contemmed thee, put vpon thee a white garment, a dezerds cote: & lyke a sot he sent thee thus againe vnto Pylate, O howe vnmeasura∣ble is this humilitie and obediēce? At the will and pleasure of thine ennemyes thou wentest foorthe, & thou returnedst againe without gaine saying, suffering thē to dooe to thee what soeuer they would. Medita. 9. O Good and gracious IESV, thou in the iudgement hall stripped naked, and without all cōpassion being bounde fast to a pillar, was mooste cruelly scourged. There was thy virginall & tender fleshe, cutte with whippes & torne with stripes, all together mangled and deformed, with blacke and blewe
and many a wounde, so that the streames of thy moste precious bloude, ranne downe on euery syde vpon the earthe. Medita. 10. O Good and gracious IESV, after that sore and sharpe scour¦gyng of thine, to put thee to more shame and vilanye, thou was clo∣thed of Sathanas souldiours with a purple reade garment vyle and torne. They also makyng a crowne of thorne, painefully pressed the same vpon thy moste holy heade: And while the sharpe thorns pric∣ked greuously, and wounded sore thy head, thy moost pure bloude ranne downe aboundantly ouer all thy louely face and necke. Then they puttynge a reede into thy ryght hande, and kneelyng downe before thee in scorne, saluted thee saying: All hayle Kynge of Iewes.
And then tooke they the reede, & with many a sore stroke they smit∣te thy venerable heade. They also spette in thy mellifluous visage & stroke thee on the blessed face. Medita. 11. O Good and gracious IESV, thou was brought foorthe by Py∣late vnto the furious Iewes, to bee gased and looked vpon, wearinge thy crowne of thorne and purple garment: but they cried out with more cruelnesse to haue thee cru∣cified. Medita. 12. O Good and gracious IESV, thou was delyuered vpp vnto the will & pleasure of the Iewes, which by & by led thee to bee crucifyed, layinge the heauy crosse vppon thy sore and bloudie shoulders. Thus didst thou beare moste me∣kely
thyne owne crosse, whose greate weyghte payned thee full sore: and comyng vnto the place, all werie & breathlesse with paine, for my sake thou dydst not refuse, to taste wyne mingled with gall & myrre, which was there geuen vn∣to thee. Medita. 13. O Good and gracious IESV, when thou was stripped na∣ked, then were thy sore woundes by the violent pullynge of thy clothes, renewed. Oh what a bytter and cruell payne dyddest thou suffre, whan thy tender handes and vndefyled feete were with blounte & rough nayles, faste nailed vnto the crosse, and when the ioinctes of thy lim∣mes were loosed. Oh with what loue and swetenesse of charitye, didst thou offre thy handes and
feete to be bored through. Then out of the woundes of thy handes and feete, as it had been out of wel∣les, thy precious bloude plenti∣fully gushed out. Medita. 14. O Good and gracious IESV, thou hangynge vpon the crosse in the middes betwene two theues, was assayled with blasphemyes: but thou praydst vnto thy father the while, saying: Father forgeue it them, they wote not what they do. Then diddest thou promise pa∣radise vnto the theefe. Then ga∣uest thou thy deere-beloued mo∣ther (who persed with the sworde of sorowe, stoode by the crosse) vnto thy disciple Iohn, and vnto vs all to be our mother. And after that thou hadest suffred three long houres intollerable paynes, and thirsted verye vehemently, they
gaue thee eysell to drinke, which when thou hadest tasted, bowing downe thy venerable head, thou yeldest vp thy spirite. Medita. 15. O Good and gracious IESV, O good shepherde, thus thou bestowedst thy lyfe for thy shepe, and the right side of thy dead bo∣dy was opened with a speare, out of the which flowed both water and bloud for vs. Thou wouldest that thy tender and louinge harte should be wounded for my sake. Afterwarde thy immaculate body taken downe from the crosse, thy moste blessed mother tooke it in her lappe, she kissed it, and wett it with teares: At the length Ioseph and Nicodeme wounde it vpp in Sindon, and layed it in the sepul∣cher. My dere beloued, yea the deare beloued of all my desires,
thou diddest vouchsafe thus to die, & to be buried for my sake, which lyuest and reygneste blessed and glorious for euer, and euer world without ende. Amen. These asperations and ghostlye sigh∣inges and prayers are needefull for deuoute Christians to haue by harte: (and often times to reuollue in minde some of them at the leaste) for attayning to a ghostly and perfecte lyfe. O Good Iesu, o gracious Iesu, o sweete Iesu, o my hope, my refuge, and my helth, haue mercy, haue mercy, haue mercy vpō me, I am poore, nedy, and weake, I am naught, I haue naught, I know no∣thinge, I can dooe nothing of my selfe but sinne, helpe me therfore swete Iesu. O Lorde bee mercyfull vnto me moste vile, moste abominable synner, vnworthie to lyue on the
earth, verily it is but ryghte, that euery man should despise me, per∣secute me, afflicte me, & ouer treade me with their feete. I resigne and surrendre me, yelding me wholy vnto thee. Thy moste blessed and thankeful will, bee euer done vpō me and in me. Graunt me (O good Lord) full remission of all my sinnes, washing me in thy precious bloude. Graunt me perfecte mortifi∣cation and denyinge of my selfe. Destroye in me myne owne will and the sekyng of my selfe. Graunt me true humilitye, per∣fecte patience & charitie, & of my tounge & of all my senses perfecte temperaunce. Graunt vnto me, the puritie, simplicitie, nuditie, and libertie of mynde, and also an exacte and essenciall In-turnyng, that I maye
bee one accordynge to thy hartes desire. Lo, my singular beloued Lord, lo, I salute and honour thy rose∣ruddy and swete woundes. All hayle all haile moste plea∣saunte and healthsome woundes of my Lorde. All hayle moste bountifull harte of my deare louer, wounded for my sake: of all goodnesse, of all blisse the moste pleasaunt treasure house. O My Lord Iesu Christ, I moste humblye thanke the for thy venerable woundes. Oh Lord drowne me in them, hyde me in them: write and prynte them deepely in my harte, that I may burne al together in thy loue, and that I maye take compassion vpon thee from the harte. Graunt that all fraile creatures
may bee vyle and of small estima∣cion with me: and that thou onely mayest please and bee swete and delectable vnto me: Make me lyke vnto thy holy humanitie. O derely-beloued, derely-be∣loued, derely-beloued: O the most derely-beloued of all derely-be∣loued: O my onely beloued. O my freshe and flourishinge spouse: O my mellifluous and hony-sweete spouse: O the swetenesse of my harte, & the lyfe of my soule: sette me on fier, burne me, make me a newe, and transforme me, that no∣thinge beside thee, liue in me. Oh, wounde very depely my harte, with the darte of thy loue. Then turne thy mynde to the godhead of Christ, and quyetly thincke or saye thus. O My Lord God, o my delecta∣ble principle and beginnynge,
O amiable depth bottomlesse, O the clere lighte of my intrailes, and bottome of my verye herte: O moste sincere & delectable good∣nesse, my very and incomparable goodnesse: O my God & all thing: what desire I besides thee? Thou arte my highe & full contentacion, and only ynough for me. Oh when shall I luckely fynde thee? when shall I ardently and mooste fer∣uently loue thee? when wilt thou rauishe me all together into thee? when wilt thou consume me all wholy into thee? when wilt thou moste fast and sure knytte me vnto thee. Oh remoue awaye mercifully all impedimētes, and make me one spirite with thee, to the laude and prayse of thy name. All hayle glorious, shyninge, and euerlastinge quiet Trinitye,
father, sonne, and holy ghoste, one God. Oh vouchesafe to feede my soule with thy gostly influence. In lyke maner to the blessed mother of God saye thus. HAyle MARIE full of grace, oure Lorde is with the: hayle sweete Virgin, the blessed mother of God: The very excellēt Quene of heauen: Hayle bright shinynge starre: Rose verye delectable and pleasaunt: The Orient white lyllie of the Trinitye: O blessed ladye, take pitye vpon me moste poore banished man. In lyke maner to such a Sainte of God as thou hast speciall deuotion vnto, and to thy holy Angell. ALhayle derebeloued of God, blessed and holy saincte. N. or all haile noble spouse of Christe, holy and blessed saincte. N. Hayle holy Angell of God, my
faithfull keper. All hayle all ye blessed sainctes of God, and all ye blessed spirits Angelical, which are fulfylled perpetually with the ve∣hemente streame of all diuine vo∣luptuousnesse & heauēly pleasure: pray for me now, and at the houre of my death. O mercifull IESV, I beseche the, for thy moste venerable Passiō and death, graunt vnto the quicke, mercy & grace, and vnto the deade reste and euerlasting light. An other briefe exersice to be vsed dayly accordinge to the choyse of the deuoute christian, as his opportunitio shall serue. O Good IESV, be mercyfull vnto me abhominable sinner, I haue sinned, I haue offended, I haue done amisse before the: Lord perdon me. All my iniquitye, my negligences, and all my immortifi∣cations,
I put thē all into thy moste derebeloued woundes, and I caste them into the bottomlesse depthe of thy mercy & merites. O would to God I had neuer offended thee: would to God I had neuer letted thy grace in me: I purpose now (by thy helpe) to correcte and amende my selfe. Oh Lorde, put awaye all my sinnes, washe me cleane with thy precious bloude: Make me whole with thy precious woundes Sanctifie me with thy bitter Passiō and deathe: Clense me perfectlye: Restore againe vnto me the inno∣cencye, whiche thou gauest me in baptisme, that I maye trulye please thee: I worshyp, I laude & glorifie thee, I prayse & geue thankes vnto thee my Lorde IESV CHRISTE for all thy mercies and benefites. I thanke thee (O sonne of the lyuing God) moste highest GOD: whiche
for thy excedinge greate charitye, that thou didste beare towarde me, hast vouchesaffed to bee made mā: Thou wouldeste for my sake be borne in a stable, and an infant be∣wrapt in clothes, to be layd downe in a manger, to be fed with the litle milke of the mayden thy mother, to suffre nedinesse and pouertye, to be sore troubled thyrtie three yeres with manifolde labours and carefull paines. Thou wouldest for very inwarde paine and agonie, be all in a bloudy sweate, to be appre∣hended and taken shamefully, to bee bound vnworthily, to bee cō∣demned, vniustly, to bee defyled with spettle, to be stricken vvith buffettes & blowes, to bee clothed & scorned as it were a madde man, in a white garment in mockage: Thou wouldest bee beatē & torne moste cruellye with stripes, moste
cruellye crowned with thornes, ouerlodē with a painfull & heauye crosse, furiously and boysteoufly nailed vnto the crosse with sturdie nailes, vnkyndely to haue offred to thee in thy thyrste, eysell and gall. Thou, the noble clother and garnisher of the starres, hangest all naked, despised, wounded, and with innumerable sorowes afflicted vpō the crosse for my sake. Thou shedst for me thy moste pure and precious bloude, thou dyedst for me. I embrace in the armes of my soule thy venerable crosse: and for the loue & honoure of thee I kysse the same. Graunte that I may with whole & full desire attayne vnto thee, and that I maye pause & reste in thee, most sweetest of all. Lo my Lord lo, I repute and set my selfe in the lowest place vn∣der all creatures. For I am vnwor∣thie,
that the earth shoulde beare me. I caste my selfe downe, & putt my selfe vnder the state of all men: I sincerely loue all men as well as I can: I forsake and leaue all corru∣ptible thinges for thy sake, I refuse what soeuer thou arte not: I for∣sake & renounce all sensuall plea∣sure and delite. I renounce all va∣nitie and impuritie: I forsake al the sekyng of my selfe and all immor∣tifications: I resygne and put me wholy into thy hande & pleasure: All my whole will' I chaunge into thyne: Thy onely will (Lorde) thy onely will be done in me, and on me: thy blessed will be doone in all times and euer lastyngly. I offre me redie to suffre, (with the helpe of thy grace,) whatsoeuer it shal plea∣se thee. Oh moste sweete and merci∣full IESV, mortifie whatsoeuer ly∣ueth
naughtillie and sensuallye in me, and what soeuer is vicious and inordinate in me, what soeuer displeaseth thee in me: mortifye in me all propertye: Garnyshe and adourne me with thy merytes and vertues. Oh prepare (Lorde) a delectable, and a pleasaunt habita∣cion for thy selfe in me. Renewe my spirite, my soule, & my bodie, with thy excellente grace: Make me like vnto thy holy humanitie: Make me one vnto thy hartes de∣sire: Ridde & make clere, my mind and soule and make it syngle, and lyghten it: Graunte me free intur∣ning vnto thee. O my Lorde God, O my very & vnchāgeable good∣nesse, fulfyll me with thine owne selfe. Leade me into the clere bot∣tome of my soule, and bringe me from thens into thee my originall. Knitte me vnto thee moste nerely,
and chaung & trāsforme me alto∣gether into thee: that thou maiest haue thy delyte in me. Here me graciousely, Lorde here me gra∣ciousely, not at my will, but at thy blessed pleasure. Oh Lorde teache, illumine, directe, and helpe me in all things, that I maye doe nothing. I maye speake nothinge, I maye thinke nothinge, nor desyre no∣thinge, but that, whiche maye be acceptable before thee. Then to haue in minde our blessed ladye. O Blessed MARIE, O moste sweete Virgine, haue pitye vpon me moste vile sinner: I salute & I honour thee. Oh blessed ladie, optaine for me, of thy blessed sōne full remission of all my synnes: optaine for me, perfect mortifica∣tion and forsakinge of my selfe, Optaine for me, very and true hu∣militie,
patiēce, charitie, refrainyng and temperance of my tong and of my sences: Obtaine for me, puritie, simplicitie, & freedome of minde, and that I maye bee once accor∣dinge to the hartes desire of thy sonne. Take in mynde all Saintes. O All ye blessed saintes of God, and blessed spirites Angelicall, whome God with his melly fluous countenance and blessed presence, maketh ioyfull and euerlastingely glad, praye ye for me: I salute and honour you. I geue lauds & thākes vnto our Lord, which hath chosen you, and hath preuented you in his benedictions: Oh optayne for me forgeuenesse, optayne for me gra∣ce, and to be made one with God. O Moste benigne, & moste mer∣cifull IESV, haue mercie vpon
thy churche, haue mercy vpon this place and congregacion: Graunte that here be cotinuallie, humilitie, peace, charitie, chastitie, & puritie: Graunt that we all maye worthily amende and correcte our selues, & that we feare thee and serue thee faithfully, that we maye loue thee and please the. I commende vnto thy mercie all our businesse & our necessities. Lord haue mercie vpon all, for whome thou haste shed thy moste holie blood. Oh Lord, con∣uerte, turne, and call agayne all miserable sinners: graunt vnto the quicke, forgeuenesse & grace, vnto the dead rest and light euerlasting. Amen. A prayer for schollares before they goe to schoole, for obtayning vvisdome, lear∣ning, and knovvledge. COme O holy spirit replenishe the harts of thy faythfull: ligh∣tē
in vs the fyer of thy loue, which by diuersitie of all languages haste assembled and gathered the peo∣ple in the vnitie of fayth. O God which by the brightnes of the holy Ghost, hast instructed the hartes of the faythfull, graunte vs, that in the same spirite we maye knowe that whiche is ryghte and truth, and alwaies to be ioyfull in his consolation. Amen. Holesome Meditations vvich you may vse at night, before you goe to reste. 1 VVhen thou wouldest goe to bedde, thou shalt yelde thankes to God for his greate mercy, that he hath so preserued thee that daye, wherein dyuers throughe their sinnes hane fallen headlonge into hell. 2 Then after, reuolue, and call to minde diligently all the sinnes whereby any way thou hast offen∣ded
God, or thy neyghbour that daye, and aske God mercye for them. 3 Fynally, thou shalte praye to God with thy hart, that he would vouchsafe to haue care ouer thee, and that he would not suffer thee to perish in workes of darcknesse, and by these (or other lyke) pray∣ers folowinge, thou shalte call for the ayde and succour of our Lord and Sauiour. An Eueninge prayer to be sayed as thou goest to bedde. Ex viridario spirituali. A Lmyghtye and euerlastinge God, I render thee most har∣tye thankes, for that thou haste vouchsafed of thy greate mercye and goodnes to preserue me this day frō all euil. And I beseech thee more-ouer for thy bitter death and passion, moste mercifully to
pardone me wretched sinner all mine offences, that this day I haue committed by thought, worde, or deede: and hereafter to preserue and keepe me from all daunger, as well of body as of soule, to the end I may rise agayne in health, to prayse the name of thy maiestie, and ioyfully serue thee in thankes gyuinge with a chaste body and a cleare harte Amen. Our Father. &c. Hayle Marye. &c. O Mary the mother of grace, And of mercy mother also, Defend me from the cruell foe, And at my death my sou'e ēbrace. I Beleeue in God the Father. &c. An other prayer for the night. O Lord God and my heauenly Father, forasmuch as by thy diuine ordinance the night appro∣cheth, and darknes begynneth to ouer whealme the earth, and tyme
requireth that we geue oure selues to bodylye reste & quietnes, I ren∣der vnto thee moost hartie thankes for thy louynge kyndnes, whiche haste vouchsaued to preserue me this day, from the daunger of mine enemies, to geue me my healthe, to feede mee, and to sende me all thinges necessarie for the cōforte of this my poor eand nedye lyfe, I moste humblie beseche thee for Iesus Christes sake, that thou wilte mercyfullie forgeue me all that I haue this daye committed againste thy fatherlie goodnes, eyther in worde, deede, or thoughte, & that thou wilt vouchsafe to shadow me this nyght vnder the comfortable wynges of thy almightie power, & defende me from Satan, and from all his craftie assaultes, that neither he, or anye of his ministers haue power ouer eyther my bodye or
my soule. But that althoughe my body thorowe thy benefyte en∣ioyeth sweete and pleasaunt slepe, yet my Soule maye continuallye watche vnto thee, thinke of thee, delight in the, and euermore praise thee: that when the Ioyefull light of the daye returneth accordinge to thy godlye appointemēt, I maye ryse againe with a faithfull soule, and vndefiled bodye, and so after∣warde, behaue my selfe all my life time according to thy blessed will and commaundement, by casting away the workes of darkenes, and putting on the armoures of light, that men seeing my good workes, may therby be prouoked to glo∣rifie thee my heauenlye Father, which with thy onely begotten sonne Iesu Christ our onely saui∣our, and the holy Ghost, that most sweete comforter, lyuest and raig∣nest
one true and euerlasting God, world without ende Amen. A prayer to thy good Angell thy gar∣diane. Ex hortulo animae secū vsum Leodiens. I Beseech thee O holy Angell, to whose protection and custodye I wreched sinner am committed, continually to defende, ayde, and garde me, from all inuasion and as∣saultes of the deuill where-soeuer I be, both waking and sleepinge, dryue away from me through the vertue of the holy Crosse † al the temptations of Satan, & that which through the deserts of mine owne merites I can not doe, by thy prai∣ers obtayne at the handes of the highest and dreadfull ludge, that he may haue no place in me. Amen. A prayer as thou entrest into thy bed.
F. Sonnius tract. 3 Cathe. IN the name of our Lorde Iesus Christe that was crucified for me, I goe into my bedde: let him blesse me †, gouerne me, and de∣fende me, and bringe me into lyfe euerlastinge Amen. A prayer to be sayed as thou seitleste thy selfe to sleepe. L. Viues in precibus general. O Iesu Christ our safegarde, re∣ceaue me into thy protecti∣on, and graunt that when my bo∣dy is a sleepe, my soule may watch to thee, and that it may ioyfullye and gladlye beholde that blessed, moste ioyfull, and heauenly lyfe, where thou art gouernour toge∣ther with the Father, and the holy Ghost, and where the Angels, with the blessed soules are citizens for euer and euer. Amen.
An exhortation to watche taken out of holy Scripture. The day of our Lorde shall come as a theefe in the night. Thes. 1. v. 5. VVatche ye therefore because ye knovve not the day, nor the houre. Math. 25. v. 13. And that vvhich I say to you I say to all: vvatche. Marc. 13. v. 37. The ende of the first Chapter.
Moste holesome meditations, vvhich vve ought day and night to haue be∣fore our eyes, and alvvayes to haue in remembraunce. VVe onght continually to remēber these three things: that is to saye: Tyme Paste. That vve haue vnprofitably spent. That good vvhich vve haue left vndonne. That euill vvhich vve haue committed. Tyme Present. Of the shortnes of mans lyfe. Of the difficultie to be saued. Of the small number that shall be saued. Tyme To come. Of death moste miserable. Of the last Indgement most horrible. Of the paynes of hell intollerable.
THE SECONDE CHAP∣TER CONTEYNINGE GOOD∣ly & deuout prayers, to be sayed before, at & after the holy Sacri∣fice of the Masse. A prayer vvhen thou doest enter into the churche. Ex hortulo animae. OH, take from me (moste mercifull Lorde) all mine iniquityes, to the ende I may with a pure and con∣trite harte enter into the holy of holyes. O Sauiour of the worlde which lyuest and reignest with the father and the holy ghost. A prayer to styrre vp the minde to deuotion before Masse. Io. Fab. ex. Aug. 33. medit. ALmightye and moste merci∣full Father, vnto thee all the
heauenly companie of the celesti∣all citie, all the blessed orders of saued spirites, doe incessantly with due reuerēce sing continuall glo∣ry and euerlasting prayse. Thee O Lord, all saintes and soules of holy men doe laude and magnifie, with moste worthie and condigne ho∣nour, as to whome all prayse, ho∣nour and glorie is most iustly due. Nor there is any creature, be he neuer so worthy, that can suffici∣ently accordinge to thy worthy∣nes, geue vnto thee worthye and sufficiente prayse. For thou arte that vnspeakeable vncomprehen∣sible and euerlastinge goodnes. Thou good Lorde hast made me, thou haste through the merites of the bitter passion of thy moste blessed Sonne, which he vouche∣safed, to suffer for man-kind, resto∣red me to the state of saluation.
To thee onely is due all laude and honour, if anye good thinge be found in me. Oh good Lord, I mi∣serable wretche, a creature of thy makinge, a poore woorme of the earth, haue good will to laude and magnifie thee, with all my minde & whole intent, but without thy spe∣ciall grace, I finde my selfe fainte and wonderfull weake, wherfore I come to thee my God, my lyfe, & my strength, my hope, and onelye comforte, to craue thy mercie and grace, to geue mee power to praise thee. Graunte of thy vnspeakeable mercy that I may worthelie prayse & honour thee, and that what I doe therin, may be pleasing & accepta∣ble to thee. Graunt me the light of thy grace, that my mouth maye speake, & my harte studie thy glo∣rie, & my tounge may be occupied only in the song of laude & praise.
But because all praise in a sinners mouthe is vyle, and I must of force confesse my selfe manifoldelie to haue offēded with my lippes, clēse thou o good Lorde my harte from all filthe and sinne. Sanctifie me moste mightie Sauioure bothe in∣wardlie and outwardlie, and make mee worthy to magnifie thee: re∣ceyue of thy infinite goodnes the sacrifice of my lippes, and make it acceptable in thy sighte: lett the sauour therof be plesaunte & well smelling vnto thee: Let thy holie swetenes possesse wholie my mind, and feade my soule with the fulnes of inuisible thinges: lett my soule good Lorde, bee quite cutte from visible things, & all whollie geuen to the studie of inuisible thinges: cleane seperat from earthlie things, and wholie addicted to heauenlie meditations, & make my soule see
the wonderfull sight of thy Maie∣stie. O almightie God, enspire thou my harte, that I maye continuallie geue thankes vnto the, and honour thee for euer. Graunt mee the gra∣ce, that in my pilgrimage, and vale of miserie, I may so praise thee, that through thy mercie & grace, I may bee associat to their holie fellow∣shippe, whiche see the euerlastin∣glie, & singe prayse to thee worlde without ende. Amen. A deuoute prayer necessary to be sayed euery Sunday. Cornel. Donters in his contemplations of the Passion. MY most louing God and Lord and my creatour, I miserable sinner doe presente my selfe this day before thine eyes, beseeching thee humblye, that through thine infinite bountye, thou wouldeste vouchsafe to geue me grace, that
I may keepe holy this Sunday, ac∣cording to thy commaundement, and the precept of our mother the holy Church, geuing me true con∣trition of all my sinnes that I haue committed against thy diuine Ma∣iestie, and against my neighbour, by thoughts, wordes and deedes, and by omission of good workes which I ought to haue done: And I most humblie beseech thee most sweete Iesus, that thou wouldest not consider the multitude of my sinnes, but remember thine infinit mercy, and vouchsafe to graunte me grace to spende this weeke fo∣lowing, without mortall sinne: and for the honour of thy death and passion, to geue to al sinners know∣ledge and grace to do penaunce in this worlde, and generally to haue mercy of al those that our mother the holy Churche desireth (this
day) to pray for, that with her we all may be partakers of thy sorow∣full passion. Amen. A prayer to be vsed before confession, or before Masse if time serue. OH maker of heauen and earth, king of kinges and Lorde of Lords, which of nothing diddest make to thine image and lykenes, and diddest redeme me with thine owne precious bloude, whom I a sinner am not worthye to name, neither to call vpon, neither with my harte to thinke vpon, humbly I desire thee, & mekely pray thee, that gently thou do beholde me thy wicked seruaunte, and haue mercy on me, which haddest mer∣cye of the woman of Canane, and Mary Magdalene, which diddest forgeue the Publicane & the thefe hanging on the crosse: vnto thee I confesse (most holy Father) my
sinnes, whiche (if I woulde) I can not hide frō thee. Haue mercy on me O Christ, for I (wretche) haue sore offended thee, in pryde, in co∣uetousnesse, in gluttony, in leche∣ry, in vaine-glory, in hatred, in en∣uy, in adultery in thefte, in lyinge, backebitinge, in sporting, in disso∣lute and wanton laughing, in Idle wordes, in hearinge, in tastinge, in touchinge, in thinking, in slepinge, in working & all wayes in which I frayle man and most wretched sin∣ner might sinne, my defaulte, my most greuous default. Therefore I most humblye praye & besech thy gentlenes, which for my health de∣scendedst from heauen, whiche diddest holde vp Dauid, that he shoulde not fall into sinne, haue mercy on vs (O Christe) the which diddest forgeue Peter that did for∣sake thee. Thou arte my creator &
my helper, my maker, my redemer, my gouernour, my Father, my Lorde my GOD, & my king. Thou arte my hope, my truste, my gouer∣nour, my helpe my strength, my defence, my redemption, my lyse, my health, & my resurrectiō. Thou arte my stedfastnesse, my refuge or succour, my light, and my helpe. I moste humblie and hartely desier and praye thee, helpe me, defende me, make me strong, & cōforte me, make me stedfast, make me merye, geue me lighte, & visite me, reuiue me againe whiche am dead: For I am thy makinge and thy worke, (oh Lorde) despise me not. I am thy seruaunt, thy bondeman, al∣though euill, although vnworthy, and a sinner. But what soeuer I am, whether I be good or bad, I am euer thine: Therefore to whome shall I flie, except I flie vnto the? If
thou caste me of, who shall or will receiue me? If thou despise me, and turne thy face from me, who shall looke vpon me, and recognise and knowledge me, although vnwor∣thy cōming to thee, although I be vile and vncleane? For if I be vile and vncleane, thou canste make me cleane: If I be sick thou canst heale me: If I be dead and buried, thou canst reuiue me: For thy mercy is muche more than myne iniquitie: Thou canst forgeue me more, than I can offend. Therfore (O Lord) doe not consider nor haue respect to the number of my sinnes, but accordinge to the greatnes of thy mercy forgeue me & haue mercie on me most wretched sinner. Saye vnto my soule, I am thy healthe, which sayedst I will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he lyue, and be conuerted, & turne to thee.
O Lorde bee not angry with me. I praye thee moste meeke father, for thy greate mercie. I most hum∣blie deseech thee, that thou bring me to the blysse that neuer shall cease. Amen. THESE PRAYERS FOLOVVINGE are to be sayed at Masse. Confiteor Deo omnipotenti. &c. Misereatur tui omnipotens Deus. &c. VVhen the Preist is at Confession. O Lord God almightye, longe suffering and much mercifull: I haue sinned without mesure, and still mine iniquities do dayly en∣crease: I haue prouoked thine an∣ger by cōmitting euill wilfully in thy sight, as it were determininge naughtinesse, and multiplyinge offences: I haue sinned (O Lord) I haue sinned: and I acknowledge mine iniquitie: But thou (O God)
of thy greate goodnesse hast pro∣mised to the penitente remission of their sinnes: I therefore now bow the knees of my arte, besee∣ching mercy of thee (O Lord) and willingly detecting and detesting the sinfulnes of my conscience. I say with the penitent Publicanne, saye this thrise: [*Be mercifull (O God) vnto me a sinner:*] Do not destroy me together with my ini∣quities, nor reserue my punishmēt to be perpetuall, but saue me thy vnworthy seruaunte, according to the multitude of thy mercies, and I shall prayse thee all the dayes of my lyfe, because all the powers of heauen prayse thee, and to thee belongeth honour and glorie for euer and euer. Amen. VVhen the Preist goeth to the Alter after Confession.
TAke from vs all our iniquities (O Lord) that we may be wor∣thy to enter into heauē: say this thrise [*Haue mercy*] on thy people (o Christ) whom thou haste rede∣med with thy preciouse blood. Lord haue mercy vpon vs. Christ &c. Lord &c. Amen. VVhen the Priest sayeth. Gloria in excelsis Deo GLorie be to God on highe, and in earthe peace to men of good will: we prayse the (o Lorde) we worship thee, we magntfie the, we adore the, we glorifie the, we thāke the for thy great glorye, o Lorde God, heauēly king, God the father almightie, Lorde Iesu Christe, the onely begottē sonne, and the holy ghost, Lord God, Lambe of God, sonne of the father, whiche takest away the sinnes of the world haue mercie vpon vs, who takest awaye
the sinnes of the worlde heare our prayers, who sittest on the right hand of God the father haue mer∣cy vpon vs, because thou only arte holy, thou onely arte Lorde, thou only art moste highest Iesus Christ with the holy ghost, in the glorie of God the father. Amen. ALmightie and euerlasting God I moste humbly beseche thee vouchsafe to looke vpon this con∣gregation, & mercifuly accept the prayers of thy churche, made vnto thee for vs all by the ministerie of this Priest, & therby, for thy mer∣cies, sake geue vs remission of all our sinnes, integretie of mynde, healthe of bodie, necessarie sustē∣tatiō, peace in our daies, temperate ayre, fruitefullnesse of the earthe, vnitie of faithe, rootinge out of all heresies, destruction of all wicked councels, encrease of true religiō,
earnest charitie, sincere deuotion in prayer, patiēce in troubles, Ioye in hope, and what soeuer is for our soules health nedefull and moste belonginge to thy glorie, through Iesus Christ our Lorde. Amen. At the Epistle. O God which hast fully accom∣plished in perfecte veritie that whiche the lawe dyd foretell, and vnder a wounderfull Sacramēt hast left vs the memorie of thy Passion: Graunt vs we beseche thee, so to worshipp the holy misteries of thy blessed body and bloode, that we may alwaye feele the fruite of thy redemption in vs who liuest and raignest with God the father and the holy ghost in perfecte vnitie for euer. Amen. After the Epistle. O Glorious Trinitie, o venera∣ble vnitie, by the we are crea∣ted,
to true eternitie: by the are we redemed, to true charitie, de∣fend, saue, deliuer: protect & clense all thy people, O God almightie: we adore thee O God the father: we praise thee O God the sōne: we thanke the o God the holie ghost to whome thre personnes and one God, be all honour and glorie for euer and euer. Amen. O Lord deale not with vs accor∣ding to our sinnes, nether re∣ward vs accordinge to our iniqui-quities, Lorde remembre not our former offences: but thy mercies spedely preuēt vs, because we haue greate neede thereof: helpe vs O God our sauiour, and for the glo∣rie of thy name deliuer vs, O lord, and be mercyfull to vs for thy name sake. After the Ghospell. Credo in Deum Patrem. &c.
GOod Lord graunt that we may all contine we in the true and sincere profession of the holy Ca∣tholicke fayth, to the ende of our lyues, and that we may therin fight a good battell, exercisinge our selues in all holinesse and godli∣nesse, to the end that after this lyfe we may receaue of thee O Lord a crowne of righteousnesse, which thou haste layed vp for all thine e∣lecte. Amen. At the offertorie. O lord holy father, who through Iesus Christ thy onely sonne, haste taught a newe oblation of a new testament, which the Church receauinge of thy holy Apostles, offereth through-out the whole world to thee O God the creator of all things, offring vnder a hid∣den misterie, the first fruites of thy creatures and giftes, to witt, bread
and wyne mingled withe water, streight-wayes to be consecrated into the flesh and bood of thy wel∣beloued sonne, that by the same oblation, he may represente him, whoe is the lyuely bread descen∣dinge from heauen, geuing lyfe to all the worlde, who by the bloode and water which flowed from his side did washe vs from our sinnes: vouchsafe almighty God merci∣fully to accept this oblatiō, which thy Catholicke Church offreth to thee by the Prieste for all thy peo∣ple, whom thou haste purchased with the pretiouse bloode of thy deare-beloued sonne our lord Ie∣sus Christ. Amen. VVhan the Priest turninge desireth the people to pray for him. OVr Lord send thee helpe from heauen and protect thee. Our Lord be mindfull of this thy sacri∣fice,
and receiue it at thy handes, to the laud and glorie of his name, & to the healthe and comfort of our soules, & the soules of all faithfull liuing and dead. Amen. O Lorde whiche Iustyfiest the wicked and gyuest life to the dead, quicken and raise me o Lord: gyue me compunction of hart and teares to my eyes, that I maye euer bewayle the wickednesse of my hart with humilytie. Let my prayer come before thy presece O Lord: Yf thou be angrie with me (o god) what helper shall I seeke? or who shall haue mercie vpō mine iniqui∣ties? remēber (O Lorde) that thou didst call the woman of Cananea & the Publicane to repētance, & didst receiue Peter after his teares. Re∣ceiue also my praiers (O God) my Sauiour, who liuest & raignest for euer. Amen.
VVhen the Priest saith. Sursum corda. O God father moste highe, lyfte vp our hartes and minds (I be∣seche the) from the cogitations of earthly cares, to the meditation of heauēly loyes, that we may thinke, and speake of thee onely, and maye in all our lyfe expresse thee, and af∣ter may enioy thee for euer. Amen. Then say vvith the Priest. IT is meete and iust, righte and necessarie that we alwayes and in all places geue thee thankes (O holy Lord) Father almighty, euer∣lastinge God, through Iesus Christ our Lorde: by whome the Angells praise thy Maiestie, the dominatiōs adore the, the powers tremble, the vertues of heauen and the heauens, and the blessed Seraphin with mu∣tual gladnesse gyue praise vnto the
with whome we beseche the that thou wilt commande our prayers to be receiued, sayeing with hum∣ble confession. Holie, Holie, Holie, Lord God of Sabaothe. The hea∣uens & earth are full of thy glorie. Glorie be to God on the highest, blessed is he that commeth in the name of our Lorde, O sanna in the highest. Amen. At the holy Canon. O Moste high Priest and true Bi∣shoppe Iesus Christ, who hast offred thy selfe to God thy father, (vpon the alter of the Crosse,) a pure and immaculate Hoste for vs wretched sinners, who hast left vn∣to vs thy flesh and bloode in a Sa∣crament which is made by thy di∣uine omnipotencie, & hast ordey∣ned this Sacrament, whiche thou commaundest to be offred in re∣membrance of our saluatiō, by the
same thy almightie power, I be∣seche thee, that thou wilt graunte me poore sinner, worthely to re∣member thy blessed Passion, and to resigne and consecrate my selfe, & all that I haue, wholly to thee, who art my Lorde and redemer, & to be present at this heauenly sa∣crifice with feare & reuerēce, with puretie of hart, & plenty of teares, with spirituall gladnesse, and hea∣uenly Ioye, lett my minde taste the swetenesse of thy blessed presence, and perceiue the troupes of thy saints and Angells which are about the. Amen. SPeake with me (o blessed Virgin Mary) that my prayers may take effect before thy sonne our Lorde and Sauiour Iesus Christ: Entreate for me O ye Apostles: make inter∣cession for me O ye Martirs: praye for me all ye Confessors and all the
holye companie of heauen: the prayers of such O Lord thou des∣pisest not: Inspire thē therefore to praye for me O Lord which liuest and raignest one God for euer and euer. Amen. Here meditate vvith your selfe till the Eleuation. ANd thinke your selfe vnwor∣thie to be present amonge so many thow sande of Angelles and saincts, as are there (although inui∣siblie to vs) tending vpō him (with all reuerence) whom we (through our sinnes) caused to die a moste bitter deathe, & whome (through our euell lyfe) we from time to ti∣me (as much as in vs lyeth) do cru∣cifie. Thinke how great his loue is to vs, which by this dayly oblation woulde preserue vs in that estate whervnto he once brought vs. These benefittes & others (as time
will suffer) considered: lett vs exa∣mine our selues & our behauiour to so gracious a Lord, and say with the Publicane, O God be merci∣full to me a sinner. O Moste mercifull Lorde Iesus Christ, in the remembrance of thy most blessed incarnatiō, death, Passion, wounds, sorrows, greeues, sighes, teares and drops of thy most precious bloode, and in remem∣brance of thy moste infinite loue to mankinde, and in the vnion of this oblation, and of that sacrifice by the whiche thou did offer thy selfe on the Altar of the Crosse, I doe offer my selfe to thy laud and glorie: humblie besechinge the to gyue to the lyuinge grace, to the deceassed peace and rest, and to vs all, mercie and life euerlasting. And I commende vnto the O Lord my soule and body, & all that is within
me, moste humblie beseching thee to haue mercy vpon me, and vpon all those whome I am bounde in respect of nature or frendshippe to praye for: as N. and N. &c. At the Eleuation of the Host. I Adore thee, & worshipp the (O Christ) with all praise & bene∣diction. For by thy bitter deathe & Passion, thou haste redemed my soule from endlesse afflictiō. Haue mercie vpon me deare Iesus, and graunte that thy deathe be neuer found frustrate in me, I most hum∣blie beseche thee. Amen. At the Eleuation of the Chalice. AL hayle moste precious and blessed blood, flowinge out of the side of my Lorde and Sauiour Iesus Christ, washinge awaye the spottes both of the olde and new offence: clense, sanctifie, and keepe my soule I beseche thee to euer∣lastinge
life. VVE thanke the O Lord God mercifull father, that thou did vouchesafe to send thine one∣lye begotten sonne Iesus Christ, into this wretched worlde to die for vs all, the most shamefull death of the Crosse, to the end that he myght offer him selfe to thee, through the holy ghoste, a moste pure, cleane, holy and acceptable sacrifice for our sinnes: and might so purge oure wicked conscience from all spottes of vncleanenesse. By this thy exceding great loue to vs, and by these moste cruell tor∣mentes of thy sonne our Sauiour: we moste humblie beseche the that thou wilt preserue in vs cōtinuallie those most noble fruites of his re∣demption, and make vs also daylie to die with him to the worlde, and to be crucified to the lustes & de∣sirs
of the fleshe, and to liue to thee onely all oure life: So that in the end we raigne eternallie with him: where thou with the same thy son∣ne, and the holy ghoste, liuest and raignest one true and lyuing God for euer and euer. Amen. VVhen the Priest sayeth the Pater no∣ster saye vvith him. LEtt vs pray. Being admonished by holesome preceptes, and being taught by diuine institution, we dare be bold to say. Pater noster qui es in caelis. &c. Aue Maria gratia plena. &c. VVhen the Preist kissethe the pax. O Lambe of God, that takest awaye the sinnes of the world haue mercie vpon vs. O Lambe of God that &c. haue mercie vpon vs. O Lambe of God that &c. Gyue vs peace and quietnes. Deliuer vs we beseech thee (O
Lord) from all our euills paste, pre∣sente, & to come: and by the inter∣cession of thy blessed and glorious mother the virgin Mary, & of thy holy Apostles Peter & Paule, & of all thy saincts, mercifully graunte vs peace in our dayes, that we be∣ing aided by the helpe of thy mer∣cye, may continually be free from sinne, and safe from all parturbati∣on of mynde and bodye. Amen. VVhen you kisse the Pax. GEeue peace in our dayes (O Lorde) because their is no o∣ther that fighteth for vs, but onely thou O Lorde God. VVhen the Priest receyueth. O Sacred feast wherein Christ is receyued, the memorie of his passion is reuiued, the minde is re∣plenished with grace, and a pledge is geuen vs of the glory to come.
O Mostmercifull Lord God fa∣ther of mercye, graunte I be∣seech thee, that this vnbloody Sa∣crifice of the blessed bodye and blood of thy sonne our Lord Iesus Christ, which here & euery-where throughout thy holie Churche, is offred, to the great benefit of vs al, (for a cōtinuall & daylie memorie & thankes geuing) may entreat for vs at thy handes, mercie & remissiō of all our sinnes. Amen. Then blessing your selfe saye. THe grace of our Lorde Iesus Christ, the vertue of his moste gloriouse Passion, the signe of the holye Crosse, the integritie of the moste blessed Virgin Marie, the blessing of all Saints, & the prayers of all the Elect of God, be betwene me and all my ennemies, visible & inuisible, now and in the howre of my death.
In nomine patris & filii & spiritus sancti. Amen. A prayer after the diuine Sacrifice of the Masse. Cornelius Donters in his contemplati∣ons of the passion. O Moste louinge Lorde and al∣mighty God, I beseech thee most humbly vouchsafe to receiue for acceptable, the diuine seruice which I haue done this day, to thy honour and glorie, and to the ho∣nour of thy blessed mother, and to the honour of all saintes, whose feasts we celebrate in remission of our sinnes, and for all our frendes and benefactours, aswell those that liue, as those that be departed: most earnestlye requestinge, that thou wouldest louinglye receyue these our deuotions, in this time of thy diuine seruice, and to forgyue me mercifully, that which I haue done
without deuotion, in dedes, words, and thoughtes. Gyue vs thy grace alwayes to walke in thy holy com∣maundementes, and to serue thee loyally, to the ende thou maist be honored & glorified in vs. Amen. A prayer to recommend your selfe to God. In Eucholo Ecclesiast. O Lorde I recommend into the hands of thy inestimable mer∣cy, my soule, my body, my senses, my wordes and my thoughtes, my counsayle, my workes, and all the necessities of my body and soule, my entring and goinge foorth, my fayth and my conuersation, the course and end of my lyfe, the day and houre of my departinge, my death, the reste and resurrection of my soule with thy saints and thine elected. Amen.
A prayer to be sayed before a Catho∣licke Sermon or exhortation. O Lorde Iesus Christ, open the eyes and eares of my harte, to the ende I may heare and vnder∣stand thy holy worde, and to obey it, according to thy holy will. I am a pylgrime vpon earth, keepe not hidden thy cōmaundements from me. Open myne eyes that I may vnderstand the maruelouse things of thy lawe. Gyue me wisdome, to lighten my vnderstanding, to purifie my hart, to inflame my affection, that I may loue thee and knowe thee, in all and aboue all thinges. Amen. The ende of the second Chapter.
THE THIRDE CHAP∣TER CONTEYNINGE HOL∣some prayers for remission of sinnes. An humble bevvaylinge of sinnes for a sinner that hath compunction. Ioan. Fab. in precat. Christian. O Most heauenly kinge and moste mercyfull Lorde and Sauioure Christ Iesu, here do I come to thee beinge verye fainte with the infirmitie of sinne, and far from the perfection which thou requirest to be in me. My consciēce doth dayely accuse me, and more and more I finde the imperfection and fraveltie of my flesh. I do continually offende thy Maiestie. All the imaginations of my harte, all my words and deedes
whatsoeuer I do, or leaue vndone, whether I eate, drincke, sleepe, or watche, all my thoughtes, all my senses are wholye bent to wicked∣nes: whether shall I turne me O Lorde? Thou requirest of me inte∣gritie of life, and iustice, and that I shoulde walke in thy holie com∣maundementes, wherto thou pro∣misest mee thy gratious helpe: But O Lorde I feele my owne will so peruerse & ouer-thwart that I can not hartelie wishe and desire those thinges whiche be requisite to my saluatiō: I haue no will to bewayle my sinnes, ne yet repente my wic∣kednes from the bottome of my harte: I am so caried awaye with the vanitie of this life, that I doo quite forgette the benefites of thy death and Passion, whiche thou of thy bountiouse liberalitie bestowed vpon me moste vyle and abhomi∣nable
wretche. My offences bee so manie in number, and so grieuous, O most gracious God, (wherwith I offend thy Diuine maiestie,) that were not thy most mercifull pitie, I had bene longe agoo drowned in the depe dongeon of euerlastinge tormente. VVherfore I most hum∣blie thāke thy vnspeakeable good∣nes & mercie, that I am not alredie sounkē into the botomles pitte of hell. But what shall I doo? shall I despayer? shall I saye with cursed Cain the murtherer of his brother, my offences are greater thē can be forgyuen me? No: God forbyd that I shoulde haue anye suche thoughte: no but this will I say, my God is mercifull and full of pitie, he is my comforte, my strengthe & consolatiō, my refuge, & defence, he will not despyse the worke of his owne hd, n will caste from
afore him me poore wretched sin∣ner: wherfore moste mercifull Sa∣uiour, I come to the, openinge in thy sight the thoughtes of my har∣te, for thou neuer fayleste me with thy graciouse helpe. I cōfesse most mercifull Lorde before thee, my weakenes, acknowledginge my owne imperfectiō, and bewaylinge the multitude of my offences. O euerlasting and endles swetenes, o vnspeakeable mercie and moste louinge Father, I haue sundrie ti∣mes, and manies wayes offended against heauen & thee, so that I am not worthie to be reputed for thy childe. For I haue abused thy fa∣therlie clemencie & mercifull pi∣tie to mine vtter vndoing. Accepte me o Lorde for one of thy hyred seruauntes, and feede mee with the comfortable bread of thy heauen∣lie grace, that I beinge refreshed
therwith, maye humblie serue the in thy house, in cleanes of lyfe, and puritie of conscience, all the dayes of my life. O sweete Sauiour Christ I humblie beseche the for thy bit∣ter Passion & blessed mothers sake, by that Marie Magdalene, whiche soo feruentlie loued thee, whose sinnes all thoughe they were ma∣nie, yet thou forgauest them, and madest her pertaker of thy heauen∣lie glorie, receyue mee vnder the wynges of thy mercie, & take com∣passion vpon mee. Take from me the fonde loue of this transitorie world, & quenshe in me all fillthie lustes of the fleshe, and enkindle in my soule a burninge desire of thy gloriouse blesse. Graunte mee al∣mightie God true repentaunce for my sinnes: graunt me thy grace to lamēte in mee my wante of sorowe for my offences: make my harte
pure & nette that my soule beinge cleane, maye vtterlie abhorre and hate sinne. Graunte mee reconci∣liation to thee, throughe the com∣fortable Sacramente of penaunce: & to bee receiued into the blessed cōpanie of thy chosen. Gyue mee an earneste desire to amende my life, that I beinge holden vp withe thy grace, may continue in holines of lyfe to the ende of the same, and lastelie may attaine to thy heauen∣lie tabernakle, where I maye praise and honoure thee, world without ende. Amen. A prayer of penitent sinner acknovv∣leginge his vilenesse in the sight of God. Imit Christ. lib. 3. ca. 9. SHall I Lorde Iesu dare speake to the that am but dust & ashes? verelye yf I thinke my selfe any better then ashes and duste, thou stndest against mee, and aso mine
owne sinnes beare witnes againste mee, that I may not with saye it: but yf I despyse my selfe, and set my selfe at naught, and thinke my selfe but dust and ashes, as I am, then thy grace shalbe nyghe vnto mee, and the light of true vnderstandinge shall enter into my harte, so that all presūption & pryde in mee, shalbe drowned in the vale of meeknes, throughe perfecte knowledge of my wretchednesse. I haue lost thee, & also my selfe by inordinate loue that I haue had to my selfe, and in seking of thee againe, I haue found bothe thee and mee, and therefore will I more depelye from hence∣fourthe sett my selfe at naughte, & more diligently seeke thee, than I haue done in time paste: for thou Lord Iesu, thou doest to me aboue all my merites, and aboue all that I can aske or disire. But blessed bee
thou in all thy workes, for though I be vnworthye any good thinge, yet thy goodnes neuer ceaseth to do well to me, and also to many other which be vnkinde to thee, and that are turned righte far from thee. Turne vs Lorde threfore to thee againe, that we may hencefor∣ward be louinge, thank full, meeke and deuout to thee: for thou arte our health, our vertue, and all our strength in body and in soule, and none but thou. To thee therefore be ioye and glory euerlastingly in the blisse of heauen. Amen. A confession of a mans ovvne vngrate∣fulnes tovvardes God, vvhereupon the sinner beinge turned vnto pennaunce, prescribeth to himselfe a certaine course of lyfe. Margarita euangelica, ca. 3. li. 4.
O God I am the prodigall child, which hath sundrie wayes of∣fended thee, who being created of thee, in the state of innocencye, haue notwithstandinge that, with∣out all shame most vily gyuen my selfe ouer to all diuelish and lewde conuersation. Thou wast crucified and did dest humble thy selfe for me, and I haue swelled vppe with pryde. Thou haft shewed thy selfe naked and nedy, and couetousnes hath ouerwhelmed me: Thou suf∣fredst smarte and payne, but I lyue in wanton delicatenes: Thou wast serued with esyll and gall, but I lye in bestely drounkēnes: Thou wast alwayes well occupied in vertu∣ouse exercise, but I alwayes idle and neuer well occupied: Thou didest pray for thine enemies, and I haue bene so far from the pray∣inge for mine enemies, that I care
little for my frendes. But alas what shall I do? shall I fall in despayre? No, God forbyd. Iron that is rustie may be clensed & skowred cleane from rust, and I will cleanse my selfe from the ruste of conscience with contrition, cōfession, & satis∣faction. And as I haue through pryde lyfte vp my selfe, so will I plucke downe my harte by humi∣litie, & become a mockingestocke and skorne to the worlde: And be∣cause I will auoyde couetousenes: I will quite abandone all desire of worldlie and transitorie thinges, & against the wantōones of the fleshe, I will hamper my fleshe, with con∣tinuall sobbing and sighing for my sinnes. By the burning compassion of thy brotherlie loue, and feruent charitie and the denyinge of thine owne will, & for thy bitter Passion haue mercie vpon mee. Amen.
An humble confession of sinnes vvith desire of mercy and grace. O Lorde creator of heauen and earth, king of kinges and Lord ouer all dominion & power, which haste made mee of naught euen vnto thine owne likenesse by me∣morie, vnderstandinge, and will, wherby I may knowe, worshippe, and loue thee, & hast also redemed mee with thy most precious bloud, whome I detestable wretche and wicked creature am not worthye once to name, muche lesse to call vpon thee: the rather, for that I do acknowllege, & confesse my selfe. I haue bene & am an horrible & gre∣uouse sinner: & haue so haynouslie transgreffed in the sight of thy Di∣uine maiestie, that I ā not worthy to be called thy sōne, no not so much as to haue the name of thy meanest or simplest seruant, nether yet that
the earthe should beare my foote∣steppes, but rather for my wicked∣nes to open her mouth to deuoure and swallowe me vppe, to be eter∣nallye tormented in the bottom∣lesse pyt of hell. How muche lesse then maye I presume to offer vppe vnto thee anye sacrifice of prayse or thankes geuing? For if thou hast not spared the naturall braunshes & creatures of so great excellēcie, that is to say, Lucifer & his wicked fauourers, but for the offences of one rebelliouse & proude thought and that scarse of so longe conti∣nuance as the minute of an howre, thou haste throwen them downe from the high habitatiō of heauen & euerlasting ioye & felicitie, (vn∣to whiche they were created,) into the vale of euerlastinge darcknes, there to be eternallie tormented in the flames of vnquenshable fire,
Alas, what shall I then moste wret∣ched sinner saye, or what iuste excuse may I alledge, whiche haue not offended in one sinne onely, but in many, and that in heapinge sinne vpon sinne from daye to y without anye repentaunce? But yet most merciful father because thou arte the father of mercie, and that it is thy propertie alwayes to take mercie, & despisest not the sighing of suche as are vnfeynedlie cotrite in harte, and willeste not the death of a sinner, but rather that he maye be turned againe vnto thee & lyue: therfore I cheeflie hauinge assured confidence in thy superabundaunt mercie, doo humblie prostrate my selfe before thy mercie-seate, in∣stantlie beseeching thee to graunt mee pardon, and remission of my wretched wickednes, and greate offences, with which I haue so gre∣uouslie
offēded thy eternal good∣nes, wittinglye or ignorauntlie, as thou beste knoweste, from the be∣ginninge of my lyfe vntill this pre∣sente, and speciallye with suche a person, in such a place, these manye times, in this manner, this sugge∣stion mouinge me, this longe con∣tinuing without repentaunce, and by my euill example geuinge such and such occasion to sinne. Here call to minde particulerly in what thou haste offended God: VVith whom thou hast sinned: VVhom thou haste in∣iuryed: How often, and how longe thou haste continued Of all whiche, moste mercifull Father, it maye please thee to per∣don mee moste fillthie sinner, and abhominable lyuer, and also all other sinners whiche either I haue entised vnto sinne, or gyuen exā∣ple of sinning, & likewise all those whiche haue gyuen mee occasion
of sinninge: absoluinge and deliue∣ring vs from the grieuous heauye bandes thereof, throughe the mer∣cifull merites of the moste bitter Passion of thy onely sonne and our redemer Iesus Christe, who suffered moste cruell and vyle deathe to saue sinners. For otherwise what shoulde become of mee in that moste dreadfull iudgmente daye, when the booke of conscience shalbe opened, whē it shalbe sayed of me, beholde the persone and his woorkes: at which time all the ini∣quitie that I haue committed, from the first daye of my lyfe, both in harte, worde, and woorke, shalbe made open to heauen and earth, & all those my sinnes shalbe there presente to accuse mee: moreouer the dyuell and conscience redye to beare wittnes therevnto, allso thou my wratthfull iudge vppon
their iuste accusation, thy iustice enforcinge the same, redy to gyue the terrible sentence of eternall death againste mee, and finallie the horrible pitte of hell continuallie gaping and opening his vnsatiable mowthe, desyrous to swallow mee, the dredfull consideration wherof would make mee, O Lord, to despaire, if I didde not call to minde the infinitenesse of thy mer∣cie, my moste mercifull redeemer: For the sinnes of men, be they ne∣uer so manie, are to be numbred: but thy mercie Lorde God is infi∣nite and without numbre, and thy mercie great aboue all thy woor∣kes: for thy excedinge great mer∣cie throughe effusion of thy moste precious bloude and voluntarie death, hath purchased pardon, and forgiuenes for vs, before wee were suters for it, yea when wee were
thyne enemies, and gonne farre awaye frō thee, howe muche more rather shall wee obtaine it, when wee through thy grace now being reconsiled vnto thee, with our vn∣feined repētante hartes incessantlie doo sue, and with bytter teares humblie craue it? VVherefore O Lorde of mercie, deale not with mee after my desertes, but accor∣dinge to thy great mercie: remēbre not, sweete Iesu, thy seuere Iustice against the sinner, but be mindfull of thy longe sufferinge goodnes towardes thy creature. Remembre not thy wrathe against the offen∣dour, but be mindfull of thy mer∣cie towardes the repentant sinner. Remembre not my disobedien∣ce whiche hath prouoked the, but respecte him which in great sorow and heuines of harte, for his offēces calleth vpon thee. For what is Ie∣sus
but a Sauioure: Therefore O Iesu for thine owne sake I beseech thee, rise vppe to helpe mee, and say vnto my soule, I am thy sauing health. I presume muche of thy goodnes O merclfull Lord being there vnto imboldened, forasmuch as thou thy selfe teachest mee to aske, to seeke, & to knocke. VVher∣fore beinge admonished through thy teachinge, I aske, I seeke, and I knocke, and thou Lorde whiche commaundest mee to aske, graunte me to obteine: and thou whiche counsaylest mee to seeke, graunte mee to finde. And thou which tea∣chest mee to knocke, open vnto mee at my knockings, & make mee beinge sicke in soule, to be whole: restore mee againe beinge as one forlorne, and a caste-awaye: Raise me vppe beinge deade throughe sinne, from death, and vouchsafe
to gouerne and directe all my sen∣ses, thoughtes, woordes, and actes, so as they maye be pleasaunt in thy sight, that frō henffourthe I maye trulie serue thee, lyue to thee, and cōmitte my selfe wholy vnto thee, and to delight in nothinge, but in thee and for thee. For I knowe O Lord, that forasmuche as thou hast made mee, Lowe vnto thee my selfe: and because thou haste rede∣med mee, and wast made man for mee, I owe vnto thee more then my selfe, if I had de it, by so muche as thou art more woorthie then I, for whome, thou being the sonne of God and second person in Tri∣nitie, wouchsafest to suffre for my sake most grieuous tormentes and shameful deathe. Yet Lo, more thē my selfe, I haue not to gyue, nei∣ther yet I can gyue that vnto thee without thee, wherefore doe thou
receiue mee, & draw mee through thy grace vnto thee, that I maye aswell bee thine by loue and imi∣tation, as I am thine by calling and creation. VVhich liuest & reignest for euer and euer: vnto whome be all honour & glorie world without ende. Amen. A prayer for a penitent sinner after his relapse or falling to sinne agayne. Antonius Hemert. in Speculo perfecti∣onis. O Lorde Iesu Christ I vnhappie sinner most vile and vnthank∣full: Lo, now againe I have offen∣ded thee, by this worde N. or by this sinne N. I haue dishonoured thy maiestie, & haue reiected thee, which aboue all thinges ought to be to me most deare and agreable. Thou knowest (O Lord) how muche I am yet Carnall, how litle mortyfied, how full of euell con∣cupiscence,
how I am flootinge in externall pleasures, how often en∣wrapped in vayne fansyes, how ne∣gligent in spirituall exercises, how light in laughing and dissolution, how harde & difficult in wepinges and cōpunction, how euell aduised in speakinge, how impatient in ke∣pinge silence, how much gyuen to eating and drinckinge, how deafe and dull in hearinge godly admo∣nitiōs, how attētife to babling, how sluggish to heare dyuine seruice, how sodaynlie I am troubled and letted to doe good, how manye things I purpose wherof I accom∣plishe none. O my Lord my God, I am full of Sorowe & grief, for that I haue sinned, & also for that I haue too-to litle compunction: I desire with all my harte, that thou wouldeste wounde my hart with the sorowe
of moste perfecte contrition. And for asmuch, as perdition and of∣fence proceedeth from me, and grace and mercy from thee, I pur∣pose from this time forwards (be∣inge assisted by they grace) from hence foorth to keepe my selfe, from all misdeedes, and to auoyde all occasions of sinne. Amen. A moste profitable protestation to be made vvhyles vve are yet in healthe and prosperitie, Cornelius Donters in his contemplati∣ons vpon the passion. O Lord God almighty to whom all thinges are manifeste and knowne: O eternall Sapiēce which preserueth all things, I poore wret∣ched creature in despite of mine enemy make protestation, whyles I am in good health and perfecte memory, wherein I stande at this
present through thy grace, that al∣though it happen or come to passe that by any temptation, illusion, deceipte or variation comming of griefe of sicknes, or by weakenes of body, or by any other occasi∣on whatsoeuer, I come in daunger of my soule or preiudice to my sal∣uation, or in errour of the Catho∣licke fayty in the which I am rege∣nerated in the fountayne of Bap∣tisme, there promised to resiste all temptations of the deuill and all errours of fayth: and at this pre∣sent I do resiste and renounce as I did then, and then as now, protest∣inge moste feruently with all my harte to lyue and dye in the fayth of our mother the holy Church thy spouse: and in witnesse of this protestation and confession I offer (the articles of our holy christian fayth which thy holye Apostles
hath lefte vs) in recommendinge vnto thee my fayth, lyfe and death. Amen. I beleeue in God the Father &c. The ende of the third chapter. THE FOVRTHE CHAP∣TER CONTEYNINGE VERY goodly prayers, for cōfort, strēgth and deliuery (by Gods assistance) in all sorowes, tribulations, afflicti∣ons and aduersities. VVhen thou feelest thy selfe tempted, saye as folovveth. Imitatio Christi li. 3. ca. 7. O Thou Satan, the deuyll, enemie of mankynde, I adiure thee by the name of our Lorde God, and by the signe of the holy crosse ✚ that thou departe and neuer here∣after
enter into me. O thou wicked spirit auoide from mee, & be thou ashamed for thou arte foule and ouglie, that wouldest bringe suche thinges into my minde. Goe from mee thou false deceyuer of man∣kinde, thou shalte have noo parte in mee for my Sauiour Iesus stan∣deth by mee as a mightie warriour and a strong champion, and thou shalte flye awaye to thy confusion. I had leuer suffer the moste cruell death then to consente to thy ma∣licious stirringes: be still therefore thou cursed fyende, and cease thy malice, for I shall neuer assente to thee, though thou vexe mee never so much, our Lorde is my lighte & my healthe, whome shall I dreade? and he is the defender of my life, what shall I feare? Truelie though an hoste of men aryse against mee, my harte shall not dread them, for
whie? God is my helper and my redeemer. Amen. A prayer of any captiue accordinge to the forme of Dauid, vvhen he vvas hid in the caue. Psal. 142. VVIth my voice I cry to thee, afore thee I open my la∣mentations, in thy bosome I dis∣close the secrete word of my hart, my dolours and griefes I shew vn∣to thee, my harte is almoste lyke to bruste, so great is my discomfiture. Thou knowest all my dealinges O Lorde: and thou seest well ynough how the vngodly haue layed their snares for me. Lo I caste mine eye on this side, and that side, aswell on my frends as kinsfolkes, but all is in vaine, none of them al helpeth me. And againe I can not runne away, I am so loadē & ouer charged with irons. O Lorde my maker and fa∣ther, now vnto thee I cry, thou art
mine onely Shot-anker, defence & helpe. Thou art my porciō & heri∣tage which I possesse in al coūtries, yea, I haue none other possession but thee onely: To thee therefore I sticke altogether, knowinge cer∣tainly that nothing can goe amisse with me. Consider then my lamen∣table complaynte, beholde how I am brought low: From the cruell pursuers which be much more of power than I am, defend me: Deli∣uer me from this prison, and hor∣rible feare of sinne and death, that I may sette out thy name, all thy sainctes as well Angells as men, make sute for me, desiring thee for my comfort. They shall not cease vntill they obtaine their requeste, I meane vntill thou forgyue me my sinnes, and sende me comfort in this distres with pacience and lōg suffering. This once obtayned,
the godly folke shal flocke aboute me, & shall not stynt to gyue thee thankes, when they see that thou riddest me forth of these dangers, to the highe prayse of thy name, Lorde be mercyfull vnto vs, take part with vs, then we shall for euer lyfte vp, and magnifie thy glorious name. Amen. A prayer of Iob, in his moste grieuous aduersitie and losse of goodes. Iob. 1. NAked I came oute of my mo∣thers womb, and naked shall I returne agayne, our Lorde gaue, & our Lorde hath taken awaye, as it hath pleased our Lord, so is it done nowe blessed be the name of our Lorde. Amen. A prayer in trouble of conscience. Psal. 134. LOrde heare my prayer, receyue my fupplicacion, harken to my cōplaint for thy righteousnes. Try
not the lawe with thy seruaunt, for trulye then shall no lyuynge man be founde vngyltie, yea, not one of thy saintes should escape quitte at thy barre, vnlesse thou graunte him thy gracious pardon, in so∣much, euen the very starres be not pure and fautles afore thee, in the Angels thou foundest sin. Nowe mine enemies hunte for my soule, they beate & dryue it downe, they thruste it into darcke dungeons, where felons conuicte and con∣dempned to death, were wonte to be kept, my spirit is sorowfull, my hart is heauie and sadd with in my breast, to thee I holde vp my hādes, requiring the of mercy. For lyke as the dry ground lōgeth for a show∣er of raigne, so my soule thinketh long till it hath thy helpe and suc∣cour, heare me spedely: if thou do not? I am in dispaire, my spirites is
al werie of this bondage. I haue bid my life fare-well: VVherfore O God, hide not thy face, that I be not lyke to those that be hurled into the pyt of damnatiō: after this night of misery ouerpassed, let the pleasaunt morninge of comfort luckyly shyne vpō me, that by time I may heare and fele thy goodnes, for in thee is all my trust: pointe me the waye, that I shall walke in, for yf thou be not my guide, I must nedes wander and straye out of the waye. To thee Lorde I lift vp my soule, and that with all mine harte I besech the, take me forth of mine enemies handes. Thou onely art my succour and sauegarde, teache me to worke what soeuer shall be thy pleasure, for thou art my God. Let thy good spirite conducte me into the land of the lyuing, encou∣rage my spirite for thy names sake:
furth of all these troubles, for thy righteousnes delyuer me: cōfound mine enemies as thou art gracious & fauourable towardes me. Those that will worke me sorowe and griefe, plucke forth of the waye, for I am thy seruaunt, and for thy sake suffer I all this hurlye-burlye. As thou art God, so helpe thou me. Amen. A prayer for patience. De Imit. Christ. li. 3. cap 20. O Lorde, for as muche as thou was founde paciente in thy life, fulfillinge in it moste speciallie the will of thy father, it is requisite that I most wretched sinner should behaue my selfe pacientelye after thy will in all thinges, and as longe as thou wilt, that I for myne owne health beare the burthen of this corruptible life: for thoughe this lyfe be tediouse and as heauie a
burthen to the soule, yet neuerthe∣lesse it is now through thy grace made very meritoriouse, and by example of thee, and of thy holy Sainctes it is now made to weake persons more patient, clearer, and also much more comfortable then it was in the olde Lawe, when the gates of heauen were shut, and the way thyther warde was darke, and so fewe did couet to seeke it. And yet they that were then righteouse and were ordeyned to be saued, before thy blessed passiō and death mighte neuer haue come thyther. O what thankes am I bounde ther∣fore to yelde to thee, that so lo∣uingly haste vouchsafed to shewe to me, and to all faythfull people that will folow thee, the very true and straight way to thy kingdome. Thy holy lyfe is our way, and by thy pacience we walke to thee that
arte our heade and gouernoure. But that thou Lord haddest gonne before and shewed vs the waye, who woulde haue endeuored him self to haue folowed: O how many should haue taried behynd if they had not seene thy blessed exam∣ple going before, we be yet slowe and dull, although we haue seene and hard thy signes and doctrines: what should we then haue bene if we had seene no such light goinge before vs? Truely we should haue fixed our mind and our loue who∣ly in worldly thinges. Make ther∣fore O Lorde that possible to me by grace, which is vnpossible by nature. Thou knoweste well O Christ, that I can suffer little, and that I am anone caste downe with a little aduersitie: wherefore I be∣seech thee, that trouble and aduer∣sitie may hereafter for thy names
sake, be beloued and desired of me. For truelye to suffer and to be vexed for thee, is very good, and profitable, to the healthe of my soule. A prayer agaynst the enemies of Christs trueth. Psal. 139. DElyuer me (O Lord) from the vngodly & stiffe necked per∣sones, for thou seest howe in their hartes they imagyn mischiefe, and haue greate pleasure to picke qua∣rels, their tonges bee more sharper then anie Adders stingge, & vnder their lyppes lyeth poyson of Ad∣ders, but O mercifull Lorde let me not fall into their handes that they handle me not after their owne lustes. Thou onely arte my God, thou muste heare my piteous cōplainte, Lorde that rulest all together, that arte the strength and power of my
defence, be thou as a helmet vpon my head, whensoeuer the vngodly shall assaulte mee, neither suffer thou not the wicked thus to pro∣sper in their matters. Suffer not their canckarde and malicious sto∣mackes to increase and spitefullye to reuile me. Looke vpō thy poore wretches cause, and ryd me out of these dayely greuaunces, then shall I with an vp right hearte and plea∣saunt countenaunce extoll & ma∣gnifie thy holy name. Amen. A prayer vvherin is desired freedome of the minde and auoydance of vvorld∣ly desires. Imitat o Christ. li. 3. ca. 30. I Besche thee moste meeke and mercyfull Lorde Iesu, that thou keepe me from the busines and cares of the worlde, and that I be not taken with the voluptuouse
pleasure of the worlde, nor of the fleshe, and that in lykewise thou preserue me from all hindraunce of the soule, that I be not broken with ouermuch heuines, sorowe, nor worldly dreade. And by these petitions I aske not onely to be deliuered from such vanities as the world desireth, but also from such miseries as grieue the soule of me thy seruaunte with the common malediction of mankinde, that is, with corruption of the bodelye feeling wherwith I am so grieued and letted, that I may not haue li∣bertie of spirite to beholde thee when I would. O Lord God thou art sweetenesse vnspeakable: turne into bitternesse to me all fleshely delightes, which would drawe me from the loue of eternall thinges, to the loue of a shorte and a vile delectable pleasure: Lette not
flesh and bloud ouercome me, nor the worlde with his shorte glorie deceyue me, nor the fiende with his thousand-foulde craftes sup∣plante me, but gyue me ghostly strength in resistinge, pacience in suffering, and constancie in perse∣uering. Gyue me also for al world∣ly consolations, the moste sweete consolation, of the holy Ghoste, and for all fleshly loue sende into my soule the loue of thy holye name. Loe, meate, and drinke, clo∣thinge, and all other necessaries for the bodye are paynefull and troublesome to a feruent spirite, which if it mighte, would alwayes rest in God and in ghostly things, graunte me therefore grace to vse such bodely necessaries tempo∣rally, and that I be not deceyued with ouermuch desire to them. To forsake all thinges it is not lawfull,
for the bodely kinde must be pre∣serued, and to seeke superfluous thinges more for pleasure than for necessitye, thy holy lawe prohibi∣teth, for so the flesh would rebell against the spirite: wherfore Lord I beseech thee that thy hande of grace maye so gouerne me, and teach me that I exceede not by a∣ny maner of superfluitie. A prayer before vve take in hande a∣ny Iourney. By Arnould Sobin. O Good God whom it pleased to direct Abraham, Iacob and young Tobias in their peregrina∣tions, and brought thē in health & safety into their country: Graunt I besech thee to be my direct our in this Iourney, which I would in no respect vndertake (much lesse fol∣lowe and finishe) if I knew it any
waye contrarye to thy holy will: Therefore (O Lord) gyue me Ra∣phael for my conductor, to whose custodye I may be deliuered, and thereby be broughte with happy successe to the accomplishinge of that worke whereunto I prepare and dispose my selfe. Directe my vnderstandinge (O Lorde) to the ende that my feete no where straye from the obserua∣tions of thy holye commaunde∣mentes: In the name of thy welbe∣loued sonne Iesus Christe our re∣deemer, whoe with thee in vnitie of the holy Ghost lyueth & reig∣neth eternally. Amen. Here folovveth (for the vse of those that are desirous to rede latine prayers) cer∣tayne verses collected by Sir Thomas Moore foorth of Dauids psalter: in the time of his trouble and persecution for the Catholicke faith: conteining an inuo∣cation
to God for his helpe against temp∣tation, vvith an insultatiō against vvic∣ked spirites, vpon hope and confidence in God. IMPLORATIO DIVINI AVXILII contra entaonem, cum insultatione eontra Daemones exspe & fiducia in Deum. DOmine quid multiplicati sunt, qui tribulāt me? mul∣ti insurgunt aduersum me. Multi dicunt animae meae, non est salus ipsi in deo eius. Tu autem domine susceptor meus es, gloria mea, & exaltans caput meum. Ego dormiui, & soporatus sum: & exur∣rexi quia dominus suscepit me. Non timebo millia populi circundantis me, exurge domine, saluum me fac deus meus. Psa. 5. Domine deduc me in iustitia tua, propter inimicos meos dirige in cō∣spectu tuo viam meam. Quoniam non est in ore eorum veritas, cor eorum vanum est. Sepulchrum patens est guttur eorum, linguis suis dolose agebant iudica illos
deus. Decidant a cogitationibus suis: secundū multitudinē impietatum eorum expelle eos, quoniam irritauerunt te domine. Et laetentur omnes qui sperant in te, in aeternum exultabunt, & habitabis in eis. Domine vt scuto bonae voluntatis tuae coronasti nos. Psa. 7. Domine dus meus in te spera∣ui, saluum me fac ex omnibus perse quē∣tibus me, & libera me. Nequando rapiat vt leo animam meam, dum nō est qui redimat, ne{que} qui saluum faciat. Exurge domine in ira tua, & exaltare in finibus inimicorum meorum. Persequatur inimicus animam meam vt comprehendat, & conculcet in terra vitā meam, & gloriam meam in puluerem deducat. Arcum suum tetendit, & parauit illum: & in eo parauit vasa mortis, sagittas suas ardentibus effecit. Ecce parturit iniustitiam, concepit do∣lorem, & peperit iniquitatem. Lacum apperuit, & effodit eum, incidit in foueam quam fecit. Conuertetur dolor eius in caput eius, &
in verticem ipsius iniquitas eius descen∣det. Confitebor domino secundum iusticiam eius: & psallam nomini domini altissimi. Psa 4. In pace in idipsum dormiam & requiescam. Quoniam tu domine singulariter in spe constituisti me. Psa 9. Miserere mei domine, vide hu∣militatem meam de inimicis meis. Et sperent in te, qui nouerunt nomen tuum domine, quoniam non dereliquisti quaerentes te domine. Et factus est dominus refugium pauperi, adiutor in oportunitatibus in tribula∣tione. Vt quid domine recessisti longe, despi∣cis in oportunitatibus in tribulatione? Quo niam non in finem obliuio erit pau∣peris, patientia pauperum non peribit in finem. Exurge domine deus, exaltetur manus tua, ne obliuiscar is pauperum. Tibi derelictus est pauper, orphano tu eris adiutor. Desiderium pauperum exaudiuit do∣minus: praeparationem cordis eorum au∣diuit auris tua.
Dominus in tēplo sancto suo, dominus in cae lo sedes eius. Oculi eius in pauperem respiciunt: pal∣pebre eius interrogant filios hominum. Propter miseriam inopum & gemitum pauperum nunc exurgam, dicit domi∣nus. Domine deus meus in te speraui, saluum me fac ex omnibus persequentibus me & libera me. Psa. 12. Vsquequo domine obliuisceris me in finem? vsquequo auertis faciem tuam a me? Quandiu ponam confilia in anima mea: dolorem in corde meo per diem? Vsquequo exaltabitur inimicus meus super me? respice, & exaudi me domine deus meus. Illumina oculos meos, ne vnquā obdor∣miam in morte: nequando dicat inimi∣cus meus, praeualui aduersus eum. Qui tribulant me, exultabunt si motus fuero: ego aut em in misericordia tua speraui. Exultabit cor meum in salutari tuo cantabo domino qui bona tribuit mihi, & psallam nomini domini altissimi. Psa. 15. Conserua me domine, quonia
speraui in te, dixi domino, deus meus es tu, quoniam bonorū meorum non eges. Psa. 16. Perfice gressus meos in semitis tui: vt non mouantur vestigia mea. Mirifica misericordias tuas, qui saluos facis sperantes in te. Psa. 15. Prouidebam dominum in con∣spectu meo seper, qui a dextris est mihi, ne commouear. Propter hoc laetatum est cor meum, & ex∣ultauit lingua mea, insuper & caro mea requiescet in spe. Psas. 17. Tu illuminas lucernā meam do∣mine deus meus, illumina tenebras meas. Quoniam in te eripiar à temptatione, in deo meo transgrediar murum. Deus meus impolluta via eius, eloquia domine igne examinata, protector est omnium sperantium in se. Quoniam quis deus praeter dominum, aut quis deus praeter deum nostrum. Psa 21. Ego autē sum vermis & non ho∣mo, opprobrium hominum, & abiectio plebis. Omnes videntes me deriserunt me, lo∣cuti sunt labijs, & mouerunt caput. Tu es qui extraxisti me de ventre, spes mea ab vberibus matris meae, in te proie∣ctus
sum ex vtero. De ventre matris meae deus meus es tu, ne discesseris a me. Quoniam tribulatio proxima est, quo∣niam non est qui adiuuet. Tu autem domine ne elongaueris auxi∣lium tuum à me, ad defensionem meam conspice. Et si ambulauero in medio vmbrae mor∣tis, non timebo mala, quoniā u meūes. Virga tua & baculus tuus ipsa me conso∣lata sunt. Psa. 24. Ad te domine leuaui animam meam, deus meus in te confido, non eru∣bescam. Neque irrideant me inimici mei, etenim vniuersi, qui sustinent te, non confun∣dentur. Delicta iuuentutis meae, & ignorantias meas ne memineris. Secundum misericordiam tuam memēto mei tu: propter bonitatem tuam domine. Propter nomen tuum domine propitia∣beris peccato meo, multum est enim. Oculi mei semper ad dominū, quoniam ipse euellet de laqueo pedes meos. Tribulationes cordis mei multiplicatae sunt, de necessitatibus meis erue ine.
Vide humilitatem meā & laborē meum, & dimitte vniuersa delicta mea. Psa. 26. Dominus illuminatio mea, & salus mea, quem timebo? Dominus protector vitae meae, à quo tre∣pidabo? Si consistant aduersum me castra, non ti∣mebit cor meum. Si exurgat aduersum me praelium, in hoc ego sperabo. Vnam petij a do mino hanc requiram, vt inhabitem in domo domini omnibus diebus vitae meae. Vt videam voluntatē domini, & visitem templum eius. Exaudi domine vocem meam, qua cla∣maui ad te miserere mei, & exaudi me. Tibi dixit cor meum, exquisiuit te facies mea, faciem tuam domine requiram. Ne auertas faciem tuam a me: ne decli∣nes in ira a seruo tuo. Adiutor meus esto, ne derelinquas me, ne{que} despicias me deus salutaris meus. Credo videre bona domini in terra vi∣uentium. Expecta dominum viriliter age: confor∣terur cor tuum, & sustine dominum. Psa 27. Ad te domine clamabo, deus
meus ne sileas à me: nequando taceas a me, & assimilabor descendētibus in lacū. Psa. 29. Psallite domino sancti eius, & confitemini memoriae sanctitatis eius. Quoniam ira in indignatione eius, & vi∣ta in voluntate eius. Ad vesperam demorabitur fletus: & ad matutinum laeticia. Auertisti faciem tuam à me, factus sum conturbatus. Ad te domine clamabo, & ad deū meum deprecabor. Quae vtilitas in sanguine meo, dum de∣scendo in corruptionem. Psa. 30. In te domine speraui, non con∣fundar in aeternum, in iusticia tua libe∣ra me. Inclina ad me aurem tuam, accelera vt eruas me. Esto mihi in deum protectorem, & in domum refugij, vt saluum me facias. Quoniam fortitudo mea & refugium meumes tu, & propter nomen tuum de∣duces me, & enutries me. Educes me de laqueo, quē absconderunt mihi: quoniam tues protector meus. In manus tuas domine commendo-spi∣ritum meum, redemisti me domine deus
veritatis. Miserere mei domine, quoniam tribu∣lor, conturbatus est in ira oculus meus, anima mea & venter meus. Quoniam defecit in dolore vita mea, & anni mei in gemitibus. Infirmata est in paupertate virtus mea, & ossa mea conturbata sunt. Super omnes inimicos meos factus sum opprobrium vicinis meis valde, & timor notis meis. Qui videbant me foras fugerunt à me: obliuioni datus sum tanquam mortuus a corde. Factus sum tanquam vas perditum: quo∣niam audiui vitu perationem multorum commorantium in circuitu. In eo dum conuenirent simul aduersum me, accipere animam meā cōsiliati sunt. Ego autem in te speraui domine, dixi, deus meus es tu, in manibus tuis sortes meae. Illustra faciem tuam super seruum tuū, saluum me fac in misericordia tua domi∣ne, non confundar, quoniam inuocaui te. Quoniam magna multitudo dulcedinis tuae domine, quam abscondisti timenti∣bus te.
Psa. 32. Ecce oculi domini super timen∣tes eum, & in eis qui sperant super mi∣sericordia eius. Vt eruat à morte animas eorum, & alat eos in fame. Anima nostra sustinet dominū, quo niam adiutor & protector noster est. Quia in eo laetabitur cor nostrum, & in nomine sancto eius sperauimus. Fiat misericordia tua domine super nos, quemadmodum sperauimus in te. Psal. 33. Accedite ad eum, & illumina∣mini, & facies vestrae non confunden∣tur. Immittet angelus domini in circuitu ti∣mentium eum, & eripiet eos. Gustate & videte, quoniā suauis est do∣minus, beatus vir, qui sperat in eo. Timete dominū omnes sancti eius, quo∣niam non est inopia timentibus eum. Diuites eguerunt & esurierūt inquiren∣tes autem dominum non minuentur omni bono. Iuxta est dominus his, qui tribulato sunt corde, & humiles spiritu saluabit. Psa 35. Fil j hom num in tegmine ala∣rum tuarum sperabunt, in ebriabūtur ab vbertate domus tuae.
Quoniam apud te est fons vitae, & in lu∣mine tuo videbimus lumen. Psa 37. Dominene in furore tuo arguas me neque in ira tua corripias me. Quoniam sagittae tuae infixae sunt mihi, & consirmasti super me manum tuam. Non est sanitas in carne mea: a facie irae tuae, non est pax ossibus meis a facie pec∣catorum meorum. Quoniam iniquitares meae supergressae sunt caput meū, & sicut onus graue gra∣uatae sunt super me. Putruerunt & corruptae sunt circatrices meae a faciae insipientiae meae Miser factus sum & curuatus sum vsque in finem: tota die cótristatus ingrediebar. Quoniam lumbi mei impleti sunt Illusio∣nibus: & non est sanitas in carne mea. Afflictus sum & humiliatus sum nimis: rugiebam a gemitu cordis mei. Domine ante te omne desideriū meum: & gemitus meus a te non est absconditus. Cor meum conturbatum est, dereliquit me virtus mea: & lumen oculorum meo∣rum, & ipsum non est est mecum. Amici mei & proximi mei aduersum me appropinquauerunt & steterunt, Et qui iuxta me erant de longe steterunt,
loue hartelye without dissimula∣tion, ye and to helpe all men both with counsayle and good example without pryde or vayne glory, to be obediente without grudginge, and patiente without spurninge at aduersitie. Graunt sweete sauiour Christ vnto me a vigilāt and wake∣full mind, that no fonde fancy may cary me away from thee: stedfast∣nes that no wauering affection may shake: constancie that no paine, so∣rowe, or tribulation may daunte, that freedome of mynde that no violence of seruile pleasure mave pearse: a straight and true harte to∣wardes thee that no peruerse or si∣nister thoughte haue power to make me swarue from thee. Gyue me sweete Iesu an vnderstandinge minde in the knowledge of thee: diligence to search thee: wisdome to synde thee: conuersation accep∣table
and pleasinge vnto thee: per∣seuerance in the sweetenes of thy holy fayth: a sure confidence and truste in thee: to be fastened to thy holy passion by penaunce: to en∣ioy the merites of thy blessed be∣nifites through grace. And lastlye of all to be partaker of thy hea∣uenly mansion in the euerlastinge blisse and felicitie. Amen. A prayer moste godlye and deuoue vvhich S. Thomas of Aquin vsed day∣ly to praye. GRaunt me most mercifull God feruentlie to desire such things as may be acceptable and pleasing vnto thee, with wisdom to searche after them, not to be deceyued in the knowledge of them, and vn∣faynedlie to accōplishe the dooing of them, to the prayse and glorie of thy holie name. Directe so my
lyfe, and graunte mee that I maye both haue knowlege, wil & power to doo, that whiche thou requie∣rest I shoulde doo, in such sorte, as is behoueable and most expedient for my soule. Let my waye vnto thee O Lorde be sure, straight, and perfect, that I maye neither fainte, nor fall from thee: either thorough aduersitie or prosperitie, that I be not puffed vppe in pride thorough the one, nor yet dryuē downe into dispaire thorough the other: But that I maye for the one gyue than∣kes, & be in the other armed with pacience. Also that I maye reioyse in nothinge, but in that which may allure mee vnto thee: nor sorrowe ought but that whiche doth with∣drawe me from thee, that I desire to please or displease none, but thee, or for thee: & that all thinges transitorie maye for thy sake Lord,
be of no reputation with mee, and that all thinges lykinge vnto thee maye be delectable vnto mee, and thou God more then all other thinges: and that I maye haue no reioysinge besides thee, let all la∣bour delight mee that is taken for thee, and all ease be vnpleasant that is without thee. Make me to lifte vp my heart often vnto thee, and when I fall from thee, graunte mee to call it sorowfullye to mynde with full purpose of amendemente. Graunte mee that I maye bee obe∣dient without repinyng, or geuing of froward language: and poore without fallinge from thee: patient without murmuring or grudging, pure and cleane without defiling, or corruptiō. Make mee also lowe∣lye without counterfeiting, merry without loosnes, sad without lum∣pishnes, sobre without dullenes,
nimble and quick without lightnes of behauior, trewe without doble∣nes, fearinge thee, but not to dis∣paire, to doe good workes, but not to presume, tellyng my neighbour his faulte without flatering, instru∣cting him bothe by woorde and exāple without scorning, or taun∣tinge. Graunte mee moste louynge Lorde and my God, that my harte maye alwayes soo wake vnto thee that no vaine worldlye thought with-drawe mee from thee, gyue me that constancye that no euyll affectiō or wicked suggestion doo plucke mee away from the, and a harte soo stable, that no troubles maye ouercome mee, so free from all vice, that sinne maye chalenge nothinge in me. Graunt mee O my Lord God vnderstanding to know thee, diligēce to seke thee, wisdom to finde thee, conuersatiō to please
thee, faithfullie to perseuere, loo∣king after thee, & finallie thorough hope to imbrace thee, & in respect of thy most grieuouse paines suffe∣red vpon the Crosse for mee, that I maye willingly suffre penaunce and all tribulation for thee. Also through thy grace to enioye the graciouse benefittes here in this transitorye lyfe, and in the world to come to be partaker of thy re∣warde & heuenlye ioyes, throughe the precious bloude of that imma∣culat lambe our onelye Sauiour Iesus Christ: to whome with the fa∣ther and the holy ghost three per∣sonnes and one God, be al honour and glorie worlde without end. Amen. A prayer to God that he vvill vouch∣safe to preserue the fruites of the earth. Ioan Ferus in lib. prec.
O Omnipotent, euerlasting, and mercifull God, we beseeche thee consider our daylye needes: shewe vs thy mercy, and gyue vs a sufficiente harueste for our dayly necessities, graunt that corne, trees, and other fruites of the earth, may (by thy holy benediction) growe, encrease and multyplye: Turne backe and with-drawe from the fruites of the earth, all that may be dammageable, as tempestes, ouer∣flowing of waters, coldnesse, hayle and other lyke thinges, which are anye waye hurtfull: Through our Lorde Iesus Christ thy sonne the euerlasting lyfe. Amen. A prayer to desire that vve may vse all temporall thinges, for the health of our soules onely. Thomas de Camp. in lib. de Imit. Christ.
I Beseeche thee moste inercyfull God, vouchsafe to preserue me, from excessiue cares of this lyfe, that I be not to much encombred with many thinges concerning the necessitie of my body, and that I be not ouertaken with any volup∣tuousnes of these thinges. O my God, my ineffable sweete∣nes, chaunge and turne into bitter∣nesse all my carnall consolations, which withdraw me from the loue of celestiall thinges. Suffer me not (my God) to be conquered, not to be ouercome of fleshe and of blood. Suffer me not to be decey∣ued of the worlde, and of the tran∣sitorie glory thereof, nor that the deuill through his subtiltie ouer∣throw me to the grounde. Gyue me strengthe to resist: pacience to endure: and cōstancie to perseuer: for, meate drincke, clothes, and all
necessayrie things to vpholde the bodie, are painfull & troublesome for that person, that hathe a de∣uout spirite. Therefore graunt me Lorde to vse these thinges mode∣ratly, and that my harte be not to much encombred with the desyre of them. The holy law forbiddeth vs to require superfluous thinges, and suche as are more delectable than profitable: for otherwyse the fleshe should be ouer burdenouse to the spirit. And alwayes I request that thy holy hande may gouuerne & instruct me, that I doe nothinge excessyuelie. Amen. The ende of the fifth Chapter.
THE SIXTE CHAPTER CONTEYNINGE HOLESOME prayers of the lyfe and passion of our Sauiour and redeemer Iesus Christ. A prayer to be sayed before the Cru∣cyfix. Cuthbertus Tunstall in lib. bell. prec. O Mercyfull crucifix, the redeemer of all people, whose heade was filthely lacerat & torne with a croune of thorne, whose hands & feete ex∣tended vpō a crosse were through-bored with nayles, whose whole feble bodye was hanged on highe and twoo theues to his ignomie & shame, fastened on his righte and lefte hande, of the whych the one dispised thee, the other knowleged thee to be a kinge, whose spirit cō∣mēded vnto the father, was gvuen
vppe to redeme vs withall. And being deade thy side thorwe-pear∣ced, gushed & poured outewater and bloude. VVhat toung can wor∣thely expresse, what minde can cō∣ceyue those innumerable paynes, the which thou an innocente haste suffered? VVee beseeche thee, for these so exceding great tormentes to illuminate our soules with the lyghte of thy knowledg, to mode∣rat our vnderstāding to strengthen our handes too good workes, to conuerte our feetesteppes and go∣inges to thy wayes, to directe our thoughtes, wordes, and deedes, and laste of all to bringe vs wretches vnto thy kingedome: where that wee with thy holye Angells, maye haue thy fruition the which doest liue and raigne God with God the father & the holy ghoste through all worldes. So be it.
A prayer acknovvledginge that man vvas the cause of Christs suffering. Io. Fab. ex 7. Medit. B Augustin. VVHat hast thou done sweet chylde, that thou shouldest haue this iudgement? VVhat haste thou done, that thou shouldest be thus streitly delte-with? what is thy offēce, what is thy gilte? what cause of thy death? what occasion of thy condemnation? I truly, I am cause of thy trouble, my fault hath made thee to be slaine: my defert hathe brought thee vnto this deathe: vē∣geance is taken of thee for my hay∣nouse gilte: thou art thus tormēted for me, and I the occasion of all thy smart. O maruelous sorte of iudge∣ment, & order of the vnspekeable diuine misterie. The wicked sin∣neth, and the iuste is punished. The gilty offendeth, and the innocente is beaten. The sinner transgresseth,
and the godly is condemned. That whiche the bad hath deserued, the good suffreth: for that wherin the seruaunt hath done euill, the mai∣ster maketh recompence: for that the man hath committed the sonne of God is plagued: how farfurthe thou sonne of God, how farfurth hathe thine humilytie descended? what hathe feruente loue enfor∣ced the to doo? Howfarfurthe is thy mercye extended? how doth thy bountie encrease? how far furth hath thy loue reached? Vnto what passe is thy compassion come? For I haue done wickedlie, and thou art punished: I haue committed a gre∣uous faulte, and it is layed to thy charge: I am the offender, and thou arte put to the torture: I was pufte vp in pryde, and thou imbaced and made of no reputation: I was dis∣obedient, & thou sufferest the paine
of my disobedience. I haue pam∣pered my selfe with delicat fare, & thou therfore redie to perishe tho∣row hunger. My affectiō through concupiscence had made mee to doo thinges vnlawfull, and perfect charitie in thee hath brought thee to suffer vpon the crosse: I presu∣med to doo that I was forbidden, and thou submittest thy selfe to receyue rebukes and punishemēts therefore: I delight in all banquet∣tinge and pleasure, and thou art put vnto miserable paynes vppon the Crosse. I lyue at ease, and thy hādes and feete are persed with nayles: I tast the plesaunt aple, and thou the bytter gaule: Eua laugheth and re∣ioyseth with mee, blessed Marye lamenteth & soroweth with thee. Beholde, O Kinge of glorie, Loo what myne iniquitye is, and howe abundant thie mercie is: Loo what
myne vngodlines is, and how mer∣uailouse thy rightuousnes is. O my King and my God, with what maye I possible recompence thee for the greate goodnes shewed towardes me. Mannes harte is not able to thinke what maye be worthelye gyuen in recompence for so great benefites. For is ther any such fines of witte in man, that is able to make it selfe equalle with the mercie and compassion of God? Or can man imagine whiche waye to doo such dewtifull seruice, as might iustlye requite his readie succoure & pro∣uident care continuallie hadde for man? There is trewlie sweet Soone of God, there is thorough this thy meruailouse dispensacion, wherin manes frayltie maye in some thing do that, which maye be acceptable vnto the, that is to saye, if thorough compunction of harte stirred vp
by thy visitacion, he doo crucifie his fleash with her concupiscences, and vices, whiche thoroughe thy grace being brought to passe, then beginneth he to be a sufferer with thee, for whose offences thou vouchsauedst a vile deathe to dye. So by the victorie of the inwarde man throughe thee, beinge his ea∣ptaine, he shalbe armed vnto the outwarde victorie, that after con∣queste made of the spirituall ene∣mie, he shall not feare for thee li∣kewise to dye, and for thy sake to offer his bodye to be hewed in peeces by the matteriall sworde. Thus the smalnes and simplicitye of mans condition and state, yf it maye so please thy godlines, shalbe able accordinge to his litle power in some parte to be aunswerable to the greatnes of the creators goodnes. This sweet Iesu is the
heauenlie medicine and a preserua∣tiue of thy loue. I beseeche thee therefore, for thy noble mercies sake, powre that into my festred woundes, that may clense me from the corruption of the Serpentes venemouse poyson, & restore mee againe to my former healthe, that tastinge the pleasaunte liquour of thy sweetnes, it maye cause me to sett at naughte all the wanton in∣tisements, & pleasaunt allurements of the worlde, and for the loue of thee, not to feare anye aduersities threatnede by it: and that hauinge in remembrance the perpetuall blessednes, I make none accōpt of the raginge stormes of this transi∣torie tyme. Let nothinge like me, lett nothinge be preciouse in my sight, but that whiche is pleasinge vnto thee. Also I praye thee, let all thinges besides thee, seeme fylthie
vnto mee and of no reputacion, cause me likewise to abhorre all thinges whiche is offensiue vnto thee, and my desire neuer to be sa∣tisfied in seking to do those things whiche are pleasing vnto thee. Let no ioye delight mee that is without thee, and lett mee reioyce in all troubles I suffer for thee. Lett the remembraunce of thee, bee my solace, and thy blessed name my consolation, let my teares be nou∣rishment vnto mee both daye and night, in seking after thy righteous∣nes. Lett the lawe of thy mouth be more preciouse vnto mee, then thousandes of golde or siluer, lett it be delectable vnto mee to obey thee, and detestable to committ ought against thy diuine pleasure: I humblie beseeche thee (my one∣ly hope) for all thy mercyes sake, thou wilt be mercyfull vnto mee,
and pardonne all mine iniquitie. From the bottome of my harte I desire thee to open mine eares to heare that thou commandest, and suffre not my harte to decline frō thee, nor through woordes of wic∣kednes to seke excuses for my sin∣ne. Finallie I beseeche thee, for thy meruailouse humilitie, let no pride raigne in mee: nor the power of the sinner feare mee. But that I may all waye kepe my selfe vndefiled for thee, which lyuest and raignest for euer, and euer. Amen. A prayer vvherein man doth offer (to God the Father) the passion of his sonne our Lorde and sauiour Christ. B. August. cap. 6. Medit. BEholde O holye Father thy derely beloued sonne so cru∣elly tormented for me, beholde moste mercifull king who it is that
suffreth, and remember for whom he suffereth: Is it not O Lorde thy moste innocent sonne whom thou haste gyuen to death that he might redeeme thy feruaunt? is it not the Authour of lyfe who being ledde as a sheepe to the slaughter, and made obediente vnto thee, euen vnto death, spared not the moste cruell kynde of death? Call to minde O distributor and gyuer of al goodnes, that this is he whom although thou haste begot∣ten of thy diuine powre and ver∣tue, yet notwithstanding hast made him partaker of my infirmitie and weaknes: verely this is thy deytie, which being clothed with my na∣ture, ascended the gybbet of the crosse, vpon the which he suffered moste dolorous death. O Lorde caste the eyes of thy Maiestie vpon the worke of thy in∣effable
bountie, beholde thy most sweete sonne with his whole body stretched out: beholde his inno∣cent hands besprinkled with moste precyous blood, and mercyfully pardon those faults which with my handes I haue committed: looke vppon his naked side, pearced with a speare, and renewe me with that sacred fountayne which I beleeue did issue from thence: Consider his vndefiled footesteps, which ne∣uer stood in the way of sinners, but alwayes walked in thy lawe, howe with sharpe and longe nayles they are fastened to the crosse, & guyde my stepps in thy path, and make me hate the wayes of iniquitye, and chuse euermore the way of trueth. O Kinge of Angels and saints, I beseech thee for this holy of ho∣lyes, for this my redeemer to make me runne in the waye of thy com∣maundementes,
that I may be vni∣ted and ioyned to him, whoe hath not disdayned to be cladde with my fleshe. O blessed Father wilte thou not behold the head of thy dere sonne, with his necke as whyte as snowe resolued to dye, beholde moste meeke creator the humanitye of thy beloued sonne, and haue mer∣cy vpon the frayltie of thy frayle creature: his whyte breast is naked, his blody side is read, his stretched bowels dryed vppe, his fayre and bewtiful eyes waxt dimme, his roi∣all and princely visage is pale, his marble-white leggs hange downe: the streames of his precious blood, doe water his feete quyte perced thorowe. Beholde O glorious Father, the rente and torne members of thy welbeloued sonne, and benignely
remember what my substance is: beholde the paine of God and man and release the myseryes of man thy creature: beholde the punish∣ment of the redeemer, and forgyue the offence of the redeemed: this is he (O my Lorde) whom thou haste smytten for the sinnes of the people, although he was thy belo∣ued in whom thou waste well plea∣sed, this was that innocēt in whom their was foūd no guyle, & yet was he reputed amongst the wicked. A deuoute prayer, vvith the remem∣braunce of the passion of our sauiour Ie∣sus Christ, to obtayne succour and fa∣uour of him. Io. Fab. in preca. Christ. O Moste sweete Lorde and my redeemer whiche was by the heauenly Father sente downe into this worlde, and haste willingly of
thine owne accord suffered moste cruel bitter paines vpon the crosse, and haste carried the same Crosse vpon thy blessed shoulders, to the ende that this thy patience mighte be vnto vs saluation and a myr∣rour: and finally thou diddest con∣sente vpon that tree to dye and re∣deeme vs. I moste poore miserable and wretched sinner, most humbly be∣seech thee, for the incredible paci∣ence which thou didst show in the course of thy whole lyfe: and then especiallye, when the vngracious Iewes did so rage against thee with villanous & spitefull words: when they did mocke thee, and all be∣spytte thy vysage: when they did hoode-winke thine eyes, and with their most filthy and impure hands did smyte thee vpon the most bles∣sed face: when they did moste cru∣elly
whippe and scourge thee faste bounde to a piller: when they did thruste vpon thy most sacred head a pricking crowne of thorne: when with yron nayles they did pearce thy blessed armes stretched alonge vpon the crosse: when thy blessed syde was thruste throughe with a speare: when in thy great thirst and extreame agony they offered thee a sponge full of vinager and gall: whē with thy head inclined downe thou sayed It is consummate, when thou diddest commend thy spirite into the handes of God the Father: and all this ended for the redemp∣tion and saluation of mankinde, in thy graue thou was buried. For all these paynes, and passions, O most meeke Lorde Iesus Christ, I poore and wretched sinner doe humbly beseech thy infinite ma∣iestie, not to forsake, nor suffer me
to be accused, and condemned in thy terrible iudgement: but let thy dolorous passion so helpe and ayde me, that I may be brought to euerlastinge felicitye: let thy holy Angells alway be in my company, and specially at the houre of death, that they may protect, defend, & keepe me, so that the cruell infernall enimy may haue no powre or parte in me. The ende of the sixt Chapter.
THE SEVENTH CHAP∣TER CONTAYNINGE DE∣uoute and holesome prayers to be sayed before and after the recey∣uinge of the B. Sacrament. Aduertismentes for more vvorthelye receyuinge the holye Euchariste. 1. Cor. cap. 11. Verse. 26. FOr as often as you shall eate this breade, and drincke the chalice, you shall shevve the death of our Lorde vntyll he come. Verse. 27. Therefore vvhoe soeuer shall eate this breade, and drincke the chalice of our Lorde vnvvorthily, he shall be giltye of the body and bloode of our Lorde. Verse. 28. But lett a man proue him selfe: and so,
let him eate of that breade, and drincke of the chalice. Verse 29. For he that eatethe and drinckethe vn∣vvorthyly: eateth and drincketh iudge∣mente to him selfe, not descerninge the body of our Lorde. This probation according to the wordes of the Apostle (Lett a man proue him selfe) consisteth principal∣ly in fower poyntes. 1. Fayth, before all thinges is necessa∣rye to him that shall receyue the blessed Sacrament of the Aultar, that is to say he must firste beleeue the presence of the true body and blood of our sauiour Iesus Christe in the Sacra∣mente of the Aultar: for they that denye it, doe asmuch as thy can, to denye the omnipotencye of God, and doe accuse God with lyinge: for he hath sayed: (This is my body: and this is my blood. Also you must
of necessitie beleeue that the body of Iesus christ is deliuered to death: and his blood truely shedd for the remission of your sinnes. 2. Penaunce, or repentaunce, to the ende you may acknowledge your sinnes with all your harte, and haue true repentaunce for the same, and truely to confesse thē to the priest your ghostly father: And after you haue obtayned absolution, you must firmely purpose not to com∣mit any deadly sinne hereafter: and hauinge forsaken all rancour and malice you muste be reconciled to them, whom you haue offended or that haue offended you. 3 Honest and decente behauiour, and countenaunce apparteyning to a christi∣an man, whereby is required that none goe to this moste blessed Sa∣cramente, and greate misterie, but fasting, and with modestie, humili∣tie
and feruente zeale: & not with any dishonest or vncomely beha∣uiour. 4. Deuotion and a harte not occupied in other busines or affaires, that so you may imploy your selfe wholly by meditations and deuout prayers to receyue such an excellente sacra∣mente, in considering and wonde∣ringe at the incomprehensible hu∣militie of almightie God: I meane hereby: that he being a Lord of so greate and infinite maiestye, hath bene obediente vnto his heauenly father euen vnto death, to gyue vs lyfe. And with all, that by such de∣uout meditations and prayers, you maye be stirred and prouoked to loue almighty god aboue al things, and to gyue him most harty thanks for his so great benifites: desiringe him moste humbly, that the merits of his most bitter passion and death
maye be applied to the comforte and profit of your soule. A prayer to be sayde before the recey∣uinge of the Blessed Sacrament. I Adore and worshippe thee, and gyue thākes vnto thee (my most louing Lorde Iesu Christe) for thy innumerable benefites and giftes gyuen vnto me moste vnwhorthy. All those I yeeld and offer vnto thee, into an euerlastinge laude and prayse. I gyue vnto thee thankes for all the goodnes, that euer thou diddest shew, or euer wilt shew vn∣to any reasonable creature. I gyue thee thāks for al the mercies of thy moste swete goodnes. I gyue thee thankes for thy holy Incarnation, Natiuitie, Infancie, Childhod, Man∣state, labours, sorowfull cares, Pas∣sion, Death, Resurrection, & thine Ascension. I moste humbly thanke thee, that thou haste vouchsafed, to
admitte me most vile sinner to the noble and liuelie feaste of this thy holy table. O gracious Iesu I be∣seche thee, for that loue that in ma∣ner constreigned thee to be incar∣nated, to suffre and to die for me, that thou wilt make me fully clea∣ne from all sinne, and make me to please thee in all thing. Adorne and garnish my beggarlye and poore soule, with thy mercies & vertues. Graunte mercifull Iesu, that I may with moste humble reuerēce, with burninge desire and chaste affection, receiue the moste vene∣rable Sacrament of thy blessed Bo∣die, in memorie of all those things, that thou haste vouchsafed to doe, to speake, and to suffre for my sal∣uation. Graunt, good Lorde, that I maye performe this thinge moste purely, to the euerlasting glorie of thy name, to the honour of thy
moste sweet Mother and Virgin Marie, and to the honour of thy blessed Saint N. (Here name the Sainte of that daye.) to the honour of all thy blessed Saintes and Angells of heauen, to the soule health of me, and N. and to the soules health of all Christen people, quicke and dead. Haue mercy, good Lord, haue mercy vppon thy Churche, haue mercy, good Lord vpon this place and this compagnie. Graunte that here be alwaye humilitye, peace, charitye, chastitye, and cleanesse. Graunt, that we all maye worthily amende and correct our selues, and that we feare thee and serue thee faithfullye: and that we maye loue thee, and please thee: I commend vnto thy mercy all our busines, and all our necessities: be mercifull vn∣to all those, for whome thou haste
shed thy precious blood. Graunte vnto the quicke forgyuenesse and grace, graunt vnto the faithfull de∣parted, rest and light euerlastinge. Another Prayer before the receyuinge of the holy Sacrament. By Sir Thomas Moore. O Benigne Iesu that wouldest suffer so many greuous paines, yea death it selfe for the loue of mankind: greate and meruailous is thy charitie. O good God for that thy charitie, and that thou vouche∣safedst with thy precious bloud to wash awaye our sinnes, I praye thee gracious Lorde, that thou forgyue me all the sinnes that I haue done, thought, or said, in pride, in wrath, in enuie, in couetousnes, in glou∣tonie, in slouth in lecherie, in vn∣cleanes of body, and of soule, in mispendinge of my fiue wittes, in breaking thy commaundementes,
in wastinge the tyme of my lyfe in vice, in that I haue not folowed vertue, nor done those ghostlye deedes that I myghte haue done. O mercyfull Iesu with that pre∣cious bloud that thou diddest shed on the Roode for our saluation, wash all the sinnes away that I haue done since my birth, comfort and make me whole with the holy Sa∣crament, which thou hast ordeined and left here on earth to be our medicine, and life, through whiche we should liue after thee, and with thee, & thou in vs. For, good Lord, thou saydst at that holye worke when thou madest it & gauest it to thy Disciples: (Iohan. 6.) Panis quem ego dabo, caro mea est, pro mundi vita: qui manducat me, ipse viuit propter me, ipse manet in me, & ego in eo. O thou holy mightfull Prieste and Bishop, that by thy diuine might madest
the worthy Sacrament of thy pre∣cious Body in fourme of breade, gyue me grace to receyue it this day with puritie of heart, & cleanes of soule, with loue, dread & stedfast beleefe. O benigne god, I acknow∣lege & confesse to thy high good∣nes, that I am not worthy to come vnto thy boorde to be fed with so royall meate as is thy blessed Body. But gracious Lord, I beleeue veri∣ly, that thou maiest make me wor∣thy who haste made all thinge of nought, and of sinfull, haste made righteous and holy. O almighty God, for this thy greate might I praye thee, that thou make me worthy and able to receyue the precious Bodie deuoutly with all reuerence, with perfect mekenes, and holines, with full contrition, & teares of deuotion, with spirituall comfort & gladnes of thy presen∣ce.
O blessed Bodie in fourme of bread, come and entre into my mouth and hart, that by thy diuine presence my soule bee fed, yea and fastened to thee with perfect cha∣ritie. O Lord, fill me with grace, & strēgthen me, that I may euer here∣after lyue after thy will, and that I may lyue in thee, and thou in me. Iesu for thy great bountie saue me from all perils, teache and comfort my soule in all doubtes and dreads, clense me from all vices, suffer no∣thing to abide in my hart, but one∣ly thy selfe whiche arte my soules lyfe & leach. O heauenly meate, O ioye of Angels, O soules strēgth, O precious Bodie that gyueth en∣dlesse helpe, mercifull Lorde Iesus, thus didst thy selfe saye, (Iohan. 6.) Ego sum panis viuus qui de coelo descē∣di: si quis manducauerit ex hoc pane, vi∣uet in aeternum. O thou Bread of life
that diddest descēde from heauen, who that eateth this bread, shall lyue euerlastingly: O blessed Iesu, make me nowe at this time worthy to receyue this Sacrament, that is thy precious Body, that I maye liue euerlastingly with thee in thy pre∣fence, & see thee face to face, euer to ioye in thy goodnes in blisse euerlasting. Amen. A deuoute prayer to be sayed at the E∣leuation of the moste blessed and Sacred Hoost. Anselm. cap. 2. in specu. sermo. euangel. VVE adore and worship thee O Iesu Christ king of Isra∣ell, light of the Gentils, and prince of the kinges of the earth: Lord of Sabaoth, and moste stronge power and puissance of the omnipotente and almightie God, we worshippe thee O precious pryce of our re∣demption, O peaceable Hooste,
which by thy smellinge sweetnes onely, diddest inclyne thy Father which reygneth in heauen to be∣holde our poore estate, and diddest reconcyle him to vs, his children. O sauiour Iesus Christ we prayse the multitude of thy mercies: we plentifully sounde out the memo∣rie of thy sweetnes, we offer vnto thee O sauiour Christ the sacrifice of laude and praise, for the greatnes of thy bountye which thou haste shewed vnto vs sinners, beinge a wicked seede and vngracious chil∣dren of perdition. A prayer to be sayed before the blessed Sacramente of the Aulter. Io. Fab. ex cap. 2. soliloq. B. August. O Mnipotent and most mercifull God, thou art truely good, and in deede I am euill, thou arte holy, I am wretched, thou art iuste, I am vniuste: thou arte the lighte, I am
blinde, thou art the lyfe, I am dead: thou arte a conuenient medicine, I am weake and sicklye: thou arte ioy, I am heuines: thou art the so∣ueraigne veritie, I am the vniuer∣sall vanitie, and so is euery liuinge man. VVhat shall I saye then my crea∣tor? heare me my maker, I am thy creature and the worke of thy handes, but O Lorde, I am nowe brought to nothing, and I am dye∣ing dayly, thy handes haue made and framed me: euen those handes I saye which were nayled to the Crosse for my sake. Most benigne redeemer dispise not the worke of thy handes, but looke vpon the woundes of thine owne handes: loe my Lorde God thou haste written me in thy hands, reade the wrytinge and heale me, beholde I thy creature doe sighe
vnto thee, thou arte my creator comfort me: I cry vnto thee, thou arte the lyfe, quicken me, and gyue me lyfe: to thee I lift vp my voyce helpe me and restore me. Spare me O God for my dayes are nothinge, what is man that he can thus speake to God his crea∣tor? pardonne me thy seruaunte which presumeth to speake to so great a Lorde, neede hath no lawe, griefe and sorowe compell me to speake, the calamitie and miserye which I indure, enforce me to crye out: I am sicke, therefore I call to the phisition: I am blind therefore I hasten vnto the light, I am deade therefore I sigh after lyfe. To thee O Iesus of Nazareth I hasten, thou arte the fountayne of lyfe: O Iesu sonne of Dauid haue mercy vpon me, haue mercy vpon me O fountayne of mercy, thou
haste hard me being sicke callinge vpon thee, reach me thy hande O moste gentle Father: bring me to thee, that I may come to thee, and in thy lighte, may see that euerlast∣ing light: spare and pardonne me O Lorde, I am the vnhappie man borne of a woman, lyuinge but a shorte time, and yet replenished with much misery: I am earth and ashes, and by and by in griefe and anguishe I muste dye, and then I shall be but wormes meate. VVhat other thing is my lyfe O my Lorde God, then a shadowe which soudenly vanisheth awaye, lyke as the flower which doth flo∣rishe and is greene, & by & by doth wither: euen so my frayle and de∣ceiptfull lyfe passeth away, and yet notwithstanding, it is on euery side hedged in with the snares of death, I knowe assuredly that I must dye,
but when or howe I can not tell. I therefore beseeche thee O meeke and mercifull God to helpe me: holde me vppe and staye me in thy power and strength: appeare vnto me O euerlasting lighte, and shine in my hart that I may reioyse in thee: come vnto me O my lyfe moste noble, and most sweete, that through thee I maye lyue in thee, and with thee in thy kindome for euer: heare me O Lorde God to the glory of thy name, and the fe∣licity and blisse of my soule. Amen. A prayer to be sayd after the receiuing of the Blessed Sacrament. By Sir Thomas Moore. I Adore and worshippe thee, and gyue my humble and heartie thankes vnto thee, moste mercifull Lorde Iesu Christe, whiche haste vouchsafed to admit me moste vile sinner, vnto the noble and liuely
feast of thy moste holy table. Alas poore wretch that I am. For I haue receyued this moste venerable Sa∣crament to-to vnworthily. Lorde, haue mercy on me, Lord forgyue me. I commēd that which I haue done, vnto thy Diuine hart, there to be amended, & to be made perfect. Receyue (I beseeche thee Lorde) these moste holy mysteries of thy blessed Body, whiche I haue receyued to the euerlasting glorie of thy holy name, to the honour of thy most swete Mother the Vir∣gin Marie, & to the honour of thy blessed Saint N. (Here name the Sainte of that daye.) to the honour of all thy blessed & holy Saints and Angels of heauen, for my soule healthe, and for the soule health of all Christen people quicke and dead. Receyue (good Lorde) this moste excellent Sacra∣ment
in full amendment, purgatiō, and satisfaction for all my sinnes & negligences, and for the sinnes of all the worlde. Restore by it, and make vp againe all my ghostly rui∣nes and decayes, and supplie my needy pouertie. Mortifie, by it in me, what soeuer doth displease thee: and make me one accordinge to thy heartes desire. By it, make my spirite, my soule and my body, conformable to the spirite, soule and body of thy holy Humanitie: and lighten me altogyther with the light of thy Diuinitie. Graunt by it, that I may be sta∣blished in thee, that I perfytly with perseuerance loue thee, that I may be incorporate vnto thee, & most nerely vnited vnto thee: and that I maye be chaunged all whole into thee, to the laude of thy blessed name. Amen.
COnuert (Lorde) miserable sin∣ners, call againe heretikes and schismatikes. Lighten the infidels that knowe not thee, helpe all that be in anye necessitye and trouble, helpe all them that haue commen∣ded them selues or desired to be cōmended vnto my prayers. Haue mercy vpon my parentes & bene∣factours. Haue mercy vpon all thē, for whome I am bound to praye, & that thou wouldest be intreated for. Haue mercy on this place and companie. Graunte, that here bee alwaye humilitie, peace, charitie, chastie, and puritie. Graunt, that we all may worthily amend and correct our selues, that we may feare the, and serue thee faithfully, & that we may loue thee, and please thee. I commend vnto thy mercy all our businesses, and all
our necessities. Lorde, be mercifull vnto all people, for whome thou hast shedde thy precious bloude. Graunt vnto the quicke forgy∣uenes and grace, & vnto the faith∣full departed, reast and lyfe euer∣lasting. Amen. Another Prayer after receyuing of the Sacrament. By Sir Thomas Moore. THankes be vnto thee, O holy Father, God almightie, that thou diddest vouchesafe of thy greatpitie to sende thy only Sōne from thy high Throne into this vale of wo & miserie, here to take our nature and shape, & in the same to suffer moste sharp paines & bit∣ter death to bring our soules to thy kingdome, and to leaue that pre∣cious Body here to be our strēgth, and comfort: I thanke thee moste mercifull Lorde Iesu with all the
mighte and strength that thou hast gyuen me: I offer to thee thankes: that thou this daye haste fed me with thine owne precious Body, by whiche I hope to haue healthe of soule, and euerlasting lyfe, with ioye when I depart hence. O holy Ghost come good Lorde and en∣flame my hart with thy brenninge beames of loue, and make me with vertuous swetenes continually to yolde acceptable thankes to the holy and glorious Trinitie. O ye three Persons & one God, glo∣rie, laude, and honor, with all reuerence be offered to you of all creatures without ende. Amen. The ende of the seuenth Chapter.
THE EIGHT CHAPTER CONTEYNING LAVDES, PRAI∣ses and thankes-gyuing, for the be∣nefites that God hathe bestowed vpon vs. A psalme in vvhich a sinner yeldeth thankes to God that his enemyes haue not preuayled agaynste him, nor gotten the vpper-hand of him. I VVill magnifie & praise thee, O Lord God, for thou haste exalted me and sette me vp: & mine ennemies haue not got∣ten the ouer hand of me. O Lorde of hoastes, I haue cried vnto thee, and thou haste saued me. Thou haste broughte my soule out of hell: thou haste holden me vp from fallynge into thee deepe lake, from whence no man retour∣neth.
Thou haste not closed me vp, in the handes of myne ennemies: but thou haste sette my feete in a place both wyde and broade. I haue sought thee, and thou hast hearde me, thou haste brought me into libertie oute of great distresse. Thou haste turned my sorowe into gladnes, thou haste ceased my mourning, & compassed me round aboute with myrth. Thou haste declared thy great magnificence in helpinge thy ser∣uaunt. Thou haste done meruaylouslie with me in my miseries. Thou haste regarded the paine of the poore: thou haste turned awaye thy face from me. I will be synging and speakyng of thy mercyes: and I will publishe to other thy fidelitie and truthe, so long as I shall lyue.
My mouthe shall neuer cease to speake of thy rytghteousnes, & of thy benefites: which be so manye, that I can not number them. But I will gyue thee thankes tyll death take me awaye, I wyll syng in the prayse of thee so longe as I shall continue. I will triumphe and reioyce in thy mercy, for thou haste looked vpon my necessityes, and regarded my soule in great dystresse. Thou haste bene my sure re∣fuge, and the strength of my truste and hope. I thanke thee Lorde for thy goodnes alwaye: and for thy exce∣dinge mercie. Thou haste bene my comfort in the time of my trouble, thou hast bene mercifull vnto me. O Lorde, and haste reuenged the wronges that myne enemyes haue done to
me. Accordinge to the multitude of the heauy thoughtes that I had in my minde, thy cōfortes haue chea∣red and lyghtned my hart. Thou hast sente me nowe ioyes, for the dayes wherein I was in so∣rowe: and for the yeares in whiche I suffred many a painfull storme. Thou haste called to remem∣braunce the rebuke that thy ser∣uaunt hathe bene put to, and howe furiously myne enemies haue per∣secuted me. O Lorde God of hostes, who may be compared vnto thee? thou arte great, & greatly to be praysed. Thou arte hyghe vpon all the earth, thou art exalted farre aboue all goddes. Glory and honour before thy face: holynes and magnificence in thy sanctuary.
VVith iustice and iudgement thy royall throne is stablished: mercye and truthe go before thy face. Blessed arte thou (O Lorde) which haste not holden backe thy mercy from thy seruaunt. After that I had longe looked for thee O Lorde, at the laste thou diddest attende vpon me, and hear∣dest my crye. Thou haste taken me oute of the lake of miserie, and set my fete vpon a rocke, & made my steppes sure. Thou haste gyuen me my de∣syer, I haue seene thy ioyfull coun∣tenaunce. Thou haste stricken all my ad∣uersaryes, and haste abated their strength. Thou haste rebuked the rable∣mente of them that vexed me, and haste plucked me forthe of their
handes. Thou hast cast them headelong into their owne pytte, their feete be wrapped in the net whiche they layed priuilye for me. Myne enemyes are retyred backe, they are fallen downe and destroyed from thy syght. Thou haste bene the poore mannes defence, and his helper in tribulacion, when most neede was. Thou haste done iudgemente for me: thou hast desēded my cause against my accusers. And although thou was verye angrye with me a litle whyle, yet nowe I lyue throughe thy mercye and goodnesse. Verely I supposed with my selfe that I was cleane caste oute of thy fauour. But thou haste harde my pray∣ers: and accordinge to thy greate
mercye haste taken me agayne into thy fauour. O Lord of thyne owne minde and will thou haste gyuen strength vnto my soule: but when thou hid∣dest thy face from me, O Lorde, howe greatly astonyed was I? VVhen I was in aduersitie, then I cried vnto thee, and thou diddest aunswere me: when my soule was in great anguishe and trouble, then O Lorde I remembred thee. I haue tasted and seene howe sweete thou art: truly blessed is the man that trusteth in thee. Accordinge to thy name so is thy commendation and praise, but thy counsayles touchynge vs be without example, and greater then with wordes can be expressed. Dominion, power, and glorie be thyne, for thou haste made all thynges, and because thy will is so,
they do styll continue. Thy name be blessed, praysed, and magnifyed, bothe nowe and euer: and worlde withoure ende. Amen. A Psalme in vvhiche the goodnesse of God is praysed. O Lorde oure gouernoure how wounderfull is thy Maiestye through oute the whole worlde: whiche haste set thy glorye aboue all the heauens. VVhat is man, that thou magni∣fiest him so greatlye? or the sonne of man that thou doest visite him? O Lorde thou arte greate and muche to be praysed in thy holye hyll. Prayse be vnto thee O Lorde God, lett our vowes made to thee be alwayes perfourmed. Confession and magnificence are thy worke: and thy righteous∣nesse
continueth for euermore. Thou haste done many thinges (O Lord God) both maruailous & greate: and there is none that can bee lyke vnto thee in thy workes. Thy wayes be iuste and true, who will not feare and dread thee, and magnifie thy name. I thanke thee (O Lorde God) with all my harte, and I will san∣ctifie thy name for euer. O Lorde thou art my strength and my prayse. Thou haste broughte downe myne enemyes which arte a iudge euen from the begynning. Thy righte hande is exceding stronge: thy righte hande worketh manye great actes. Thyne arme is myghtye and strong: and be cause it hath pleased thee, thou hast strengthened myne infirmitye.
I will prayse thy greate and dreadfull name, for it is holy. Although I haue fallen, yet I am not crushed in pieces: for thou hast sustayned my hande. I haue opened and shewed my waye vnto thee, and in thee I haue trusted, and thou at length haste ac∣complished my desires. Thou haste broken the heades of myne ennemies, and haste made them to stoupe: whiche walked proudely in their sinnes. Thou haste dominion ouer their power, and when they be exalted and set alofte in their wayes, thou abatest their courage, and destroi∣est them with thy mighty arme. In thy name I wil euer reioice, and in thy mercy is all my glory. Thou louest righteousnes and iudgement, the earth is replenished with thy mercy.
Thy eye looketh fauourably vp∣on them that dreade thee, and trust in thy mercy. There shall no good thing be lackinge to them that seeke thee, and they that feare thee shall not be helpelesse. For thou directest their wayes, and hearest them when they crye vnto thee. That thou mayest deliuer their soules from death, and swage their paynes, when they be grieued. For thou helpest them, whose hartes be broken with sorowe, and bearest vp with thy hand them that be contrite in spirite. Thou fauest the soules of thy seruauntes: and all they that truste in thee, shall not be dystroyed. VVherfore my toung shall sing thy prayse: O Lord God, I will al∣wayes magnifie thee.
I will loue thee (O Lord) which art my strength, my stay, my might, my Sauiour, and my refuge. My God, my defend our and, my buckler, the strength of my sal∣uation, and my supporter. After that I had called vpon thee with due laude and prayse, thou hast saued me from myne enemies. VVhen I was in trouble I called vpō the, thou hast hearde my voice oute of thy holy temple, & my crie hathe entred vp into thine eares. Thou haste saued me from mine aduersaries, that rose vp agaynst me, thou haste deliuered me from wicked enemies. Thou haste taken me from the compagnie of euell men, and mine eye hath seene vpon mine enemies the thinges that I desired. And therfore if it should fortune me to passe through the darke vale
of miserie: I will goe without feare, for thou wilte be with me, thy rod∣de and thy staffe shall comfort me. Thou shalt delvuer me from tribulation, thou shalt kepe me frō them whiche seeke to destroy me. Myne eyes be vpon thee (O Lord,) for thou shalt bring my fete forth of the snare. Vnto thee O Lord God I will perfourme my vowes, I will gyue thee thankes bothe nowe & euer∣more, and world without ende. Amen. A Psalme of the benefytes of God, vvith thankes for the same. MY soule prayseth thee O Lord, and all that is within me, pray∣seth thy holye name. My soule gyueth thee humble thankes, and thy benefites I will neuer forget. VVhiche forgyuest all my sinnes
and healest all mine infirmities. VVhiche haste saued my lyse from destruction, & shewed in me thy grace and mercye. VVhich haste satisfyed my de∣sier with good thinges: and shalte once restore my youth agayne. Thou haste entreated me mer∣cifully at all times, and haste reuen∣ged me of myne enemyes, Thou haste bene a defence to me (O Lorde) and a sure founda∣tion of my wealth. Thou haste guyded me with thy counsaile, & taken me to thee, through thy mercie. Thou haste manye wayes de∣clared in me thy greate myght and power, and after thine anger hathe bene paste, thou haste turned a∣gayne and comforted me. Thou haste sente me many grie∣uous troubles, but at the lengthe
thou haste brought me oute of the bottomles depenesse. Thou haste made me preuye to thy wayes, and haste not hydde thy counsayles from me. Thou arte full of mercye and grace (O Lorde) slowe to wrathe and ready to goodnes. Thy displeasure lasteth not al∣waye, & thou kepest not backe thy mercies in thine anger for euer. Thou rewardest vs not accor∣dinge to our sinnes, nor punishest vs accordinge to our desertes. Loke howe high the heauen is in cōparyson of the earth, so greate is thy mercye towardes vs. How farre as the earth is distaunt from the west: so farre (O Lorde) remoue our sinnes from vs. Like as a naturall father hath pity vpon his children, euen so (O Lorde God thou haste had com∣passion
vpon vs. Thou haste not forgotten thy creature, thou remembredst that we are fleshe, yea all men liuinge. And that the age of men is lyke vnto grasse, and may be compared to the floures in the fielde. VVhich as soone as the sharpe winde hathe blowen vppon them with his blastes, wither away and dye, so that no man can tell where they dyd growe. But thy mercie O Lorde, and louyng kyndenesse is alwayes vp∣on them that feare thee, and thy ryghteousnes endureth for euer. So that we kepe our promyse and conuenaunt with thee: and so remember thy commaundementes that we doe them in deede. O Lorde thou haste stablished thy throne in heauen: and thou gouernest all thinges by thine im∣peryall
power. I will magnifie thee O Lorde, and prayse thy name worlde with∣oute ende. I will gyue thankes alwaye and make thy name glorious fo euer. O Lorde thou arte puissant and greate, and thy magnyficence is vnsearcheable. One generation shall shewe to another thy workes, and they shall declare thine auncient noble actes. They shall euer prayse the mag∣nificence of the glorie of thy ho∣lynes, & the memorie of thy great goodnes. For thou arte good and gra∣cious to all men, and thy mercye excedeth all thy workes. The eyes of all men beholde & wayte vpon thee, that thou shoul∣dest gyue them their susten aunce in time conuenient.
Thou openest thyne hande, and fillest euery lyuinge creature, with necessary foode. O Lorde thou art ryghtfull in al thy wayes, & holy in thy deedes. Thou kepest all them that loue thee, and the tourmente of malice, shall not touche them. My mouthe shall speake thy glorie and prayse, and all lyuinge creatures shall honour thy holye name for euer. Prayse our Lorde, oh ye his Angels mightie in power, whiche doe his commaundementes, and obeye the voyce of his worde. Prayse ye altogyther God, O all ye hostes, you his ministers that do his will and pleasure. Prayse our Lorde as I do, and let vs magnifie his name togyther. Prayse our Lorde, oh all ye his Saintes, for his name is glorious
and his prayse goeth aboute hea∣uen and earth. Prayse our Lorde togyther, O all ye his workes: euerye thing that liueth prayse our Lorde. Amen. A thanks-giuinge to God for his innu∣merable benefits bestovved on man from his infancie. B. August. can. 18. Soliloq. I The sonne of thy hand-mayd in these my poore confessions doe confesse to thee my redeemer, with all my hart, and will call to mynde all the benefites whiche thou haste bestowed vpon me all the time of my lyfe euen from mine infancye, for I knowe well (O Sauiour) that thou art greatlye displeased withe ingratitude: for it is the roote of all spirituall euill: and a certaine wynd dryenge and burninge all good, stopping the fountaine of thy dy∣uine
mercy towardes man. But I O Lorde will gyue thee thankes, least I be ingratefull to thee my redeemer, because thou hast delyuered me: howe oft had that dragon swallowed me vppe, if thou haddest not taken me from his mouth? how oft haue I sinned, and he was redy to haue deuoured me? but thou my Lorde God haste de∣fended me: when I wrought wic∣kedly agaynst thee and did breake thy commaundementes he would haue drawen me to hell, if thou haddest not letted him: I did of∣fend thee, and thou diddest defend me: I did not feare thee, and thou didest preserue me: I departed from thee, and offered my selfe to mine enemie: but thou diddest affraye him that he durst not take me: thou diddest bestowe these great bene∣fites vpon me (O my God,) yet I
poore wretch did not know it. Thou hast often times deliuered me from the iawes of the diuell, thou hast takē me out of the mouth of the lyon, and haste brought me many tymes from hell I not know∣inge it: for I wente downe to the gates of hell, but thou haste stayed them that I entred not in: I did has∣ten to the portes of death, but thou diddest not suffer them to inclose me in, thou haste also often deliue∣red me from bodyly death O my sauiour. VVhen I haue bene sore vexed with sicknes, and in greate danger by lande, and sea, by fier and sword, thou haste stoode by me, and mer∣cifully deliuered me from all: for thou diddest knowe (O Lorde,) if death had then ouertaken me, hell had receyued my soule, and I had bene damned for euer: but thy
mercye and grace preuented me, and deliuered me from death both of bodye and soule O my Lorde God. These and many other benefites thou haste heaped vpon me, but I being blind did not perceiue it vn∣till thou dyddest illumynate me. Now therefore O the light of my soule, O my Lorde God, O my life by whom I lyue, O the lighte of mine eyes by the which I see: loe thou haste illuminated me, and I know thee, for by thee I lyue. And I gyue thee thankes, although in∣sufficient and nothing correspon∣dente to thy benefites, yet such as my frayltie is able to afford, I offer vnto thee: I confesse and acknow∣ledge thy goodnes, for thou haste broughte me from the lower hell once, twyse, thryse, yea a hundred and a thousand tymes: I was euery
day going downe to hell, but thou diddest bringe me backe agayne: and iustly thou might a thousande tymes haue condemned me, if it had bene thy pleasure: but thou wouldest not because thou louedst soules, and dissemblest the sinnes of men expectinge their repen∣tance. O my God, my sauiour, in all thy wayes their is great mercy, now I see and manifestly know through the light of thy grace, and my soule doth faynte in the contemplation of thy greate mercy towardes me, because thou haste pluckt me from the lower hell, and haste brought me backe againe to lyfe. It is then by thee wholy that I liue, and ther∣fore I wholy offer my whole selfe to thee, my whole soule, my whole harte, my whole body, my whole life, let it liue vnto thee O my sweet
lyfe: for thou haste wholy delyue∣red me, that thou mighte wholye possesse me: thou hast wholy made me: that thou mighte wholy haue me agayne: Therefore I will loue thee O Lord, which art my strēgth, I will loue thee O my ineffable ioy and comforte, so that my wholle life shall liue no more but for thee, which lyfe was loste in my misery, and nowe reuyued agayne in thy mercy: for thou art a God mercy∣full to thowsands that loue thy ho∣ly name. Amen. A prayse and thankes gyuinge to God for his great benefites. Io. Roffe. psal. 13. lib preca. MY soule doth praise thee O my God, and all that is within me doth laude thy holy name: my soul doth render thee hūble thankes, & I will neuer be vnminful of thy be∣nefites, for thou doest pardonne all
my sinnes, & hast healed all my in∣firmities: thou haste redeemed my lyfe from death, and haste shewed vnto me mercy and grace. Thou haste multiplied in me thy magnificēce, after thine anger thou haste comforted me: thou haste showed me many tribulations and aduersities, but in the end thou hast brought me backe againe from the depth of deapnes: thou haste made knowen to me thy wayes, and from me thou haste not hid thy counsels. Thou arte mercyfull and full of grace O Lorde, slowe to anger, prone and redy to goodnes: thou wilt not alwaie be angrie, and thou doest not for euer holde backe thy mercie: thou rewardest vs not ac∣cording to our sinnes, nether doest thou punishe vs accordinge to our iniquities. As the father doth pitie his chil∣dren:
so thou haste compassion of vs O God our Lord: thou forget∣test not thy handy-worke, thou re∣membrest that euery liuinge man is fleshe, and that the daies of man are as grasse, and as the flowers of the fielde, which with a blaste of colde winde vanishe away, so as none can fynde the place where they grewe. But thy mercy is euerlastinge to those that feare thee, and thy ius∣tice remayneth alwayes, so that we keepe thy law and fulfill thy com∣maundementes. I will extoll thee my God, and prayse thy name for euer and euer: I will render thee thankes at all sea∣sons, and I will make thy name fa∣mous for euer, and longer if longer may be: for thou arte good to all, and thy mercye exceedeth all thy workes. The eyes of all thinges looke
vppe vnto thee that thou wouldest gyue them meate in due time: thou openest thy hand & fillest with thy blessinge euery liuinge thing: thou preseruest all that loue thee, & no tormente of malyce shall touche them: my mouth shall shew foorth thy prayse, and euery liuing thing shall celebrate thy holy name for euer and euer. Prayse our Lorde O ye Angels mightye in power, which doe his commaundementes, and are obe∣diente to the voyce of his worde: prayse our Lorde O all ye Armies which doe his will: magnifie our Lorde and lett vs extoll his name in it selfe. Prayse our Lord all ye his Saints, whose onely name is moste highe: whose onely prayse doth exceede heauen and earth: Prayse our Lord all ye his workes, through all his
dominion in euerye place: euerie thinge that liueth praise our Lorde. The ende of the eyghte Chapter. THE NYNTH CHAPTER CONTAYNINGE NECESSA∣rie prayers for the prosperitie of our bretheren friends and neygh∣bours. Timoth. 2. & Iacob. 5. A prayer for the Churche afflicted. Franc. Tittel in para. Psal. 78. O God the gentiles, bar∣barous Nations, and Infidelles which haue no fayth in thee, nor knowleadge of thy name, are entred into thy heritage, they haue taken thy people by force of armes, and as vanquishers
they occupie our cyties, they haue defyled with their abhominations thy temple dedicated to thy honor and seruice, they haue polluted the vessels consecrated for the seruice of the temple, and vsed them pro∣phanely. VVe are become a reproch and laughing-stocke to our neighbors, in such sorte that they scorne, dis∣pise, and make a ieste of vs, reioy∣sing at our afflictions, and in their mirth they vpbrayd vs: but thou O Lord vpon whose will we who∣ly depend, how long wilt thou be angry with vs. And wherfore doest thou so deli∣uer vs into the hāds of our enemies, as though thou haddest shaked vs of, & hereafter would haue no more care ouer vs: wherefore doest thou showe the furye of thy wrathe to∣wardes thy people, which are the
sheepe of thy holy pasture, where∣of thou art the ruler, sheppard, de∣fender and protector. Be myndfull O Lorde of thy holy Churche, and leaue it not in the hands of thy enemyes, but de∣lyuer it by thy stronge powre be∣holde, and consider, the league and testament made with the elect. Re∣membre thy promise made vnto thē, that thou woldest not forsake them that were contrite in hart, but woldest saue them that were hum∣ble in spirite. For in trueth we are kepte vn∣der, afflicted and broughte to no∣thing, we are contemptible, abiect and miserable, in such sorte that we are a gasing-stocke and ignominie to all nations: wherefore O Lorde doest thou not turne thy face to vs thy poore seruantes? why doest thou turne thy face from them, and
suffer thy enemies so cruellye to rage against them? why doest thou not beholde the misery and afflic∣tion wherin we thy seruantes (des∣titute and desolate of all helpe, and hauing no comfort but in thee) are afflicted and tormented of our e∣nemies; Awake O Lorde God, dissemble no longet but come to succour thy people, and make hast to helpe thy faythfull seruants, and saue vs from the hands of our enemies (we hum∣bly beseech thee) for thy moste glorious names sake, for thine own selfe, and for thy infinite mercye: that we the posteritie may a little taste the sweetnes of thy promises, which our for fathers haue so abun∣dantly felte. But we that are thy people, and the sheepe of thy pasture, which worshippe no other God, which
seeke no other sheppard & gouer∣nour besides thee, whiche put our whole trust & cōfidence in thee, & desire to be fedd, ruled and gouer∣ned, by thee onely, we will render thee moste humble thankes, and sett foorth thy glorye for euer and euer. VVe will declare and shewe thy prayses from generation to gene∣ration, for thou of thy meere good will, haste restored vs to the liber∣tye which we haue requyred: we therefore (in aduersitie as well as in prosperitie, or how so euer it shall please thee to dispose of vs) will serue thee with ioye and gladnes: we will contine we still in thankes gyuinge, attendinge patientlye thy ayde and helpe. Amen. A prayer for our parentes. Io. Ferus in lib. precat.
O Almightye and omnipotente God, which haste strictly com∣maunded vs, next vnto thee to ho∣nour our father and mother, and to pray for their happy and good suc∣cesse: graunt vnto my parentes, and the whole familye, health, & peace: keepe them in the piety and trueth of thy fayth: defend them from all daungers bodily and ghostly: gyue them grace (I humblye beseeche thee) that they offende not thee in any thinge, but that they may al∣waye find thee, a louing, gentle, and mercyfull father and God. Amen. A prayer to be sayed for them that are fallen from the Church. Io. Fabius in preca. christ. OMnipotent benigne and moste mercifull father, we moste en∣tierly besech thee, that it wil please thee to visitt with thy fatherlye af∣fection,
all those that are fallen, and departed from the pure Catholike and christian Church: or doubt in any article thereof: and are seduced or deceiued through any false per∣swasion, to illuminate their hartes O Lorde, with the beames of thy diuine light: staye them and bring them backe to acknowledge their errour, that being in such sort con∣uerted, they maye with the whole vniuersall Church, confesse with mouth, and shewe in workes, one true, catholicke and christian faith, and remayninge in it, they maye worke their owne saluation: so that they and we beinge of one minde and will, in one foolde may heare and followe thee our shepparde, through Iesus Christ our Lorde. Amen. A prayer that chilldren may be instru∣cted in vertue and in the feare of God.
Ioan. Ferus in lib. precat. O God graunt that not onely we our selues cleaue to thy holye worde and doctrine, but also that we may instruct and bringe vp our children in thine honor, in thy feare and discipline, in vertue and obe∣dience, and that they may encrease and growe in comelynes, fayth and piety, that we may haue perfect ioy without any sorrowe, and that we may laude and prayse thee all the dayes of our lyfe. Amen. A prayer for a friende and generallye for anye that is commended vnto our prayers. O Moste sweete sauiour Iesus, I moste humbly beseech thee to vouchsafe to illuminate with the lighte of thy grace, the harte of N. thy seruaunte and my harte also: and to comfort and replenishe our
hartes, with thy moste louing cha∣ritie, to the ende that we may who∣ly seeke thine honour and blessed will, and thee alone with all our hartes to serch and loue: and who∣ly & altogyther to leaue our selues and our owne wills, and to resigne them wholy to thee, so that alwaies, and at all times, we may lyue accor∣dinge to thy holy pleasure, in ob∣seruing and sulfilling thy holy wil. Iesus for thy holy name and for thy bitter passiō, saue vs from sinne and shame and endlesse damnation, and bring vs to the blisse which ne∣uer shall haue ending. Amen. A generall prayer for the lyuinge and the departed in the Catholicke fayth. Ex lib. veterum orat. groecorum. O Sweete sauiour Iesu forgyue those that hate vs, and handle vs oūtragiouslye, render good to
them that doe vs good: graunt vn∣to our brethren those necessaries which they doe aske, and lyfe euer∣lasting: comforte the sicke: directe saylers: and keepe the passengers in their righte waye. O Lord according to thy great mercy, haue pitye vpon those that are recommēded, vnto our vnwor∣thy prayers: remember our fathers and bretheren departed this lyfe, bringe them to that place where they may beholde the light of thy countenaunce: call to minde our brethren which are in captiuitie, and delyuer them from their affliction. Assiste all those that doe good and labour in rulinge of the Churche, graunt them their iust requests, and gyue them euerlastinge blisse: be not vnmindful O lord of vs poore wretched sinners thy vnworthye seruaunts, powre into our harts the
lighte of thy knowlege, and keepe vs in the path of thy commaunde∣mentes, by the intercession of the moste holy, sacred and blessed virgin Mary, and of all the saintes of heauen, for thou arte blessed for ouer and euer. Amen. The end of the ninth Chapter.
THE TENTH CHAPTER CONTEYNINGE HOLESOME prayers to the holy Trinitie. A prayer or thankes geuynge vnto the holy Trinitie. O Blessed Lorde Father, Sonne, and Holy Ghoste, three personnes and one God, my Lorde, my God, my maker, my redemer, my nou∣risher, my defender, my swetenes, my mercie, my refuge, my strēgthe, my victorie, my ioye, & my glorie eternal, I laude thee, I glorifie thee. I honor and worshippe thee, O blessed Trinitie for that thou arte in thy selfe, for thou arte the hiest good, from whome floweth all goodnes, thou arte gracious eter∣nitie, thou art eternall felicitie, thou arte onely God, and there is none without thee. I laude and honour
thee o blessed Trinitie that might∣fully haste made of nought heauen and earth, sonne and moone, and al∣thinges that be in them and for that it pleased thee to make the holye Angels to laude, & to prayse thee eternally, and that they might assiste vs faithfully in this exile and ban∣nishement, with there good coun∣sayles and helpings, and to declare thy in effable goodnes, thou madest all thinges for man, and moreouer thou madest man, with thy propre handes to thine owne ymage and similitude, onely for thee: and thou formedst in him vnderstanding, & adornedst him with free wil. I laude & glorifie thee for that great gifte. Thou didest set him in paradise flowing with delites, that he might haue the thinges that are aboue to enioye, and gouuerne the thinges inferioure, & to possesse all things,
and to worshippe thee for euer∣more. And thou made not these noble creatures Angels & men for any necessity thou hadest of them, for truly all thinge was sufficient in thee to thine eternall ioye & glo∣rie: but of the feruoure of thy cha∣ritys thou wast moued to create them, that suche creatures shoulde bee partakers of thy ineffable ioye and glorie. I laude and honour thee good Lorde for that it pleased thee among all thy blessed workes to make mee a reasonable man, and hast gyuen mee wisedome, reason, vnderstanding, and free libertie, & haste fourmed mee with all right lymmes, and features of bodie, and haste gyuen mee manye blessed giftes spirituall and temporall, and also meate, drincke, clothe, and all thinges necessarie, whiche manie a good creature that hath serued the
better than I haue done hathe wanted, and for that thou hast visi∣ted my harte many times with ma∣ny graces, and spirituall motions, deliuering mee oft from many pe∣rilles both of bodie and soule, and from slaunders, shames, and rebuks of this worlde, into the whiche for my sinnes I myght haue fallen: and for that also thou hast suffered mee in all mine iniquitie, and all myne horrible and abhominable sinnes, pacientlye alwaye abydinge for my conuersion, and amendemente, whereas at innumerable times thou myghtest haue slayne mee, and of righte haue putt mee to eternall paines and dampnation. I laude and glorifie thee O Lorde God for all thy mercie, whiche alwayes thou haste shewed to sinners, pacientlie abyding for them, mercyfully cal∣linge them, beninglye receyuinge
them, abundantlye geuing grace to them, & to such familiaritie admit∣tinge them, as though they had ne∣uer sinned. O mercyfull Lord and paciente God, what shall I saye to thee for all these benefites? VVhat laudes and thankes shall I yelde to thee? VVhat and all my sinnes were cleane taken a waye from mee, tru∣lie yet were not I worthy for the leaste of thy benefites and mercies to gyue thee condigne lande. But as a wretched sinner can, with all my hart I laude thee, I prayse thee. I thanke thee, I honoure and wor∣shippe thee, yea all honor, laude, & prayse be gyuen to thee, nowe and euermore. Amen. A prayer to God the father S. Cyprianus author esse scribitur O God father of our Lorde Iesus Christ thy sonne, God of Pa∣tryarckes, God of Prophetes, God
of Apostles, God of Martyrs, God of Virgins, God of all beleeuers: I beseech thee O father of maiesty, which without limitation of tyme haste taken pitie vpon vs, sendinge vnto vs Iesus Christ thy sonne our Lorde and sauiour, borne of the virgin Marye by the operation of the holy ghost, by the annunciati∣on of the Angel Cabriel: by whom thou haste delyuered vs from imi∣nente and present death. I beseech thee O Lorde to suc∣cour and helpe me, and iudge me not accordinge to my workes, for I haue not bene obediente to thy commaundements, but thou which louest repentance haue mercy vp∣on me, which before thy face make confession of all my sinnes: and as Dauid prayed: O Lord for the loue of thy holy name wype awaye my sinnes: so I beseech thy diuine Ma∣iestie
to blotte out all my offences. Make me to abyde in thy holy Catholike Church, with an vndefi∣led faith, a pure hart, firme deuotiō, continuall loue, and to perseuer in good workes: deliuer me from the eternall fyre & euerlasting payne, & from all torment which thou haste prepared for the wicked: graunte this, for our good and blessed Saui∣ours sake, by whom to thee al laud, honour, power and glorye be for euer and euer. Amen. A prayer to God the Sonne called, O bone Iesu. O Bountifull Iesu, O swete Iesu, O Iesu the sonne of the pure Virgin Marie full of mercy and trueth, O swete Iesu, after thy great mercy haue pitie on me. O bening Iesu I praye thee, by the same pre∣cious bloude, which for vs misera∣ble finners, thou wast contente to
shed on the aulter of the crosse, that thou wouldest vouchsafe to auoid clene all my wickednes and not to despise me, hūbly asking pardō, & calling vpō thy most holy name Ie∣sus. This name Iesus is the name of health: what is Iesus but a Sauiour? O good Iesus that hast created me & with thy precious bloude rede∣med me, suffer me not to be dāned whom of nought thou hast created. O good Iesu let not my wickednes destroye that which thy almightie goodnes hath made and formed in me. O good Iesu, reknowlege that which is thine in me, & wipe cleane away that which is not thine in me: O good Iesu, while time of mercy is, haue mercy on me, and cōfound me not in time of thy terrible iudg∣ment. O good Iesu if I wretched sinner, for my moste grieuous offē∣ces haue by thy verye iustice de∣serued
eternall paine, yet I appeale from thy verye righteousnes, and stedfastlye trust in thine ineffable mercy: so as a mylde father & mer∣cyfull Lorde oughte, take pitie on me. O good Iesu, what profit is in my bloud since I muste discende into eternall corruption? they that be dead shal not magnifie thee, nor lykewyse all they that descende to hell. O moste mercyfull Iesu haue mercy on me, O most sweete Iesu deliuer me, O moste meke Iesu be vnto me comfortable, O Iesu ac∣cepte me a wretched sinner into the number of them, that shalbe saued. O Iesu the health of all them that truste in thee, haue mercy vpō me. O Iesu the sweete forgyuenes of all my sinnes, O Iesu the sonne of the pure Virgin Marie, endue me with thy grace, wisdome, cha∣ritie, chastitie, and humilitie: yea &
in all myne aduersities with stedfast pacience, so that I maye perfectlye loue thee, and in thee to be glori∣fied, and haue myne onely delight in thee, worlde without ende. Amen. A prayer to the holy ghoste. Io. Fab. cap. 9. mechta. COme O holy spirite the moste sweete comforter of the sor∣rowfull and desolate, the loue of the diuine puissance, the holy com∣munication of the almightie and omnipotent father, and of his most blessed sonne, descende with thy mightie power into the entralls of my harte: lighten and bewtifie the darke closetts of my desolate harte with thy cleare brightnes, and that which with continuall filth of my vnfruitfull lyfe is dryed vppe, vifit thou and make fruitfull with the a∣boundant dewe of thy grace.
Touche and wounde my harte with the darte of thy loue, inflame my dull and slouthfull harte: ligh∣ten the inner partes of my soule withe the heate of thy holye fyre: make me to drincke of the riuer of thy sweetnes, that hereafter I may feele no taste in any worldly de∣lyte which is venimous. O holye spirite, O excellente workman, whomsoeuer thou doest inhabite, thou buildest a lodginge for the father and the sonne: come therfore O moste sweete comfor∣ter of my sorowfull soule, defende me in all tribulation: come O puri∣fier of our sinnes, and saluer of our deadly sores: come O strength and fortitude of the weake, and guide of the humble: come meeke father of the fatherlesse, and sweete Iudge of the widowes: Come O soue∣raigne hope of the poore, and com∣forter
of the weake: come O bright starre of faylers, and sure porte of the shipp wracte: come O singuler bewtie and ornament of the liuing, and onelye saluation of the deade: come moste holy spirite, come and haue mercy vpon me, make fitt and accomodate me to thee: condes∣cend benignely to me accordinge to the multitude of thy mercy, that my littlenes may be agreeable to thy greatnes, and my imbe∣cillitye and weakenes to thy diuyne puissance: through Iesus Christ our Sauiour. Amen. The ende of the tenth Chapter.
THE ELEVENTH CHAP∣TER CONTAYNINGE CHRI∣stian Catholicke prayers to Saintos & citizens of the glorie of heauen. A prayer vnto the holy virgin Mary. Cuth. Tunstall in lib. prec. Luke. 1. ALl hayle vndesiled Vir∣gin Marye mother of the sonne of God, ele∣cted and chosen aboue all other Virgins, the whiche euen from the wombe of thy mother Anna (a woman moste holy) hast bene of the holy Ghost so fanctified, illuminated, and so, greatly defended with the grace of God almightie, that vnto the con∣ception of oure Lord Iesus Christ thy sonne, and whilest thou didest conceyue hym, and vnto the tyme of his birthe, & whylest thou didest
beare him, and continuallye after his byrth, thou continuedst, and re∣maynedst a Virgin of all other that be borne moste chast, most vncor∣rupte, and of bodie and soule all thy lyfe moste immaculate and vn∣spotted. For truely thou haste far passed all other Virgins, how many soeuer haue bene hetherto syns the beginninge of the worlde, or euer shalbe to the later ende ther∣of, in a sincere conscience of an impolluted minde. By these thy most excellent gyftes of heauenly grace, infused into thee, by God very singulerly, O Virgin and mo∣ther Marie, aboue all other women and Virgins, wee praye thee which art vnto vs (miferable mortal men) a mercyfull patronesse, that thou wilt voutchesafe to make interces∣sion to God the Father omnipo∣tente, and to his sonne Iesus Christ,
(begotē certenly as cōcerning his Diuinitie of the Father before all worlds, & borne of thee, cōcerning his humanity, & to the holy Ghost proceding from the father and the sonne) that our sinnes may be for∣geuen vs, and that wee, throughe thy intercession maye meryte con∣tinuallye to reioyce with thee O holye Virgin, and to prayse thee in the kindome of heauen, without ende. Amen. A prayer to our Ladye the blessed vir∣gin Mary and S. Iohn Euangelist. S. Edmundus Arch. Cantuarienfis author scribitur O intemerata. O Vndefiled & for euer blessed, singular and incōparable Vir∣gin Marie mother of God, his most pleasaunt Tēple, the noble Shryne of the holy Ghost, the Entree and Gate of the kyngdome of heauen:
by whome next after God all the world lyueth. Bowe downe thyne eares (O mother of pitye and mer∣cy) vnto my poore prayers, and be to me (wretched sinner) a pitiouse helper in all thinge. O most Blessed Ihon Euangelist the farnyliar frend of Christ, which of the same Iesu Christ our Lorde was a chosen Virgin, amonge all others muche beloued, and aboue all others instructed and learned in heauenly Secrettes and mysteries: thou was made his Apostle and Euangelist moste excellent: there∣fore I call vpon the and Marie the mother of the same Lorde Iesu Christ our Saniour; that thou and shee would vouchsaf to help me. O ye two heauēly Gemmes Marie and Ihon. O two diuine Lampes, euer shyninge before God, dryue away with your blessed bearnes the
darke cloudes of my sinnes: for ye are the two in whom the onely be∣gotten sonne of God, for the me∣rit of pure virginitie, confirmed the priuilege of his singuler loue, while he was hanging on the crosse, say∣ing thus to the one of you: VVoman beholde thy sonne: and after to the o∣ther: Beholde thy mother: Therefore (in this sweetenes of such sacred loue, wherin ye were then conioy∣ned (by the mouth of our Lorde) as Mother and Sonne) to you two I moste wretched sinner commend this day my body and soule, that in euery houre and momente, in∣wardly and outwardly, ye woulde vouchsafe to be my suer keepers and pitifull intercessors to God for me. Aske I beseech you health of body and soule for me: Helpe I praye you, helpe with your glori∣ouse prayers, that the holy Ghost
the noble gyuer of graces, woulde wouchsafe to visite, adorne and in∣habite my harte, to purge me from all filthe of sinne: to bewtifye me with all holy vertues, and make me stand perfectly and perseuer in the loue of God and my neyghbour: And after the course of this lyfe, I may be ledde to the ioyes of the elect by the same holy Ghost, who with the father and the sonne, eter∣nally lyueth and raigneth one God almightye worlde without ende. Amen. A prayer to all the holy Angelles. Victor. Vticensis. libr. de persecutione Vandalica. HEare vs O holy Angells of our God, whose ayde neuer faileth, for you are constituted (in your seruice) for them that shal be heires of euerlasting saluation: watch and take heede, and behold howe Sion
the Citie of our God is become of litle estimation, and as it were pol∣luted with infection amongest her enemyes: the enemy hathe abu∣sed and wastfully occupyed all her pleasaunt & beautyfull ornamētes, for he hathe seene infidelles and vnworthy persones assaile & enter within the gates whoe our Lorde had commaunded should not en∣ter into his Churche. Saye vnto God our protector, (euen as those whiche haue a sure trust to obteyne that whiche you require) that his Church is afflic∣ted & trauelled, & her wombe sore troubled with her outcries, for she is set amongest infidels & doth find no rest, & not any to comfort her. She hathe soughte who woulde mourne with her, but coulde finde none; she hath sought who woulde gyue her comforte but no person
was to be founde, euen when shee dyd eate Gaule in her meate, and in her thirst tooke vynager for her drincke folowinge the Passion of her spouse and Lorde who suffred for hyr, to the end, that shee might followe his steppes. A prayer to S. Iohn Baptist. Ludo. carthusianus li. de vita Christi. O Moste blessed Iohn the fore∣runner of Christe, the crier of the Iudg, frend of the spouse, voice of the diuine word which haste de∣serued to declare & fortell the ioy and comfort of our redemption: obtaine for me poore and misera∣ble sinner of the same Lord Iesus, by thy most holy prayers, that my harte, being clensed from vice and adorned with vertues, I may accor∣ding to thy hoolsome admonitiōs prepare the way of our Lord, and make streyght his pathes in suche
sort, as in the laste and finall Iudge∣mēt, when he shall clense the floore of his Church, & shall seperate the good corne from the chaffe, I may deserue to be found amongest the wheate, & his elect, & with thē may be layde vpp in the barne of his heauenly mansion. Amen. A prayer to any of the Apostles. O Lord God which amongest al and aboue al thy other saintes, haste moste maruelouslye chosen thy moste blessed Apostles, to be the firste pillers and foundation of thy Church, and before all other haste firste sent them to preach thy Ghospel through the whole world, confirminge and establishing their doctryne, by maruelous workes, wounders and miracles: and thou more-ouer by the same Apostles
haste sought, allured and inuited vs Gentyles, to the knowledge and prayse of thy holy name. VVe humblye beseech thee O Lorde, mercyfully to graunte, that we beinge by thee founded vpon the rocke of the Apostolicke con∣fession, and in the vnion of the same fayth, are chosen and called to o∣beye & prayse thee perpetually, be neuer seperated from thee, through any errour or temptation: make vs pertakers of the intercession of S. N. and of the twelue Apostles in the strength and fortification of a true fayth, amendment of our lyfe, and auoyding and eschueing of all euil, through Iesus Christ our Lord Amen. A prayer to any of the holy Martyres. Hora B. virgi. secund. vs. ord. D. Bene. O God which haste so strengh∣thned in thy fayth and loue thy
blessed Martyr S. N. as no fleshlye delites, no threatninges of tyrantes, no sworde or torture of tormen∣tors could withdraw him from the worshipping of thee: graunte vnto vs miserable sinners, by his worthy merites and intercessions, helpe in tribulation, comforte in persecuti∣on, that we may manfully fighte a∣gainst all the deceites of the deuill, despise the worlde and all that is in it, that we may feare no aduersitie, but may obtaine that, which by thy holye inspiration we doe desire, through Christ our Lorde. Amen. A prayer to any Confessor. Petrus Canisius li catho. prec. ALmightye and euerlasting God which art the wounderful light of thy beloued saintes, and princi∣pally thou haste appoynted for vs blessed bishopps, pastors, doctors
and confessors as burninge lightes in thy house: and by their doctrine, exhortations, writinges and testi∣monies, recallest and reducest sin∣ners from euill to good. VVe humbly beseech thee, that thou wilte vndoe & lose the bonds of our sinnes, and although we be vnworthie, yet make vs partakers of that intercessiō of blessed S.N. & all thy holy confessors, that we for∣sakinge our sinnes, and walking in true fayth and charitie, folowinge them in good workes, may at laste enioy their companie in the eternal beatitude, through Iesus Christ our Lorde. Amen. A prayer to any holy Virgin. Idem in eodem lib. O God which amongest the o∣ther miracles of thy power and might, doest gyue and graunte in a fraile sex to all virgins, wydowes &
matrones, the victorie of martyr∣dome, and immaculate chastitiye: mercyfully graunte that we which amongest thy other holye virgins and widowes, do celebrate the me∣mory of thy blessed sainte N. may by her example and intercession, despise the allurements of the flesh, the pleasures of the worlde, and in true fayth to passe all perrils of soul and body, and exercyse our selues daily more and more in thy seruice in such sorte, that with them after∣wards we may haue the fruition of ioye and solace eternall. Amen. A prayer to any of the holy Sayntes. Ex tabella quadam Coloniae in templo S. Vrsul. O Holy and blessed S. N. I hum∣bly beseech thee that thou wilt haue me (poore and wretched sin∣ner in remembraunce, before the
face of my God and sauiour, that by thy merites and intercessions I may be preserued from all daungers bo∣dyly and ghostly, that I may dayly more and more increase in vertue and good workes: and at the houre of my death and departure out of this worlde, vouchsafe to succour and defend me, against the assaultes and deceites of mine ennemies, and bring my soule deliuered and made free from all tribulatiō, to the ioyes of the heauenly paradyse. Amen. Pray for vs O holy S. N. that we maye be made worthye of the promisses of Christ. VVe humblye beseech thee O Lorde God father omnipotente to receiue the prayers of thy seruants, that we worshipping the memorye of thy blessed S. N. by his merites and intercessions may be delyuered from al bodyly aduersities: and that
our hartes may be clensed from all euill and idle thoughtes, through Iesus Christe our sauiour. Amen. A prayer to all the blyssed Saintes in heauen. Ex herae B. M. ad vsum Sarum. O All yee holy & electe of God, vnto whome almightie God hathe prepared his eternall kinge∣dome from the beginninge: I be∣seech you through the charitie, by the which God dyd loue you, that you doe sucker mee moste misera∣ble sinner, before death doe take mee awaye oute of this wretched world: and reconcile mee vnto my creator before that hell deuoure mee. O blessed Marie mother of God, the mediatrix for sinners vn∣to Christ, heare mee, kepe mee, saue mee: O thou sweete Lady obtaine to mee righte faithe, firme hope,
perfecte charitie, true humylitie, chastitie, and sobrietie, & after the course of this lyfe the felow shippe of the euerlasting blyssednes. Thou also holye Michaell, with all the thousandes of Angells praye for mee, that thou mayest take & keepe mee from the power of my aduer∣saries, helpe mee, obtaine for mee the loue of God, purenes of hart, strength of faith, and the pleasure of heauenlie glorie. Also yee holy Patriarkes and Prophetes, procure for mee of God pardon, penaunce, continencie, and godlye perseue∣rance, and also lyfe euerlastinge. O yee blessed Apost'es of God vn∣lose mee from my sinnes, defende mee from the paynes of hell, and take mee from the power of dar∣kenes, & bringe me vnto the euer∣lastinge kyngdome. I beseche you also yee holy Martyrs of God, that
perfecte charitie, syncere loue, a pure minde, a chaste lyfe, and re∣mission of my sinnes be gyuen of almightie God vnto mee. O yee glorious Confessours of God, praye for mee, that through you the desire of heauenly thinges, and reuerence of maners & wash∣inge away of my misdeedes bee of God graunted vnto mee. Likewise I praye you all holy Virgines of God, that you doe ayde mee, to thintent I may haue a good minde, and health of bodie and soule, hu∣militie, chastitie, & after the course of this my miserable lyfe fellow∣shipe of the perpetuall blessednes. O all yee Saints of God I do pray, and also do make humble supplica∣tion, that you will woutchsafe to helpe mee, and haue compassion vpon me most pytyfully, and pray for mee instātly, that through your
intercession, a pure conscience bee ingrafted within mee, with com∣punction of harte for my sinnes, and laudable endinge of my lyfe, so that through your merites I maye bee able to come vnto the countrye of eternall blessednes, almyghtie God graunte it. Amen. The end of the eleuenth Chapter.
THE TVVELFTH CHAP∣TER CONTEYNING ADVER∣tisments & consolations with pray∣ers and suffrages for the sicke. An aduertisment for the sicke, diligent∣ly to prepare him selfe to dye vvell. Lud. Blosius cap. 1. posterioris li. Ench. paruulorum. VVhoe soeuer doethe loue God dutifullye, being at anye time o∣uertaken with sicknes, whereby deathe is feared to be at hand: let good heede be taken that with diligēce thou prepare thy selfe to end well: discharge thy harte of the cares & troubles of this world: receiue deuoutly the Sacramentes of the Church, to the ende thou maiest purchasse succour & strēgth to passe through thy iourney: and wholly recommende thy soule to
God. Remember the passion of our sweete Sauiour and redeemer: em∣brace in thy hart his holsome crosse kisse his ruddy woundes, and thrust thy selfe with all thy power into them, that beinge hidden in them thou maiest be safe, and happely es∣cape from all the snares and entys∣mentes of the deuill: humblye be∣seech our Sauiour Iesus Christ, that he would wouchsafe to washe thee with his precious blood, and that he woulde whollye abandonne all thy sinnes. And for wante of meritoriouse good workes, offer to God the fa∣ther the merites of Iesus Christ: of∣fer him his moste holy and sacred conuersation, death and passion: of∣fer him the merites of his moste sweete mother the wirgin Mary, & of all Saintes: for so it shall come to
passe that thou which art poore, na∣ked and miserable of thy selfe, shalt appeare maruelously adorned with spirituall ornaments: recommende thy selfe also to our blessed Ladye the glorious virgin and mother of God, and to the other Cytizens of heauen, and principally to that saint which thou haste accustomed most to pray vnto, hoping and beleeuing certainly that they heare thy pray∣ers, and that if thou call vpon the blesse virgin with all thy hart, and turne moste humbly and assuredly thy selfe to her, she will without doubt make thy entraunce into the kingdome of heauen, where other∣wise it may be (through the diuine iustice of God) that thou canst not enter, because of thine iniquitie, for she is the mother of mercy, and the Porte of of heauen.
Then folovveth this protestation or such lyke, very profitable to be made by the sicke. Lud. Blofius cap. 3. lib. sup. I wicked sinner moste vnworthy, (redeemed with the preciouse bloode of our Lorde Iesus Christ) doe confesse openlye, that with an entyer and pure harte I forgyue all those that haue at any time euer of∣fended me, or done me iniurye, in what maner soeuer: desiring moste humblye all and euerye one that I haue offended, iniuried, grieued, or any way angred (whyther they be present or absent) that they would vouchsafe also to forgyue me. Here let the sicke call to minde his sinnes in particular, and aske God forgynenes, purposing firmely by God his grace ne∣uer to commit sinne agayne: and though his sinnes be neuer so many, and the ma∣ner of his offences neuer so horrible and grieuouse, yet he is to trust in the omni∣potency
of God whose mercyes are in∣numerable, and to take hope and comfort in the passion of Christe our redeemer: Sayeng. I beleue in God the father almighty. &c. A prayer for the sicke person to saye af∣ter his beleefe. O Holy Trinitie I beseech thee. keepe and preserue this pure religion of my fayth, and graunte that it may euer be sounding in my conscience vntill my spirit departe. O almightie and mercyfull Iesu, I protest before thee and before all the courte of heauen, that I haue a will and desire to finishe my lyfe in this fayth, wherein of necessitie e∣uery childe (obediente to our Mo∣ther the holye Church) ought to dye. Further my sweete Sauiour I protest to beleeue wholly and vni∣uersally all that which is conteined
in the Catholicke fayth, and that which a true faithful christiā ought to beleeue: that if it happen by the assaults of the deuil, or by violence of sicknes, I come to thinke, say, or doe any thing contrary to this pur∣pose, I doe reuoke it at this present, & protest that I gyue no consent to any such thought, word, or worke. I reioyce and render thankes to my louinge creator and redeemer, through the maruelouse goodnes of his bounty, by the which I hope vndoubtedlye to dye in the holye Catholicke fayth: and so I recom∣mende my soule and body into his moste holy handes nowe and at the houre of my death. Amen. Prayers in sicknesse. Dionys. Cart. in dial. de part. iudicio animarum. O Swet Iesu, I desire nether lyfe, nor deathe, but thy most holy
will. Thee O Lorde I loke for, be it vnto mee according to thy plea∣sure. Yf thou wil sweete Iesu, that I dye, receyue my soule. And albeit I come to thee euen at the verye eueninge, as one of the laste, yet graunt that with thee, and in thee, I may receyue euerlasting rest. Yf thou wilt sweete Iesu that I lyue longer on earthe, I purpose to a∣mende the rest of my lyfe, and offer all into a burnt sacrifice vnto thee, for thy honour and glorie, accor∣dinge to thy blessed will: and for the perfoorminge of this I desire the assistance of thy holy grace. Another prayer. Nieron. in Agone mortis, auctore Eusebio. O Mercyfull Iesu, my vertue and power, my comforte and ease, my receyuer, and my redemer, in
whome I haue hoped, in whome I haue belyeued, and whome I haue loued, my swete delight. my tower of strength, my hope from my youthe, the guide of my lyfe, call mee, and I will answer thee. O crea∣tor of heauen and earthe, stretche foorth the power of thy mercye, vnto the worke of thy hāds, which thou createdst of the slyme of the earth, and tiedst together with bo∣nes and synowes. Commaund O Lorde, staye not, for it is time, that dust may returne into dust, and my soule maye returne to thee his Sa∣uiour, who diddest sende it downe into this worlde. Open vnto me the gates of lyfe: for thou diddest hange vpon the Crosse for my sake, and madest mee promise to receyue mee. Come my sweete Lorde, lett mee embrace thee, lett mee not
leese thee. Bring mee into thy hea∣uenlie palace. Thou arte my recey∣uer, my glorie, mine aduauncer, my habitation, and my benedictiō. Re∣ceyue me moste mercyfull Lorde, accordinge to thee multitude of thy mercies. For thou dyinge on the Crosse receyuedst the theefe, returninge vnto thee. Another prayer. Ibid. I Am sycke: my lyfe is weake in this poore state, and therfore to thee O Lorde I runne, as to my onely phisitiō. Heale mee O Lord, and I shalbe healed. And for that I haue mine affiance reposed in thee, lett mee not be confounded. But what am I, O most mercifull God, that speake so boldly to thee? I am a sinner, begottē, borne, & brought vp in sinne: I am a rotten carkas, a stinckinge vessell, and meate for
woormes. VVhat victorie O Lord shall it be, yf in conflict thou ouer∣throw mee, who am lesse than a litle strawe before the face of the wynde? Forgyue O Lord forgyue all my sinnes, and lyft vpp a poore man from this durty dounghill of earthe. Certes good Lord, this will I saye, yf it please thee, thou mayest not refuse him that hathe his re∣course to thee. For thou arte my Lord God, flesh of my flesh, bones of my bones. For to this intent, thou not leauing the right hand of thy father, diddest assumpte my hu∣maine nature, and becamst God & man, remayning in one person the selfe same, whiche thou wast from thee beginninge. And why diddest thou woorke this so hard & woun∣derfull misterie, but that I should boldlye haue recourse to thee, as vnto my brother, & thou wouldest
mercifully so couer thy diuinitie, that I should not be affraid of thy heauenlie power. VVherfore arise, O Lorde, and helpe me, arise, and put mee not backe for euer. Another prayer. Ibid. LEtt my request entre into thy sight, O Lord, and let thy hande bee made to make me whole. Be∣holde I am the man that cominge downe from Hiericho, was taken and wounded of theeues, and left half dead. Doo thou receyue mee O mercyfull Samaritan. I haue sin∣ned excessiuelie in my lyfe, and wrought muche iniquitie in thy syght. From the sole of my foote, euen to the toppe of my head, there is no sounde health in mee. Verely onlesse thou dying on the Crosse hadst assisted mee, my soule had bene worthy to dwell in hell. I am,
(sweete Iesu,) a parte of that deare price: for me, thou diddest shed thy precious bloud, cast me not away. I am the sheepe that wēt a stray, seeke that sheepe, O good shepheard, & put hym in thy folde, that thou mayst be iustified in thy woorde. For thou diddest make mee pro∣mise, that at what soeuer houre a sinner did repēt him of his sinnes & returne to thee, he shoulde be sa∣ued. I lament O Lord and moorne for my sinnes, I acknowledg myne iniquities, my wickednesse is in my sight, I am not woorthy to be cal∣led thy sonne. For I haue sinned against heauen & before thee, thou shalt make mee heare that, whiche halbe great ioy & gladnes vnto my eart. Turne away thy face O Lord from my sinnes: blotte out myne iniquities, accordinge to thy great mercie. Cast me not away out from
thy sight. Deale not with mee ac∣cordinge to my sinnes, nor reward mee after the desert of myne ini∣quities. But helpe me O Lorde, my God and my Sauiour, and for the glorye of thy holy name delyuer mee. Deale mercifully, as it femeth best to thy holy will, that I maye dwell in thy howse all the dayes of my lyfe, that I may prayse thee for euer more, as they doe that dwell there, worlde without ende. Amen. Prayers and suffrages to be sayd for one lyinge in death bedde. LOrde haue mercie vpon vs. Christ haue mercy vpon vs. Lorde haue mercy vpon vs. Holy Marie praye for him. All holy Angelles, and Archangels praye for him. Holy Abell praye for him. All the companye of the iuste pray
for him. Holy Abraham praye for him. Holy Iohn Baptiste praye for him. All yee holye Patriarkes and pro∣phetes praye for him. Saint Peter praye for him. Saint Paule praye for him. Saint Andrewe praye for him. Saint Iohn praye for him. All yee holy Apostelles and Euan∣gelistes praye for him. All ye holy Disciples of our Lord praye for him. All yee holie Innocentes praye for him. Saint Stephen praye for him. Saint Laurence praye for him. All yee holy Martyrs pray for him. Saint Siluester praye for him. Saint Augustine praye for him. All yee holy Bishoppes and Con∣fessors praye for him. Saint Benet praye for him.
Saint Francis praye for him. All ye holy Monkes and Eremites praye for him. Saint Mary Magdalen pray for him. Saint Lucie praye for him. All ye holye virgins and wydowes pray for him. All ye holy Saintes of God make intercession for him. Haue mercy, & spare him O Lord. Haue mercy: & heare him O Lord. Haue mercy: and deliuer hym O Lorde. From thy anger, delyuer hym O Lorde. From an euill deathe delyuer him O Lorde. From the daunger of deathe, de∣liuer him O Lorde. From the paines of hell, delyuer him O Lorde. From all euil, deliuer him O Lord. From the power of the deuill, de∣liuer
him O Lorde. By thy Natiuitie, deliuer him O Lorde. By thy Crosse and Passion, deliuer him O Lorde. By thy death and buriall, delyuer him O Lorde. By thy glorious resurrection deli∣uer him O Lorde. By thy wounderfull ascension de∣liuer him O Lorde. By the grace of the holy ghost the comforter, deliuer him O Lorde. In the day of iudgemente; deliuer him O Lorde. VVe sinners doe beseech thee to heare vs. That thou wouldest spare him, we beseeche thee to here vs. Lorde haue mercie vpon vs. Christ haue mercie vpon vs. Lorde haue mercie vpon vs. O thou Christian soule, departe
thou out of this world in the name of God the father almightie, who hath created thee; In the name of Christ Iesus the sonne of the liuing God, who hath suffered for thee, In the name of the holy ghost, who was powred into thee, In the name of the holy Angelles and Archan∣gelles, In the name of the Thrones and dominations, In the name of the Powers and Potestates, In the name of Cherubin and Seraphin, In the name of the Patriarches and Prophetes, In the name of the holy Apostelles and Euangelistes, In the name of the holie Martyrs & Con∣fessours, In the name of the holye Monkes and Eremites, In the name of the holie Virgins, and of all the Saintes of God. Lett thy place be this daye in peace, and thy habita∣tion in holye Sion, through Christ our Lorde. Amen.
A prayer. O Mercyfull God, O benigne God, O God who accordinge to the multitude of thy mercyes doest blott out the sinnes of suche as are penitent, and with thy remis∣sion and pardon doest cleane purge the blame of offences paste, merci∣fully looke vpon this thy seruant. N. and for our prayers graunt him his request, who with all his harte confessynge thy name, doeth most earnestlye craue for pardon of all his sinnes. Renew in him, O moste mercyfull father, what soeuer is corrupte through the frayeltie of the flesh, or that whiche hath bene defyled by the crafte of the deuill: and ioyne agayne vnto the vnitie of thy bodie the church, the mem∣ber whiche thou haste redeemed. Haue mercye O Lorde vppon his sighes: haue mercy vpon his teares,
and admitte agayne vnto the Sacra∣ment of thy reconciliation hym, who hath no hope but in thy mer∣cie, through Christ our Lorde. Amen. Another prayer. DEarely beloued brother I cō∣mende thee vnto almyghtie God, and to his protection I com∣mit thee, whose creature thou art, to the ende, thou hauing payed by the meanes of thy death, the debte of all man-kinde, mayest returne againe vnto thy maker, who hath framed thee of a piece of claye. Lett therfore the noble compainie of Angels meete thy soule depar∣tinge out of thy bodie. Lett the whole Senate of the Apostles, iud∣ges of the worlde, come vnto thee. Lett the triumphant armye of the gloriousse Martyrs come against thee. Lett the florishing companie
of the shining. Confessours cōpasse thee aboute. Lett the whole quire of the singinge Virgines receyue thee, & with embracing, settle thee faste in the bosome of the Patri∣arches, which is the place of blessed reste and quietnes. Let Christ Iesus appeare vnto thee with a milde and chereful, countenāce, and adiudge thee to bee emonge those, who al∣wayes attend vpon hym. Be thou ignorant of all that quaketh in dar∣kenes, that crashed in fire, and hou∣leth in tormentes. Lett the moste cruell fiend Satan, with all his soul∣diars gyue place vnto thee: lett him tremble at thy comming, thou being accompaigned with the ho∣lie Angells, and lett him flye into the huge pitte of euerlastinge dar∣kenes. Lett God arise, and lett his enemyes be dispersed, and lett all that hate him, flye awaye from his
face. Lett them vanish awaye as the smoke vadeth: as the waxe melteth before the face of the fire, so lett all sinners perish from the face of God: and lett the iuste make merie and reioyse in the sight of God. Therefore lett all the legions of hell be confounded and ashamed, and lett not the ministres of Satan, be so bolde as to stop thy iourney. Christe deliuer thee from all tor∣ments, who was crucified for thee. Christ deliuer thee frō death, who hath vouchsafed to dye for thee. Christ the sonne of the liuing God, place thee in the garden of his pa∣radise, whiche alwayes is pleasaunt & flourishinge: & he that is the true shepeherd, agnise thee emong his sheepe. Lett him absolue thee from all thy sinnes, and place thee at his right hande, in the inheritaunce of his electe. God graunt thou maiest
see thy redeemer, face to face, and that thou maist be alwayes present at hande, and with thy blessed eyes beholde the moste manifest trueth. God graunt therfore, that thou be∣ing placed emonge the compagnie of the blessed soules, maiest enioye the swetenes of the countenaunce of the diuine maiestie, for euer and euer. Amen. Receyue O Lorde thy seruant into the place of Saluation, whiche he muste hope to haue of thy mer∣cie. R. Amen. Deliuer O Lorde the soule of thy seruant from all daungers of hell, and from all snares that maye entrappe him to paine, and from all tribulation. R. Amen. Deliuer O Lorde the soule of thy seruaunt, as thou haste deliured Enoch and Elias from the cōmon death of the world. R. Amen.
Deliuer O Lorde the soule of thy seruaunt, as thou deliueredst Noe, from drowninge in the gene∣rall fludde. R. Amen. Deliuer O Lorde the soule of thy seruaunt, as thou deliueredst Abraham out from Vr of the Chal∣dees. R. Amen. Deliuer O Lorde the soule of thy seruaunt, as thou deliueredst Iob from his passions and paines. R. Amen. Deliuer O Lorde the soule of thy seruaunt, as thou deliueredst Isaac from beinge offerd in Sacri∣fice, and out from the handes of his father. R. Amen. Deliuer O Lorde the soule of thy seruaunt, as thou deliueredst Loth from Sodom, and from the flame of fier. R. Amen. Deliuer O Lorde the soule of thy seruaunt, as thou deliueredst
Moyses out from the handes of Pharao, Kynge of the Egyptians. R. Amen. Deliuer O Lorde the soule of thy seruaunt, as thou deliueredst Daniel out from the denne of the Lyons. R. Amen. Deliuer O Lorde the soule of thy seruaunt, as thou deliueredst the three Children out from the fiery fournace, and from the hands of the cruell & vnmercyfull Kyng. R. Amen. Deliuer O Lorde the soule of thy seruaunt, as thou deliueredst Susanna frō the crime with which she was falsely charged. R. Amen. Deliuer O Lorde the soule of thy seruaunt, as thou deliueredst Dauid, from the handes of kinge Saul, and Golias. R. Amen. Deliuer O Lorde the soule of thy seruaunt, as thou deliueredst
S. Peter and Paule out of pryson. R. Amen. And as thou deliueredst that blessed Virgin, and Martyr Tecla, from her moste cruell torments, so vouchesafe to deliuer the soule of this thy seruant, and make him par∣taker of the euerlastinge ioyes in heauen with thee. R. Amen. Lett vs praye. VVE commend vnto thee O Lord the soule of thy ser∣uant, & beseeche thee sweete Lord lefu Christ, Sauiour of the worlde, that thou doe not refuse to place hym in the bosome of thy Patri∣arches, for whom thou descēdedst mercifully into the earth. Acknow∣ledg O Lord thy creature, created not of any straung gods but of thee alone, the true and lyuinge God, for there is no other God, but
thou O Lorde, and there is none according to thy woorkes. O Lord make his soule reioyse in thy sight: and remembre not his olde iniqui∣tie, and drunckenesse, whiche inor∣dinate concupiscence and raginge lustes dyd rayse in hym. Albeit he sinned, yet he denied not the father, the sonne, and the holy Ghost, but belyeued stedfastly in them: and he had the zeale of God in his harte, and adored the God, that created all of nought. R. Amen. Lett vs praye. REmembre not, we beseech the O Lorde, the sinnes and igno∣raunces of his wylfull youth, but according to thy great mercie bee myndefull of him in the glorye of thy eternall deytie. Let the heauens bee opened vnto hym. Lett thy Angels reioyse of hym. O Lorde
receyue thy seruant into thy kyng∣dome. Lett holy Michaell the high messenger of God, that hath deser∣ued to bee the chiefe all the holye cōpany of Angels, receiue him. Let all the holy Angels of God, come forth and meete him, & conducte him into the heauēlie Citie Hieru∣salē. Lett blessed Peter the Apostle, who had the keyes of the kyndom of God delyuered vnto hym, re∣ceyue hym. Lett the holy Apostle S. Paule, who was woorthy to bee a chosen vessell, receyue hym. Lett S. Iohn the elect Apostle of God, to whome the heauenly secret my∣steries were reuealed, receyue him. Lett all the holy Apostles who re∣ceyued of Christ power to loose and bynd, praye for hym. Lett all holye Saincts who haue sustained tormentes for the name of Christ, pray for him, that after he is loosed
out of the pryson of this mortall flesh, he may be founde woorthy to come to the glorie of the hea∣uenly kyngdome, by the assistance of our Lord Iesus Christ, who with the father and the holy Ghost, ly∣ueth and raigneth, worlde without ende. Amen. Into thy handes O Lorde we cō∣men his soule. O Lorde God of truth, thou haste redeemed hym Lett that sweete voyce of thyne O Lorde Iesu, sounde in his eares. This daye thou shalt bee, vvith me in Paradise. Amen. The ende of the tvvelfth Chapter.
THE THYRTIENTH CHAP∣TER CONTAYNING DEVOVT praiers, healthfull for the departed soules. An exhortation by the vvhich vve are shevved and admonyshed to praye for soules, departed in the Catholicque Church. Clemens I. Ponti. Max. Ca. 47. lib. 8. constit. Apostol. MY brethren, lett vs praye for our brother that res∣teth in Iesu Christ, to the ende that our good God which hath recieued his soule, may forgyue him all his sinnes willing∣ly or vnwillingly committed, and that he obteining forgyuenes may be receyued into the kingdome of the blessed: in the bosome of A∣braham, Isaac and Iacobe, with all those that from the begining haue pleased God, and haue done his
will: from whom all sorow, griefe and payne is secluded. Commendations of the soule that is late∣ly departed. Albertus Castella. Sacer. Rom. part. 1. O Lorde we commend the soule of thy seruant that being late∣lye departed this lyfe, he may lyue in thee, and according to thy mer∣cye, pardone him his sinnes which he hath committed throughe hu∣mayne frayeltie. VVe commende O Lorde the soule of this thy seruante, into the handes of the holy and moste glo∣riouse virgin Mary, the mother of mercye and clemency, Also into the handes of all the holy Archan∣gels, Angels, and celestiall courte of heauen, into the handes of the holy Patriarches and prophets: in∣to the handes of the blessed Apos∣tles,
Euangelistes and disciples: in∣to the handes of the martyrs and confessors: into the handes of the virgins, widowes and all votaryes who-soeuer. And finally we commend the soule of this thy seruaunt into the hands of all such thy blessed saynts and seruaunts, as haue pleased thee from the first creatiō of the world, that by their intercession and suc∣cour, he may be deliuered from the prince of darknes, and from all dreadfull torments: graunt this O God almightye, omnipotente and full of mercy, through the bitter passion of thy sweet sonne our sa∣uiour Iesu, to whom with thee and the holy Ghost, be all honour and glorye for euer and euer. Amen. A prayer for the faythfull soule depar∣ted.
Precat. Ecclesi. in Missa. O Eternall and almightye God, to whom we neuer pray with∣out hope of mercy: Haue mercy of the soule of thy seruaunt N. and make him to bee vnyted to that companye of Saintes, which is de∣ceased from this life, in the confes∣sion of thy name: through Iesus Christe our Lorde. Amen. Another prayer. Pontifical. Rom. part 3. O God by whom all thinges ly∣ueth, and through whom our bodies diminisheth not in dyeng, but are chaunged into better: we moste humblye beseech thee, to commaunde the soule of thy ser∣uant to be receyued by the handes of thy holy Angels, to bring him vnto the bosome of thy friend the Patriarch Abraham, to ryse againe at the laste greate iudgement day,
pardonning him mercyfully all his sinnes which he hath committed, throughe the false deceiptes and suggestion of the deuill: through Iesus Christe our Lorde. Amen. Another prayer. Clemens Aposto. discip. lib. 8. cap. 47. constit. Apostol. O God of Abraham, God of I∣saac, God of Iacob, which art God of the liuinge and not of the deade, for as much as all soules of the righteouse lyueth with thee, and are in thy handes: they shall not be touched with any payne or torment. Looke bountifully vpon this thy seruaunt, which thou haste re∣ceyued into another lyfe, pardone him that, which he hath committed through the frayeltye of his will: Appoynt him thy louing Angels, to carye him into the bosomes of
Patriarches, Prophetes and Apos∣tles, and of all those that hath plea∣sed thee from the begining of the worlde, where is neither sorowe, griefe, nor horrour, but an assem∣blye of Saintes whiche are reioy∣sing in the countrye of the happye and iuste, seeing the glory of thy Christ: through whom be to thee glory, honour, seruice and adora∣tion in the holy Ghost eternallye. Amen. A prayer for the soule of thy father. Io. Damase in historia barl. & Iosa. O Lorde God of insearcheable, and ineffable bountye, bringe my father to the place of rest and refreshing: where the light of thy countenaunce dothe gloryouslye shine: do not remembre his former offences, but accordinge to thy great mercy, blotte out & cancell the obligations of his sinnes, teare
and rent them asunder, for thou art worthy of all glorye, for euer and euer. Amen. A prayer for the soule of thy mother. B. Agustinus ca. vlti. li. 9. confessionum. O The God of my hart, my life and my prayse, I humbly de∣sire thee to pardone the sinnes of my mother: graciously heare me for his sake, which is the medicyne of our woundes, whiche did hange vpō the tree, & now sitting on thy righte hande maketh intercession for vs sinners: I know that she hath delt charitably, & frō her hart hath forgyuen all her debtors: release also vnto her all those sinnes what soeuer, since her baptisme, she hath fallen into. Release them O Lorde, release them I beseech thee, and enter not into iudgemente with her: let thy mercy exceede thy iudgement, for
thy wordes are true, and thou haste promised mercy to the mercyfull. For my mother (when the day of her death approched) did re∣quest and desire this, that we wolde remember her soule, at thy holye Aultar where she had serued thee: wherby she did know and beleeue, that the holy oblation of the bo∣dy and precious bloode of our sa∣uiour Iesus Christ, was made: wher∣by the obligation made against vs, was cancelled: whereby the ene∣mie was vanquished, counting our sinnes, & searchinge what he might obiecte against vs, and finding no∣thinge in vs by the meanes of Iesus Christ in whom we haue victorye: whoe shall render to Iesus Christe his innocent bloode? who shall re∣quite the pryce wherwith he hath bought vs, that he might pull and draw vs, from our enemye.
To the misterye of the which price, thy seruaunt hath vnited and bounde her soule by the bonde of fayth: let no man withdrawe her furth of thy protection: let not the dragon nor lyon intrude him selfe neither by force nor deceipt: nei∣ther as yet, will thy hand-mayd an∣swere that she is not in debte, leste she be conuinced and possessed of that crafty accuser: but she will an∣swere, that her debtes are released by him, whom none cā repay that, which he owinge nothinge hath payed for vs: let her therefore rest in peace with her husband, before whom and after whom, she was ne∣uer maried to any other, whom she hath serued, and broughte foorth fruite to thee with great patience, to the ende she mighte gayne him to thee. Inspire O my Lord God, inspire
thy seruauntes my brethren, thy childrē my superiours, whom with voyce, harte & penne I doe serue: that, who soeuer shall reade these, they may remember at thy Aultar thy seruant Monica, with Patricius her late husband: by whose fleshe thou haste broughte me into this worlde, by what meanes I knowe not how: let them remember with deuoute zeale my parentes in this transitorye lyfe, and my brethren vnder thee their Father, in the lapp of their Catholicke Mother, and my countrye-men in the eternall Ierusalem, which thy people in their pilgrymage, from their de∣parture vntill their returne, desire to attayne vnto, that shee may at∣taine by the prayers of many, those thinges which she requyred at my handes when she departed. Amen.
A prayer for the soule of thy parentes. O God which haste commanded vs, to honour and reuerence our father and mother, haue mercy I beseeche the on the soules of my father and mother: and of all my other parentes, forgyue them their offences, and graunt that I may see them in the ioye of thy euerlasting blysse. Amen. A prayer for thy friend departed. O God the gyuer of pardon and louer of mans saluatiō, we be∣seeche thy clemency, through the intercession of the glorious Virgin Marie, and of all the holy Saints of heauen: that thou wilt graunt, that the brethē sisters & friends depar∣ted (in the vnitie of the Catholicke Church) with all our benefactours, maye come to the blysse of thy euerlastinge kyngdome, throughe Iesus Christ our Lorde. Amen.
A prayer for the lyuing & the deade. ALmighty and euerlasting God, Lorde of the lyuinge and the dead thou shewest mercye to all those, whome by faythe and good worcks, thou knowest to be thine: we humbly beseech the, that those for whome we haue determined to pray, whom ether this presēt world yet retayneth in fleshe: or the worlde to come hath alredie re∣ceyued, maye through the clemen∣cye of thy bountye, & intercession of all thy blessed Saints, obtayne full remission of their sinnes. Amē. A prayer for the departed to be sayd at masse. B. Ambr. praecatio. 1. praepa. VVE humbly beseech thee O holy father for the soules of the faythfull departed this life, that the holy Sacrifice of the masse may
be to them eternall saluatiō: perpe∣tuall health, ioy & rest euerlasting. O my Lorde God, lett this woun∣derfull and excellent mysterye of pyetie, and bountie, be vnto them this day, full & perfect ioye: graunt that they maye bee replenished with thee, the lyuing & true bread, which descēdest from heauen, and gyuest lyfe to the world: and with that holy and blessed flesh of thee, the immaculate Lambe, which ta∣kest awaye the sinnes of the world: and make them to drinke of that fontaine of thy pyetie, whiche by force of the souldiars lance issued from the syde of our Lorde Iesus Christ crucified, that so beinge cō∣forted they may reioyce in thy holy laude and glorie. Amen. The ende of the thyrtienth Chapter. FINIS.
Aug. in Psal. 42. This is the Iustice of man in this life, Fasting, Almes-deedes, Prayer. PRAYER IS GOOD WITH FASTING AND ALMES TOB. 12 Ibidem in serm. 59. He that wyll haue his prayer to flye to heauen, muste make it two wynges, Almes-deedes, & Fasting, and it shall spedelye ascende and bee harde.
A TABLE OF PRAYERS MEDITATIONS, EXHORTA∣tions and aduertismentes, contay∣ned in this presente Manuall of prayers. The first chapter contayning quotidiane or dayly praiers, accomodated and pre∣scribed to certayne houres & times both for the day and night. A Briefe exhortation to prayer con∣tynuallye, extracted and taken out of S. Chrisostome. folio 1. A prayer in the morning when ye a∣wake. folio 3. VVhen ye doe aryse. folio 3. A morning prayer when you are rysen. folio. 3. A morning prayer whereby to com∣mende thy selfe vnto God. folio 3. A prayer to be sayed goinge out of the house. folio 4. A prayer desiringe God to order and directe vs. folio 4. A prayer to perseuer in goodnes. folio 5.
An exercyse to be dayly vsed in me∣ditatinge the passion of our Lorde and Sauiour, (with an exhortation) contay∣ning fiftiene meditationes with a pray∣er belonginge to them, or to euery one of them. folio 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. Certayne asperations, ghostly sigh∣inges and prayers, to be daylye vsed. folio 12. 13. 14. An other briefe exercyse to be day∣lye vsed, more shorter than the other before, as thy leasure shall serue. folio 15. 16. 17. 18. A prayer for schollers before they goe to schoole, for obtayning wisdome, lear∣ning and knowledge. folio. 19. Holesome meditations to vse at night before you goe to reste. folio 19. An euening prayer to be sayed as thou goest to bed. folio 20. An other prayer for the night. fol. 20. A prayer to thy good Angell thy gardi∣an. folio 22. A prayer as thou enterest into thy bedde. folio 22. A prayer to be sayed as thou setlest thy selfe to sleepe. folio 22. An exhortation to watch taken out
of holy scripture. folio 23. Moste holsome meditations which we ought day and night to haue before our eyes, and alwaies to haue in remem∣braunce. folio 23. The seconde chapter contayning good∣lye and deuoute prayers to be sayed at the holye Sacrifice of the Masse as also both before and after. A Prayer when thou doest enter into the Church. folio 24. A prayer to stirre vp the minde to deuo∣tion before Masse. folio 24. A deuout prayer to be sayed euery Sounday. folio 26. A prayer to be vsed before confessi∣on, or before Masse if time serue. fol. 27. These prayers folovving are to be sayed at Masse. VVhen the priest is at confession. fol. 29. VVhen the priest goeth to the Aulter after confession. folio 30. VVhen the priest sayeth Gloria in ex∣celsis Deo. folio 30. At the Epistle. folio 31.
After the Epistle. folio 31. After the Ghospell. folio 32. At the offertory. folio 32. VVhen the priest turning desireth the people to pray for him. folio 32. VVhen the priest sayeth Sursum corda. folio 33. At the holy Canon. folio 34. Howe to meditate before the eleuation. folio 35. At the eleuation of the Host. fol. 36. At the eleuation of the Chalice. fol. 36. VVhen the priest sayeth the Pater noster. folio 37. VVhen the prieste kisseth the Pax. folio 37. VVhen you kisse the Pax. fol. 37. VVhen the priest receyueth. folio 37. A prayer in blessing your selfe. fo. 38 A prayer after the diuyne Sacrifice o the Masse. folio 38 A prayer to recommend your selfe to God. folio 39 A prayer to be sayed before a Ca¦tholicke sermon or exhortation. fo. 39
The thirde Chapter contayning hole∣some prayers for remission of sinnes. AN humble bewayling of sinnes for a sinner that hath compunctiō. f. 40. A prayer of a penitente sinner acknow∣ledging his vilenes in the sight of God. folio 42. A confession of a mans owne vngrate∣fulnes towardes God, where-vpon the sinner beinge turned vnto pennaunce, prescrybethe to him selfe a certayne course of lyfe. folio 44. An humble confession of sinnes, with desire of mercy and grace. folio 45. A prayer for a penitent sinner, after his relapse or fallinge to sinne agayne. folio 49. A moste profitable protestation to be made whyles we are yet in health and prosperity. folio 50. The fourth Chapter contayning verye goodly prayers for comforte, strength, and delyuery (by God his assistaunce) in all sorovves, tribulations, afflictions and aduersities. A Praier when thou feelest thy selfe tempted. folio 51.
A prayer of any captiue, accordinge to the forme of Dauid when he was hid in the caue. folio 52. A prayer of Iob in his moste grye∣uous aduersitye and losse of his goodes. folio 53. A prayer in trouble of conscience. folio 53. A prayer for patience. folio 55. A prayer against the enemies of christe his trueth. folio 56. A prayer wherein is desired free∣dome of the minde, and auoydance of worldly desires. folio 57. A prayer before we take in hande any iourney. folio 58. A collection of the psalmes in latin, to call on God for helpe agaynst temp∣tation, with an insultation against wic∣ked spirites vpon hope and considence in God. folio 59. The fifthe Chapter contayninge dyuers prayers, very commodious for obtaining that vvhich is profitable both for bodye and soule.
A Prayer to obtayne fayth, hope and charitie. folio 69. A deuout prayer to obtayne of God fer∣uent loue towardes God, our neighbors and our enemies. folio 70. A prayer for obtayning of heauenly wisdome. folio 71. A prayer moste godly and deuoute which S. Thomas of Aquine vsed dayly to pray. folio 73. A prayer to God that he will vouch∣safe to preserue the fruites of the earth. folio 76. A prayer to God that we may vse all temporall thinges for the health of our soules onely. folio 76. The sixte Chapter contayninge holesome praiers of the life and passion of out Sa∣uiour and redeemer Iesus Christ. A Prayer to be sayed before the cru∣cifix. folio 77. A prayer acknowledging that man was the cause of Christ his suffering. fol. 78. A prayer wherein man doeth offer (to God the Father) the passion of his
Sonne our Lorde and Sauyour Iesu-Christ. folio 82. A deuoute prayer with the remem∣brance of the passion of our sauiour Ie∣sus Christe, to obtayne succour and fa∣uour of him. folio 84. The seuenth Chapter contayninge de∣uout and holesome prayers to be sayed, before and after the receyuing of the B. Sacrament. ADuertismentes for more worthelye receyuing the holy Euchariste. folio. 86. A prayer to be sayed before the re∣ceyuing of the B. Sacrament. folio 88. An other prayer before the recey∣uing of the B. Sacrament. folio 89. A deuout prayer to be sayed at the eleuatiō of the most blessed and Sacred Hooste. folio 91. A deuout prayer to be sayed before the B. Sacrament of the Aultar. folio 92. A prayer to be sayed after the re∣ceyuing of the B. Sacrament. folio 94 An other prayer after the receyuing of the Sacrament. folio 96.
The eyght chapter contayning laudes, prayeses, & thankesgyuing, for the be∣nefytes that God hath bestovved vpon vs. A Psalm in whiche a sinner yeldeth thankes to God that his enemyes haue not preuayled against him nor got∣ten the vpper hand of him. folio. 97. A psalm in which the goodnesse, of God is praysed. folio. 100. A psalm of the benefites of God with thanckes for the same. folio. 103. A thanksgyuing to God for his in∣numerable benefites bestowed on man from his infancie. folio. 106. A prayer and thankesgyuing to God for his great benefites. folio. 108. The nynthe chapter contayning neces∣sarye prayers for the prosperitye of our brethren frendes and neyghbours. A Prayer for the Churche afflicted. folio. 110. A prayer for our parentes. folio. 113. A prayer for them that are fallen from the Churche. folio. 113.
A prayer that children maye be in∣structed in vertue and in the feare of God. folio. 114. A prayer for a friend and generally for anye that is commended vnto our prayers. folio. 114. A generall prayer for the lyuing & the departed in the Catholique faythe. folio. 114. The tenthe chapter contayninge hole∣some prayers to the holy Trinitie. A Prayer or thankesgyuinge to the holy Trinitie. folio. 116. A prayer to God the father, folio. 118. A prayer to God the sonne called, O bone Iesu. folio. 119. A prayer to the holy Ghost. folio. 120. The eleuenth Chapter conteyning Chri∣stian Catholicque prayers to Saints and Cytyzens of the glorie of heauen. A Prayer vnto the holy Virgin Mary. folio. 122. An other prayer to our B. Lady and
to S. Iohn Euāgelist called. O intemerata. folio. 123. A prayer to all the holy Angells. folio. 124. A prayer to S. Iohn Baptiste. folio. 125. A prayer to anye of the Apostles. folio. 126. A prayer to anye of the holy Mar∣tyrs. folio. 126. A prayer to anye Confessor. folio. 127. A prayer to any holy Virgin. fol. 127. A prayer to anye one of the holye Saintes. folio. 128. A prayer to all the blessed Saintes in heauen. folio. 129. The tvvelfth chapter contayninge ad∣uertismentes and consolations vvithe prayers and suffrages for the sicke. AN aduertisment for the sicke, dili∣gently to prepare hym selfe to dye well. folio. 131. A protestation very profitable to be made by the sicke. folio. 133. Prayers in sicknesse. folio. 133. Another prayer. folio. 134.
Another prayer. folio. 135. Another prayer. folio. 136. Prayers and suffrages to be sayd for one lyeing in death bedde. folio. 137. A prayer for the same. folio. 139. Another prayer. folio. 140. Another prayer. folio. 143. Another prayer. folio. 143. The thyrtienth chapter contayning de∣uout prayers, healthfull for the depar∣ted soules. AN exhortation by the which we are shewed and admonyshed to praye for the soules departed in the Catho∣licque Churche. folio. 145. Commendation of the soule that is lately departed. folio. 145. A prayer for the faythfull soule de∣parted. folio. 146. Another prayer folio 146. Another prayer. folio 147. A prayer for the soule of thy father. folio 147. A prayer for the soule of thy mo∣ther. folio 148. A prayer for thy parentes departed.
folio 150. A praier for thy friende departed. folio. 150. A prayer for the lyuinge and the deade. folio. 150. A prayer for the departed to be saied at Masse. folio 150. The ende of the Table.
Certaine differences betvvene loue to∣vvardes God and loue tovvards crea∣tures, and vvhat loue he hath and vvill haue, to those that vvill perfectlye loue and serue him. 1. IF I loue a creature, it can not know how much nor in what maner my loue is: but yf I loue God, he knoweth better the loue of my harte then my selfe. 2. If I loue a creature, oftentimes I receyue no rewarde or recom∣pence: but if I loue God, he rewar∣deth a hundreth folde. 3. If I loue a creature, I finde it not at al times, nor so often as I would, and I can not speake to it so often as I desire, and as neede requireth, neither doeth it harkē to my wor∣des as I wishe: but yf I loue God, I haue hym at all times with me: I maye speake with hym as often as I please, and at all times he harke∣neth
to my wordes, yea and to the desires of my harte. 4. If I loue a creature, often times it putteth me to trouble, & is hin∣drance to me in my praiers, for that I think of it: but yf I loue God, he bringeth peace into my harte and conscience, & if I thinke on him as I ought in my praiers, he gyueth to me hym selfe whiche is soueraigne sanctitye. 5. If I loue a creature, oftentymes I haue care of it: but if I loue God, he hathe a care ouer me. 6. If I loue creatures I knowe not their secrets: but yf I loue God, he openeth often to me the trueth of all hydden and secret things. 7. If I loue a creature, it yeldeth not my hartes desire: but yf I loue God, he will gyue me wholy all my desires. 8. If I loue a creature, it is out of
me: but yf I loue God, he dwel∣leth in me and I in hym. 9. If I loue a creature, it knoweth not all my affaires nor the thinges to me appartaining: but yf I loue God, he knoweth thē better then I doe my selfe. 10. If I loue a creature, sometimes it deceiueth me: but if I loue God, he will truely assure me. 11. If I loue a creature oftentimes it moueth me to heauinesse & greife: but yf I loue God, he gyueth me ioy and consolation. 12. If I loue a creature, it seeketh at my hand a profit and gayne to it selfe: but yf I loue God, he wisheth my profit and commoytie. 13. If I loue a creature often it de∣parteth from me, and for that cause I haue short ioy and pleasure of it: but yf I loue God, he remaineth with me (so long as I am without
deadly sinne) from whome I haue all ioye and pleasure. 14. If I loue a creature, I knowe not yf I be loued of it: but yf I loue God, I am assured of his loue. 15. If I loue a creature, it perisheth or decayeth: but yf I loue God, he dwelleth withe me euerlastingly. 16. If I loue a creature, I finde it often a lyar, variable and incon∣stant: but yf I loue God, I finde him moste trew, and his will firme and constant. 17. If I loue a creature, I see often in it that displeaseth me: but yf I loue God, nothinge that I see in hym can displease me. 18. Therefore I take and choose for my Louer & Spouse our Lord Iesu Christ, who through his owne pleasure is myne, and so am I his, & none is to me so good, so faire, so sweete, so riche, so noble, so
myghty, so wise, so piteouse, so benigne, nor so amyable, as is my harty louer Iesus. VVho liueth and raigneth with the father and the holy ghost worlde without ende. Amen.
CERTAINE DE∣VOVT AND GODLY Petitions, commonly called. IESVS PSALTER. Nomen datum Non est aliud hominibus. Act. 4. IHS There is none other name vnder hea∣uen geuen vnto men, in vvhiche vve must be saued. Act. 4. CVM PRIVILEGIO. Anno. 1583.  
