435.59 99850933 16174
A Prognostication euerlasting of right good effect, fruitfully augmented by the Author, containing plaine, briefe, pleasant, chosen rules to iudge the weather by the Sunne, Moone, Starres, Comets, Rainbow, Thunder, Clowdes, with other extra∣ordinary tokens, not omitting the Aspects of Planets, with a briefe iudgement foreuer, of Plentie, Lacke, Sicknes, Dearth, Warres, &c. opening also many naturall causes worthie to be knowne. To these and other now at the last, are ioyned diuers generall pleasant Tables, with many compendious Rules, easie to be had in memorie, manifold wayes pro∣fitable to all men of vnderstanding. Published by Leonard Digges Gentleman Lately corrected and augmented by Thomas Digges his sonne. ♈ ♉ ♋ ♍ ♏ ♑ ♓ ♒ ♐ ♎ ♌ ♊ depiction of zodiac man Imprinted at London by Felix Kyngstone. 1605.
To the Honorable Sir Edward Fines, Earle of Lin∣colne, Baron of Clinton and Say, Knight of the noble order of the Garter, Lord high Admirall of England, Ireland, and Wales, and the Dominions and Iles thereof, of the towne of Ca∣lice, and marches of the same, Normandie, Gascoigne and Guian, and Captaine generall of the Queenes Maie∣sties Seas and Nauie royall. RIght Honorable, hauing of long time sundrie waies found your Lordships great fauour, not only toward my father in his life time, but also toward his, most bountifully continued sithence his death: I haue carefully thought which way I might some way yeeld a testimonie of a greatefull mind. And perusing of late a Book of my fathers to your Lord∣ship dedicated, by negligence, or ignorance of Correctors many wayes de∣praued: I determinde both to amend the faults, and with some additions to amplifie the same, briefely also to touch and discouer certaine errors touching matters of Nauigation, transferred into our language. And although I haue in a peculiar volume for that purpose prepared to en∣treat at large, deliuering new Rules and Methods, hitherto in no lan∣guage published, nor to my knowledge of any forraine Nation practised, not onely in demonstration void of all error, but also in practise feazible: Yet in the meane, least further boldnes by ignorance should encrease, to deriue vs mo erros from other nations, whereof our Seamen haue learned too many already: I thought good at the end of this booke to note some of the most vsed and esteemed, and among that faction held for Oracles, whereby indeede they haue been and are (in all nauigations) so misled, that were they not by sight of the coast, and soundings better directed, then by any troth in their Art, many mo vessels should daily perish. This present token therefore of dutifull goodwill, I shall humbly desire your Lordship in good part to accept, meaning hereafter (God sparing life) to honor your Lordship, and profit my countrey with matters more rare. And in the meane while I humblie take my leaue. At your Lordship commandement Thomas Digges.
To the Reader. TO auoyd) gentle Reader) the yearely care, trauailes, and paines of other, with the confusions, repugnan∣ces, and manifold errors, partly by negligence, and oft through ignorance committed: I haue againe briefly set foorth a Prognostication generall, for e∣uer to take effect: adioyning thereto diuers profita∣ble collections, and many pleasant conclusions, easie of all willing ingenious to be perceiued. Here note (Reader) whereas the eleuate Pole and Meridian should be considered, in this worke it is perfor∣med for London, because I wish this Meridian, situation or clime the exact truth of things. If any yearely practises in like matters agree not with my calculations, bee assured they are false, or at the least for other Eleuations or Meridians supputated, and therefore little seruing thy purpose. And that the late rude inuentions, and grosse deuises of some this yeare, and two yeares past published might be of them perceiued, then filed, and to serue to some profit: I haue purposed euen now to put forth a booke named Panauges, wel seruing their turne, and so generally & most exactly al Europe, pleasant and profitable to the learned, and no small delight to all manner of men. Another booke is also already come to thy hands, entituled Tectonicon, a treasure vnto the Masons, Carpenters, Land-meaters, correcting their olde errors, wrongfully reckoned of them as infallible grounds, teaching faithfully, sufficiently, and very brief∣ly, the true mensuration of all manner land, timber, stone, boord, glasse, &c. And at the end contayning an Instrument Geometricall appointed to their vse. Take in good worth these labours (louing Reader) and looke shortly for the plesant fruites Mathematicall, e∣uen such as haue been promised by my friends, and partly by me. Neither shall my desire to profite, here stay: but intendeth further to procede, if these seeme accepted. As the good will of Printers not had, kept the foresayd from you: so I trust the willing minde and excellencie of Thomas Gemini shall bring them shortly vnto you. Certes my hope is, while life remaineth, not to bee vnfruitfull to this common wealth, with studie and practise.
Against the reprouers of Astronomie, and Sciences Mathematicall. I Am diuersly occasioned (louing Reader) some∣what to write in the commendation of the Ma∣thematicals: which neede not, but onely to o∣pen the foolish rashnes,Vituperant qui simpliciter eas ignorant. and rash foolishnes of such, which of late haue in writing dispraised these goodly arts. It is an old sayd sawe, and true: Scientia non habet inimicum nisi ignoran∣tem. But to auoyd tediousnesse, and chiefly for the more satisfying, I referre all of that sort, which haue tasted any learning (the rest not regarded) to the first part of famous Guido Bonatus de vtili∣tate Astronamiae in communi: where he writeth contra illos, qui dicunt quòd scientia Stellarum non potest sciri ab aliquo: contra illos, qui dixerunt. quòd scientia Stellarum non est vtilis, sed potiùs damnosa &c. contra illos, qui contra dicunt iudicijs Astronomiae, & qui reprehen∣dunt eam, nescientes dignitatem eius, cò quòd non est lucratiua. Also for breuitie I appoynt all nice Diuines, or (as Melancthon ter∣meth them) Epicurei Theologi, to his hie commendations touching Astronomie, vttered in his epistles to Simon Grineus, to Schone∣rus, & to the peroration of Cardanus 5. bookes, where he sheweth how farre wide they alleage the Scriptures against the Astro∣nomer, which make wholy with the Astronomer. Melancthon writeth and affirmeth: Arrogantiam esse cum summa stultitia con∣iunctam, venari choragium aliquod gloria ex insectatione artium, quae sunt graui autoritate doctorum prudentium receptae: he calleth it ma∣nifestum insaniae genus, declaring quòd magis opus habent Medicis, quàm Geometris, aduising the learned not to giue care vnto their follie. Sinamus (ait) vnàcum Epicuro ineptire. Which counsell o
I follow. Now therefore, yee enemies of all good doctrine, either giue an ouerthrow and that with your pen, or let famous Guido, or learned Melancthon satisfie. If neither: certes I will shortly (God sparing life) take some paine in publishing the wonderfull vnknowne pleasant profits of these dispraised high knowledges, and by that meanes to inforce silence. Now in fewe, for thy incouragement in these, thus I say and truly, the ingenious learned, and wel experienced circumspec stu∣dent Mathematicall, receiueth daily in his wittie practises more pleasant ioye of minde, then all thy goods (how rich soeuer thou bee) can at any time purchase. Id tantùm quod pulchrum est, quod purum est, quod diuinum est, nihil mortale sapiens dulci ardore amplec∣titur. Vt multa paucis: crede mihi, extingui dulce erit Mathematica∣rum artium labore. Now to ende: that learned Guido, that excellent Guido Bonatus, sheweth what Astrologie or Astronomie is, and ought not (sayth he) by any meane to bee reprehended, in that the most wise, yea, the holy fathers haue practised that science. Hee proueth it one of the chiefe sciences Mathematicall,Stulti negli∣gunt & con∣temnunt: qui contradicit ambitiosus est: qui maledicit, fatuus. by the autho∣ritie of the best learned, and by Aristotle in his Posteriorum. How commeth it to passe (louing Reader) seeing it is a noble Science, Et Scientia est notitia vera conclusionū, quibus propter demonstrationē firmiter assentimur, that it is counted vaine and of so smal strength: the secret truths and most pleasant profits therein not desired, yea vtterly despised, & of some busie biting bodies reiected as very lies? Let no man doubt ignorance, the great enemie of all pure lear∣ning hath wrought this. Nam incertam vocat hanc artem vulgus, propter errores, non arti, sed hominum indoctissimorum inscitiae, & te∣meritati imputandos, qui citra delectum omnia effutiunt. Thus I leaue indigestly farther to trouble: fauour me as I tender the fur∣therance of good learnings, profitable to a common wealth. Fare most hartely well, vnfained good Christian Reader.
The Contents of this Booke. FRom the next side to the fift leafe are contayned the forme of a Quadrant, Square, Circle, Quantities, with a figure tru∣ly placing the sayd Quantities in the heauen. From the fift to the thirteenth, ye haue the iudgement of wea∣thers by the Sunne, Moone, Starres, Comets, Rainbow, Thun∣der, Clowdes, with extraordinary tokens and aspects of Pla∣nets, &c. The 13.14.15. and 16. leafe, shewe the causes of such alteration according to Aristotle. First of the Rainbow, then Raine, Frost, Dew, Snow, Hayle, Windes, Earthquakes, Thunders, Light∣nings, Comets, Sunne and Moone eclipsed, Quantities of the Planets, and their placing ocularly demonstrated. The 17. the aspects of the Moone and her signification in the 12. celestiall Signes. The 18.19.20. what Signe the Moone is in and shall bee for euer, the meete time to let blood, to purge, to bathe, to fell timber to sow, to plant, to graffe, cut, geld, &c. The 20. and 21. haue Tables for the Sunday letter, for the Golden number or Prime, for the Epact and moueable feasts, ma∣ny wayes conducing. The 22.23. and 24. the age of the Moone, the change and quar∣ters for euer are declared, the Ebbings and Flowings, the breake of the day, the Sunne rising, the length of the day and night, the Twylight for all the yeare. Th 25.26. and 27. shew exact pleasant wayes for the day and night houre, with composition of meete instruments. From the 29. to the 34. leafe, yee haue the peculiar Kalendar, very commodious for the day and night houre. The 35.36. and 37. declare infortunate dayes of the whole yere with a Kalender generall, and Tables as generall for the chiefe fayres of England. The 38.39. and 40. contayne plesant Tables for the height of the Sunne at all houres, for right and squire shadow conducing also to the composition of many instruments, &c. The 40. and 41. leafe, Colections easie to bee had in memorie.
This Quadrant is appoynted here to get exactly the length of Staffe and Squire sha∣dow, how vnleuell soeuer the ground be, as I haue sufficiently instructed in the eight and thirtith leafe. If ye list not to make a Quadrant, ye may vse this very well: adding a plummet and line, with sights or otherwise.
This instrument must bee made in a plaine fine mettall plate, a foote, or more square. Then it is pleasant for the houre of the day and night, either to be fixed a∣bout your house, or moueable if ye list, by a needle to be placed where▪ and when ye will. The 26. leafe sheweth the making. The good Marriner may long for the vse of this Instrument: it serueth marueylously his turne.
Or thus, without the Square this Circle will serue well your purpose, being exactly made and truly placed. The Diameter, or breadth of this Circle, must be a foot or more, so is it most commodious to serue his vse declared.
I haue placed ready to bee conceiued euē here at ye eye, the true quan∣tities or mag∣nitudes of the seuen Pla∣nets, the one to the other, & euerie one to the Earth: which may sa∣tisfie thē that scorned my last publish∣ing, where I declared the Globe of the Sun, to con∣taine ye Globe of the Moone 7000. times. I would they were able to conceiue de∣monstration made: then ye truth more e∣uidently ap∣pearing, would pull scorning a∣way.
I thought it meete also to put here this figure, shewing the placing, compassing, and distance of each of the foresayd Planets in the heauen: which distances, at my last publishing were thought imposible. This figure wittily weighed, may confirme a possibility to agree vnto the true quantities immediately before put foorth, there∣fore not omitted here to be placed. scheme of Ptolemaic universe
How to iudge of weather by the Sunne rising or going downe. THe Sunne in the Horizon or rising, cléere and bright,De obseruan∣dis meteoris. sheweth a pleasant day: but thinly ouercast with a clowd, betokeneth foule weather. Also at the going downe, the body diuersly coloured or red, and about dispersed with like clowdes, the beames red, and of length, pronounce great windes, the next day from that part. Blacknesse in the Sunne or Moone, betokeneth water: Red, sig∣nifieth winde. The Element red in the euening, the next day fayre: but in the  red, winde and raine. Also the Sunne beames spotted greene, pale, or blacke, gathered to a clowd, signifieth raine. Fur∣ther, the Sunne at the setting plainely seene without any clowde, declareth a faire night to ensue. Here note, Ptolome willeth vs diligently to obserue the circle, or circles about the sunne. If it be cleare, and the circle of no con∣tinuance, behold fayre weather: If many of them, winde. Windes more vehement are signified, if that the circles bee somewhat red, here and there broken: but these obscured, thicke, and blacke, looke for cold, wind, and snow. What is spoken of the sunne, touching the circles, the same is ment of the Moone. Note here that greater windes chaunce in the day,Note. than in the night. How weather is declared by the colour of the Moone, and by the nature of the signe wherein she is. IF the Moone in the third of her chaunge, yea, three dayes before the full, or in the middest of the quarter be found of pure light, nothing compassing her, the end direct vp, she promiseth faire wea∣ther: but bent to red colour, prouoketh winde.Luna rubena ventar. pallo pluit. Aale∣renat. The Moone pale or somewhat inclined to black, obscure or thicke, threatneth raine. Also by the nature of the signe, weather may bee iudged, thus according to Steflerinus, Monte regius, Leupoldus, and famous
Guido Bonatus, with others well trauailed in the mutations of ayre. COnsider the nature of the signe where the Moone is at the chaunge,♈ ♌ ♐ Hote. ♉ ♍ ♑ Eearthie. ♊ ♎ ♒ Airie. ♋ ♏ ♓ Watrie. quarter, and full. It she be in hote and drie signes, as Aries, Leo, Sagittarius, in winter a good token of faire weather: In Summer a great signification of immoderate heate. If in ear∣thy, cold and drie signes, as Taurus, Uirgo, and Capricornus, in winter iudge cold, frost, and snow to ensue: but in Summer tem∣perate weather. In ayrie and windie signes, as Gemini, Libra, and Aquarius, much wind. If in watrie, cold and moyst signes, as Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces, in winter wet weather: In sum¦mer a pleasant tempertaure. ALso, the Sun in Aquarie: the Moone at the chaunge there, or in Sagittarie, or at the full in Leo, betokneth raine. The Sunne in Pisces or Aries: the Moone in Uirgo, Libra, or Sagit∣tarie, signifieth raine, especially in watrie dwellings. The Moone in Aquarius or Pisces, looke for chaunge of weather, then chiefly she troubleth the ayre. The Moone also at the change, or rather at the full, in Aries, Libra, Scorpio or Pisces, tempestuous weather followeth. The Sunne in Aquarie, in Aries, Libra, or Scorpio, but chiefly in Leone: the moone then at the ull, and that after raine or misings, look for lightning thunder, &c. To conclude, the Moone in Cancer, Leo, Capricornus, or Aquarius, ayded with a∣ny aspect, but chiefly with opposition or Quadrat of Uenus, raine followeth. The Iudgement of weather by starres. BEhold the stars whose magnitude you know bst. If they ap∣peare of much light,Cum maiora  enm Hore  craste∣scitaer. in bignesse great, more blasing then they are commonly, it betokeneth great wind or moysture in that part where they shew: in winter, cold and frost. When Stars seeme to runne in the Element, it sheweth winde. Affirme also altera∣tion of weather, if they ee fewe in number, clowdie, and of little light. Furth, when dimme Starres appeare with long rie
tailes, iudge windes and great drought, the more in number, the greater effect. When Starres in the night (as it is sayd) shoote or seeme to fall, it argueth winde in that part. If in diuers places, inordinate windes, if in all places, then pronounce winde, thun∣der, lightnings, yea weather most tempestuous. The significations of Comets. COmets signifie corruption of the ayre.De Cometa∣rum prodigijs, lege Carda∣num lib. 5. Fol. 83. & Antoni∣um Mizaldum de Cometo graphia. They are signes of Earthquakes, of wars, changing of kingdomes, great dearth of Corne, yea a common death of man and beast. Pontanus sic scribens: Ventorum quoque certa dabunt tibi signa Cometae: Illi etiam belli motus, fráque arma minantur, Magnorum & clades populorum, & funera regum, aquarum significant penuriam. How by the Clowdes, chaunge of weather is perceiued. IF thicke clowdes resembling flockes, or rather great heapes of wooll,  gathered in many places, they shew raine. Also when grosse, , darke clowdes, right ouer the North part, or some∣what declining to the West are close with the Earth, immediatly followeth raine. If they appeare like illes, some deale from the earth, a good token of weather ouerpassed. Black clowdes signifie raine. White clowdes appearing in winter, at the Horizon, two or three dayes together, prognosticate col and snow. Of the Rainbow and his effect touching alteration of ayre. IF in the morning ye Rrainbow appeare, it signifieth moysture,Arcus nisi sole aduerso non fiunt. vnlesse great drought of ayre worke the contrarie. If in the euening it shew it selfe, faire weather ensueth, so that abundant moyst ayre take not away the effect. Or thus. THe Rainbow appearing, if it bee faire,Non appare nisi cùm vapo∣res raifican∣ur vel insp∣antur. it betokeneth foule weather: if foule, looke for faire weather. The greener, the more raine: redder, winde.
Of thunders what they signifie. THunders in the morning, signifie wind: about noone, raine: In the euening great tempest. Some write (their ground I see not) that Sundayes thunder, should bring the death of lear∣ned men,Signum futu∣rorum bello∣rum. Iudges and others. Mondayes thunder, the death of women. Tuesdayes thunder, plentie of graine. Wednesdays thunder, the death of harlots, & other bloodshed. Thursdayes thunder, plentie of sheepe and corne. Fridayes thunder, the slaughter of a great man, and other hor∣rible murthers. Saturdayes thunder, a generall pestilent plague & great death. How weather is knowne after the change of euery Moone by the prime day. Common to∣kens of wea∣ther meete for all manner of wits.SUnday Prime, drie weather, Monday Prime, moyst weather. Tuesday Prime, cold and windie. Wednesday Prime, wonder∣full. Thursday Prime, faire and cleere. Friday Prime, mixt weather. Saterday Prime, moyst weather. Now ensue extraordinarie tokens for the knowledge of weather. SOme haue obserued euill weather to followe, when as watrie fowles leaue the sea, desiring land: the fowles of the lande fly∣ing high: the crying of fowles about waters making a great noise with their wings: also the seas swelling with vnaccustomed waues: If beasts eate greedily: If they licke their hooues: If they sodainly moue here and there making a noyse, breathing vp to the ayre with open nostrels: raine followeth. And the busie heauing of Moules: the appearing or comming out of wormes: Hennes resorting to the perch or roust couered with dust, declare raine. The ample working of the Spinner in the ayre: the Ant busied with her egges: the Bees in faire weather not farre wandring: the coninuall prating of the Crow, chiefly twise or thrise quicke calling, shew tempest. When the Crow or Rauen gapeth against the Sunne in summer, heate followeth. If they busie themselues
in proynng or washing, and that in winter, looke for raine. The vnaccustomed noise of poultry, the noise of swine, of peacocks, de∣clare the same. The swallow flying and beating the water, the chirping of the Sparrow in the morning signifie raine. Raine sud∣denly dried vp. Woody couerings straighter then of custome. Bels heard further then commonly, the wallowing of dogges, the alteration of the Cocke crowing, all declare rainie weather. I leaue these, wanting the good ground of the rest. If the learned be desirefull of the aforesaid, let them reade graue Virgil, Primo Georgicorum. At Bor. &c. There be a multitude of other not extraordinary, but of the best known causes: many for breuity here omitted, the most part not mentioned, because they passe the capacitie of the common sort, vpon all the which the Astronomer doth well and learnedly con∣clude. I doubt not, there be also sometime vnknown matters, mit∣tigating the aforesayd, or prouoking tempest vnlooked for, which neither experience, ne learning hath established. How vnkind (these considered) yea how farre from worthie thankes giuing are they, which in generall headdely doe blame, checking bitterly the Astrologer, with these Iudiciarie matters (the least part among a number of his most certaine doings) when things fortune con∣trary to expectation? Understand gentle Reader, the consent of a multitude famously learned in their buckler, euen in these mat∣ters Iudiciarie: who haue wayed a long time prudentlie, the great strength, the vehement force and marueilous natures of all erraticall, and celestiall constellations, with their Angles, Radia∣tions, Aspects, Affections, Stations, Progressions, Defections, Dispositions, Applications, Preuentions, Refrenations, Contra∣rieties, Abscissions, Coniunctions, Quadratures, and Opposi∣tions, &c. Therfore extreame folly, yea more then madnes doth he vtter, which imbraydeth or backbiteth these knowledges, not re∣membring the great and manifold benefits had through them, and that with most certaintie in all other doings. What Meteoroscoper, yea who learned in matters Astrono∣micall, noteth not the great effects, at the rising of the starre cal∣led the little Dogge? Truly the cnsent of the best leaned doe a∣gree of his force: yea Plinie, in his historie of nature affirmeth the
Seas then most fierce, wines to slow in cellers, standing waters to moue, dogs enclined to madnesse, then most wood. Further, these constellations,Orionis, Ar∣cturi, Coronae Captae, Sucu∣larum effe∣ctus. ☌ □ & ☍ ♄ cum ☉ & ☽. ☌ ♃ □ & ☍ cum ♀ aut cum ☉, &c. Orion, Arcturus, Corona, rising, prouoke tempestu∣ous weather. The Kid & Goat, windes. Hyades, or Succulie, raine. What Meteorologer consenteth not to the great alteration and mutation of ayre, at the Coniunction, Opposition or Quadrat aspect of Saturne, with either two lights? Who is ignorant yea meanly truailed in Astronomie, that Iupiter with Mercury or with the Sunne, enforceth rage of winds? What is he that perceiueth not the fearefull thunders, lightnings and raines at the meeting of Mars and Venus, or Iupiter and Mars? &c. Leaue for shame to op∣pugne these iudicials strongly authorised. He that any other part carpeth, may seeme more then mad. Al truth, al experience, a mul∣titude of infallible grounded rules are against him. Certum est om∣nibus{que} notum. quòd oeli motus, signorum ortus & occasus▪ planetarum aspectus & coniunctiones luminarium Eclipses, &c. certissimam  habent causam. Quis iam sanaementis negabit eorum effectus saepe innotescere, vtpote bella, fames, grandines, aeris per∣turbationes, elementorum commotiones, terrae mots, & similia? Positis causis natualibus, & non impeditis, sequitur effectus. The learned that listeth ingeniously to prognosticate of wea∣ther, will not onely discreetly wey all before written, but consider also with them the aspects of the Planets following, and their combustion in the 12. Signes, with the coniunction of fixed stars, mansions of the Moone, Ascendent, Climes, &c. Also the times or quarters of the yeare must bee noted diligently, (as ensueth) and iudgement accordingly pronounced. Of the yeare diuided into foure quarters. THe Spring time is hote and moyst and continueth so long as the Sunne is in Aries, power ouer the brest. ♋ ♌ ♍. Taurus, and Gemini, which is from the tenth of March vnto the 12. of Iune. The Summer is hote and drie, counted from the beginning of Cancer, to the ende of Uirgo, Power ouer all . that is from the 12. of Iune to the fourteenth of Septem∣ber. Haruest is colde and drie, counted from the beginning of Li∣bra to the end of Sagittarie, counted from the 14. day of Septem∣ber to the thirteenth of December. Winter is cold and moyst, cō∣tinued
from the beginning of Capricornus, to the end of Pisces, that is, from the twelfth of December, to the tenth of March. Here follow the aspects of the Planets, for the better iudgement of weather. BEfore I declare of Planets and the signification of aspects. it behoueth briefly to open what I call Planets, and what aspects, and how they are charactered and figured. Understand there bee seauen moueable Starres pleasant to the sight called Planets: the highest Saturne ♄: then Iupiter ♃: Mars ♂: Sunne ☉: Uenus ♀: Mercurie ☿: and the Moone ☽, next to the Earth. Now when I desire to expresse Saturne, I write this figure ♄. for Iupiter this ♃. for Mars this ♂. Thus of the other as their characters declare. All Radiations or Aspects are expressed as follow. A Coniunction is thus figured ☌. and it is when ano∣ther Planet is ioyned with the Sunne or Moone, or others among themselues, within one degree or lesse. The Sextile Aspect or Radiation, is thus expressed ✶, and it is within 60. degrees the one from the other. The Quadrate a∣spect thus □, 90. degrees distanant. The Trine thus △, separa∣ted 120. degrees. The Opposition thus ☍, 180. degrees the one is distant from the other. Loe here they follow in order: the characters of the Planets and Signes also. Coniunction☌, Sextile✶, Quadrate□, Trine△, Opposition☍. Saturne♄, Iupiter♃, Mars♂, Sunne☉, Venus♀, Mercurie☿, Moone☽. Aries♈, Taurus♉, Gemini♊, Cancer♋, Leo♌, Virgo♍, Libra♎, Scorpius♏, Sagittarius♐, Capricornus♑, Aquarius♒, Pisces♓.
Yet for more plainenesse beholde this figure. The signification of the aspects of Planets among them∣selues: for the iudgement of weather. THe coniunction or meeting of Saturne with Iupiter, in fierie signes, enforceth great drought. In watry signes, floods, con∣tinuall raine, generall ouerflowings, &c. In ayrie signes, plenty of Windes.
The Quadrature, Sextile,♄ □ ✶ & ☍ cum ♃. or Opposition of Saturne with Iupi∣ter, in moyst Signes, causeth troubled ayre, by Hayle, Winde, Raine, Thunder, &c. before and after. The Coniunction, Quadrature,♄ ☌ □ & ☍ cum ♂. or Opposition of Saturne with Mars, in watry Signes, declare in Summer raine, often showers with haile, thunder and lightning. The Coniunction, Quadrature,♄ ☌ □ & ☍ cum ☉. or Opposition of Saturne with the Sunne, chiefly in cold Signes, shew dark weather, haile, raine, thunder and cold dayes. The Coniunction, Quadrature,♄ ☌ □ & ☍ cum ♀. or Opposition of Saturne with Venus, in Winter, engender colde and raine, principally in moyst Signes: in Summer, mittigation of heate. The Coniunction, Quadrature,♄ ☌ □ & ☍ cum ☿. or Opposition of Saturne with Mercurie, in watrie signes, bring raine: in hote or drie Signes, drought: in Summer, thunder, lightnings and tempest. The coniunction, Quadrature,♃ ☌ □ & ☍ cum ♂. or Opposition of Iupiter with Mars, in moyst Signes, declare thunders, lightnings and rayne: in winter snow, or clowdie thicke weather. The Coniunction, Quadrature,♃ ☌ □ & ☍ cum ☉, or Opposition of Iupiter with the Sunne, great and most vehement winds. The Coniunction, Quadrature,♃ ☌ □ & ☍ cum ♀. or Opposition of Iupiter with Venus, in moyst Signes, colde and misings: in the other Signes faire weather. The Coniunction, Quadrature,♃ ☌ □ & ☍ cum ☿. or Opposition of Iupiter with Mercurie, great winds. The Coniunction, Quadrature,♂ ☌ □ & ☍ cum ☉. or Opposition of Mars with the Sunne, in fierie Signes, drought: in watrie, thunder and raine. The Coniunction, Quadrature, or Opposition of Mars with Venus, in moyst Signes, raine, and tempest.♂ ☌ □ & ☍ cum ♀. The Coniunction, Quadrature, or Opposition of Mars with Mercurie, in hote Signes, great heate: in drie Signes, drought:♂ ☌ □ & ☍ cum ☿. in watrie, raine sometimes, thunders, lightnings, with suddaine fierce winds▪
♀ ☌ □ & ☍ cum ☿.The Coniunction, Quadrature, or Opposition of Venus with Mercurie, causeth raine: in Summer they prouoke tempest, the more if they agree in watrie Signes. Note what is sayd of the Coniunction, Quadrature or Opposition, the same is also ment of the Sextile and Triue, but they are of lesse signification, so the lear∣ned noteth. A declaration of weather by aspects of the Moone with the Planets. ☽ ☌ □ & ☍ cum ♄.THe Coniunction, Quadrature, or Opposition of the Moone with Saturne in moyst Signes, bringeth a clowdie day, colde ayre, according to the nature of the Signe: If she goe from Sa∣turne to the Sunne, by coniunction or otherwise, harder weather ensueth. ☽ ☌ □ & ☍ cum ♃.The Coniunction, Quadrature, or Opposition of the Moone with Iupiter in Aries or Scorpio, sheweth fayre weather, white dispersed clowdes. ☽ ☌ □ & ☍ cum ♂.The Coniunction, Quadrature, or Opposition of the Moone with Mars in watrie Signes, raine. In hote Signes, diuers co∣loured clowdes are made all the Element ouer. In Summer of∣ten thunder. ☽ ☌ □ & ☍ cum ☉.The Coniunction, Quadrature, or Opposition of the Moone with the Sunne in moyst Signes, rainie weather. The more if the Moone goe from the Sunne to Saturne. ☽ ☌ □ & ☍ cum ♀.The Coniunction, Quadrature, or Opposition of the Moone with Venus, chiefly in moist Signes, rane followeth. The Moone going from Venus, and Mars, more varietie of weather. ☽ ☌ □ & ☍ cum ☿.The Coniunction, Quadrature, or Opposition of the Moone with Mercurie in moyst Signes, sheweth raine an winde, the mre when the Moone passeth from Mercury to Iupiter, then great winds follow.
How the weather is iudged by the O∣rientall and Occidentall station of Planets, with their Combustion in the 12. Signes Celestiall. First of the Plenets in Aries. SATVRNE in Aries combust, that is to say,♄ in ♈ vnder the beames of the Sunne, maketh a clowdie darke troubled ayre. Orien∣tall, I meane in the morning appearing before the Sunne, faire weather. Occidentall, that is to say, shewing himselfe after the Sunne going downe, betokeneth great winds. Iupiter in Aries combust, a token of raine: being Occidentall, it bringeth clowdes, and dewes: Orientall, faire pleasant weather.♃ in ♈ Mars in Aries combust and Occidentall, good weather:♂ in ♈ contra∣rie Orientall. Venus in Aries combust Occidentall, moystnesse, great winds:♀ in ♈ Orientall, thunders and raines. Mercury in Aries combust, tempest: Occidentall and Orientall,☿ in ♈ faire windie weather. Of Planets in Taurus. SATVRNE in Taurus combust and stationarie,♄ in ♉ bringeth thicke clowdes, thunders and troublesome weather. Iupiter in Taurus combust, indifferent weather: Occidentall,♃ in ♉ pleasant showers. Mars in Taurus combust, a quiet ayre: but Orientall, windie.♂ in ♉ Venus in Taurus combust, thunders, &c. Occidentall, faire.♀ in ♉
Of the Planets in Gemini. ♄ in ♊SATVRNE in Gemini combust and Occidentall, drought. ♃ in ♊Iupiter in Gemini combust, a good signification. ♂ in ♊Mars in Gemini combust and Occidentall, heate. ♀ in ♊Venus in Gemini combust and Occidentall, winde. ☿ in ♊Mercurie in Gemini combust, winde. Of the Planets in Cancer. ♄ in ♋SATVRNE in Cancer combust, darke weather, great windes and troublesome weathers: Occidentall, caulmer. ♃ in ♋Iupiter in Cancer combust, bringeth caulme and pleasant weather. ♂ in ♋Mars in Cancer combust, great heate. ♀ in ♋Venus in Cancer combust, a quiet caulme time. ☿ in ♋Mercurie in Cancer combust, tempestuous weather, chiefly on the Sea: Occidentall, caulmer. Of the Planets in Leone. ♄ in ♌SATVRNE in Leone combust, maketh winds and mislings. ♃ in ♌Iupiter in Leone combust, pleasant windes. ♂ in ♌Mars in Leone combust, Occidentall, drought. ♀ in ♌Venus in Leone combust, drought. ☿ in ♌Mercurie in Leone combust, windes.
Of the Planets in Virgo. SATVRNE in Virgine combust, is a significatour of infirmi∣ties.♄ in ♍ Iupiter in Virgine combust, manifesteth abundance of things.♃ in ♍ Mars in Virgine combust, like vnto Saturne.♂ in ♍ Venus in Virgine combust, drought: Orientall, contrarie.♀ in ♍ Mercurie in Virgine combust, drought, raging seas:☿ in ♍ Occidentall drought. Of the Planets in Libra. SATVRNE in Libra combust, sheweth infirmitie of sight:♄ in ♎ Orientall, cold windes. Iupiter in Libra combust, indifferent weather.♃ in ♎ Mars in Libra combust, bringeth moysture.♂ in ♎ Venus in Libra combust, moyst ayre.♀ in ♎ Mercurie in Libra combust, windes.☿ in ♎ Of the Planets in Scorpione. SATVRNE in Scorpio combust, ayre: Occidentall, frost:♄ in ♏ O∣rientalll, cold North windes. Iupiter in Scorpio combust, raine: Occidentall, bitter weather.♃ in ♏ Mars in Scorpio combust, dclareth moysture: Orientall, winds.♂ in ♏ Venus in Scorpio combust, raine, both Occidentall, and Oriental.♀ in ♏ Mercurie in Scorpio combust, raging weather, chiefly Orientall.☿ in ♏
Of the Planets in Sagittarius. ♄ in ♐SATVRNE in Sagittarius combust, cold rainie ayre: Orientall, cold and frost. ♃ in ♐Iupiter in Sagittarius combust, much raine: Orientall worse weather. ♂ in ♐Mars in Sagittarius combust, drought. ♀ in ♐Venus in Sagittarius combust, raine: Occidentall wind & cold. ☿ in ♐Mercurie in Sagittarius combust, raine: Occidentall, cleare aire. Of the Planets in Capricornus. ♄ in ♑SATVRNE in Capricornus combust, signifieth dark weather, with South winds: Occidentall, cold: Oriental, north winds. ♃ in ♑Iupiter in Capricornus combust, moyst ayre: Occidentall, increa∣sing the same. ♂ in ♑Mars in Capricornus combust, clowdie: Occidental, some heat. ♀ in ♑Venus in Capricornus combust, cold ayre: Orientall, raine. ☿ in ♑Mercurie in Capricornus combust, raine both Orientall and Occidentall. Of the Planets in Aquarius. ♄ in ♒SATVRNE in Aquarius combust, cold ayre: Occidentall, dan∣gerous seas: Orientall, raine. ♃ in ♒Iupiter in Aquarius combust, Occidentall, raine. ♂ in ♒Mars in Aquarius combust, drought: Occidentall, & Orientall, plentie of windes. ♀ in ♒Venus in Aquarius cumbust, clowdie: Occidentall, hot: Orien∣tall, raine. ☿ in ♒Mercurie in Aquarius combust, snow: Occidentall, more cold: Orientall, raine.
Of the Planets in Pisces. SATVRNE in Pisces combust, bringeth clowdes: Occidental,♄ in ♓ raine. Iupiter in Pisces combust Orientall, caulme waters.♃ in ♓ Mars in Pisces combust Occidentall, drought: Orintall,♂ in ♓ light∣ning and thunders. Venus in Pisces combust, cold: Occidentall, disposed to snow.♀ in ♓ Mercurie in Pisces combust, moyst ayre.☿ in ♓ Thus much of the iudgement of weather. SEeing that I haue now sufficiently declared how, by what rules and tokens weather is iudged: I thinke it conuenient to adioyne here a briefe collection, how Plenty, Scarcity, Sicknes, Death, Alterations, Troubles, Wars, &c. are for euer perceiued. A rule to prognosticate the aforesayd by the falling of Newyeares day. IT is affirmed of some,Sunday. when Newyeares day falleth on the Sun∣day then a pleasant Winter doth ensue: a naturall Summer: fruite sufficient: Haruest indifferent, yet some winde and raine: many mariages: plentie of wine and honey: death of young men, and cattell: robberies in most places: newes of Prelates, of Kings: and cruell warres in the end. ON Munday, a Winter same what vncomfortable:Munday. Summer temperate: no plentie of fruite: many fancies and fables ope∣ned: ages shall raigne: Kings and many others shall dye: Ma∣riages shall be in most places: and a common fall of Gentlemen. ON Tuesday, a stormy Winter: a wet Summer:Tuesday. a diuers Har∣uest: corne and fruite indifferent, yet hearbes in gardens shall not flourish: great sicknesse of men, women, and young children.
Beasts shall hunger starue, and dye of the botch: many Shippes, Gallies and Hulkes shall be lost: And the bloodie Flixes shall kill many men: All things deare, saue corne. Wednes∣day.ON Wednesday, Lo a warme winter: In the end Snow and frost: a clowdie Summer, plentie of fruite, of Corne, Hay, Wine and Honey: great paine to women with childe, and death to infants: good for shéepe: newes of Kings: great warres, battell and slaughter toward the middest. Thursday.ON Thursday, Winter and Summer windie: A rainie Har∣uest: Therefore we shall haue ouerflowings. Much fruite: plentie of honey: yet flesh shall be deare: cattell in generall shall dye: great trouble, warres, &c. with a licencious life of the femi∣nine sexe. Friday.ON Friday, Winter stormie: Summer scant pleasant: Har∣uest indifferent: little store of fruite, of wine and honey: corne deare: many bleare eyes: youth shall dye: Earthquakes are perceiued in many places: plentie of thunders, lightnings, and tempests: with a sudden death of cattell. Saturdy.ON Saturday, a meane Winter: Summer very hot: a late Haruest: good cheape garden hearbs: much burning: plenty of Hempe, Flaxe, and honey. Olde folke shall dye in most places: Feuers and Tercians shall grieue many people: great muttering of warres: murthers shall be suddenly committed in many places for light matters. NOw that I haue opened diuers waies, both for the learned and vnlearned, how weather to come at all times may be well iudged and knowne, &c. I thought it méete, for further knowledge therein, not to omit here the naturall causes of such and so many alterations of ayre. Lo, therefore orderly they follow.
Naturall causes, conducing to all the aforesayd: and first of the Rainebow. THe Rainbow is the shining and rebounding of beames of light, that turne to the contrarie vapour againe in the cloude. It declareth sometime raine, and many times fayre weather: when the one, and how the other, is before opened. Of Raine. RAine is a cold vapour, an earthly humour, or fumosities, out of waters or earth drawne vp by the vertue of the Sunne, to the neather part of the middle space of the ayre, there through cold thicked, then dissolued: Thus engendred falleth on the earth. Here I leaue to speake of miraculous raines, as Milke, Blood,Quare lapides pluant, lege Plin. lib. 2. cap. 44. Flesh, Yron, Wooll, &c. For more satisfying in these, reade Plinius in the second booke, 58. chapter. Of Frost and Dew. A Cold moyst vapour,Ros aestate, prum hyeme it. a little way drawne vp in the day tho∣row faint heate of the Sunne, descendeth in the night, dissol∣ued on the earth, there congelated or resolued into water, the one called Frost, the other Dew. The last is a signe of fayre weather in the Spring or Haruest. Of Snow. IT is a moist vapour,Nix, humor modicè con∣cretus, drawne vp to the middle region of the ayre, then thicked, and frozen into the bodie of a clowde: So con∣gelated descendeth. Of Hayle. A Clowde resolued into water, in the fall congelated, maketh Hayle. The higher it commeth from aboue,Grando plu∣uia in descen∣su congelata.and the longer it tarieth in the ayre, the rounder hayle.
Of Windes. Ventorum er∣go mateia, ca∣lida & sicca exhalatio.WInde is a multitude of drie exhalations, drawne vp from the earth: and aboue the earth enforced here and there. Of Earthquakes in the most quiet time. Quemadmo∣dum in nube toniruum, sic in terra tre∣mor.PLentie of windes, entred into holes, cones, or caues of the earth, which absent from aboue the earth causeth quietnesse: the violent brusting out of them (the earth closed againe) is the Earthquake: Signum est futurorum bellorum. Tokens of Earthquakes to come. Signa terrae∣motus.A Firie clowde, appearing in the element like a little pillar, is a token of Earthquakes to come. The obscurity or darkenes of the Sunne, without clowdes, and strangely coloured, bloodie or otherwise, is a token of Earthquakes. Also when Well water and others are troubled, or salt, or in∣fected by sauour, &c. A great quietnes of ayre by land and sea, and chiefly the long absence of winds. Also strange noyses heard, as clamours of men, rushing of har∣nesse, mournings, lamentations, &c. All these haue been obserued to signifie Earthquakes at hand. Of thunders and lightnings. Fulgetrum prius cerni, quàm toni∣trum audiri, cum siul fant certum est, Plin. lib. 3. cap. 56. con∣tra. Austo.THunder is the quenching of fire in a clowde. Or thunder is an exhalation hote and dry, mixt with moysture, carried vp to the middle region, there thicked and wrapped into a clowde: of this hote matter coupled with moystnes closed in the clowde, groweth a strife, the heate beating, and breaking out the sides of the clowde with a thundring noyse: the fire then dispersed is the lightning. Thus for the learned: Tonitruum sonius est, qui edr quando nu∣bem rumpit halitus. Fulmen flmma, vel repentinus est ignis, qui ex col∣lisio nubium, aut ruptura nascitur. Aristotle affirmeth the light∣ning after thunder, but the fire doth first appeare, in that the sight is before the hearing. If this satisfie not, reade the second of his Metoron. Here followeth a note of lightnings.
There be three kinds of Lightnings, drie, moyst, and cleare. DRie doe not burne but cleaue, part or diuide. Moyst,Note. burne not, but alter colour. The cleare are of marueilous natures: Full barrels by it are emptied. It melteth money in the purse, it breaketh the sword, the purse and scabberd not perished, yea, waxe in them vnmolten. Of the Comets or flames in the night. A Comet is a flame working in a drie, hote slimie exhalation,Ventorum causa. drawne vp to the highest part of the ayre. His matter or sub∣stance after it is burnt, and dispersed, prouoketh windes. The naturall cause of the Sunne cclipsed. NOthing else is the Eclipse of the Sunne, but the direct put∣ting the body of the Moone between the Sun and the earth, or betweene our fight and the Sunne, which chaunce onely at the chaunge. A Corollarie. BY this,Miracle. gather the darkenesse at Christs death no to stande by naturall eclipticall cause: but by supernaturall, or myracle. For it was at the full Moone, Scriptures witnesse: which enfor∣ced Dionisius Arcopagita at the time of his passion, to speake thus▪ Aut Deus naturae patitur, aut mundi machina dissoluitur. The cause of the Moone eclipsed. THe Sunne being in the contrarie poynt to the ful Moone,Vniuersalis est Eclipsis Luç. Non semper in nouilunio, sed in capite & cauda. en∣forceth the shadow of the earth then directly put between the Sunnes and the Moone, toward the Moone, hiding more or lesse of the Moone, as she differeth from the Eclipticall. Some ob∣serue pestilent plagues, sudden battell, great dearth, to ensue thse Eclipses: which all I desire God to aert from his cho∣sen. Many other things by these Eclipses are gathered, as Longitudes of Countreyes, the Quantitie of the Sunne, con∣taining the bignesse of the Earth 162. tymes: the compasse of
the earth 21600. miles: whose thicknesse, according to Archime∣des rule is 6872. miles, and eight eleuenths of a mile. The quantitie of the Moone is the 43. part of the earth.Omnium pla∣netarum ad terram magni∣tudo. The Sunne contayneth the Globe of the Moone 7000. times. Saturnus comprehendeth the bignes of the earth 91. times. Iupiter, 65. times. Mars, once, and ten sixteenths. Venus, the 37. part. Mercurius, one. 32000. part of the earth. Note here, that Alfraganus affirmeth the least fixed Starre perfectly seene, is bigge as the whole earth. HAec non erunt admirationi, si globi capacitatem ex longitudine diametri quaesieris. Continet enim solis dimetiens terrae dimeti∣entem quinquies & semissem.Dimetiens ☉ ad terrae dime∣tientem vnde∣cim ad duo. Est{que} proportio diametri Solis ad terrae dimetientem, quae est numeri vndecim ad duo, quintupla sesquialtera. Cubus solis mille tercentum vnam & triginta partes tales continet, cuiusmodi terrae cubus octonas complectitur. Cubus enim numeri vn∣decim, est mille tercentum vnum & triginta. Cubus verò binarij, qui est terrae,Cubus ☉ 13.13. Terrae, 8. octo. Subducto quoties id fieri potest, minore cubo qui est terrae, à maiore qui est solis, cognoscitur cubi ad cubum proportio, & quanto Sol maior terra sit. Inuenimus ergo octo centies, sexagies sexies, in mil∣le tercentum vno & triginta. Dimetiens ter∣rae ad diam. ☽ 17. ad 5 Cubus terrae 14913. Cubus ☽ 125.Terrae Diametros Lunae dimetiens complectitur ter, & duas eius diametri portiones quintas: est{que} ea proportio dimetientis terrae ad Lunae diametrum, quae est septendecim ad quinque tripla superbi parti∣ens quintas. Cubus numeri septendecim est quater mille nonagenta terdecim. Cubus numeri quinque est centum viginti quinque. Maiore cubo per minorem distributo, reperimus numerum certum viginti quin∣que, tricies nouies in quater mille nonagentis terdecim: quod paululum à superioribus obseruationibus differt. The quantities or rather true proportion of all the Pla∣nets vnto the earth, ocularly demonstrated by figure following.
Mercurie is but a poynt in respect of these quantities.
BY these fiue Globes are represented the true magnitudes of the seuen planets. One Globe or like magnitude appointed for Saturne and Iupiter: Euen so for the Moone and Venus: the rest haue seuerall Globes (as ye may see) according to their quan∣tities. The nature, course, colour, and placing of these seauen Planets, according to Ptolomie. ♄SAturne is the highest and slowest in proper motion, colde, drie, and pale, like vnto Lead colour, requiring thirtie yeares to end his course. Di. 9. ad. 2. ♃IVpiter is next vnder Saturne, temperate, faire and bright: his course is performed in 12 yeares. Di. 32. ad. 7. ♂MArs is hot and drie of fierie colour, in two yeares endeth his course. Di. 7. ad 6. ☉THe Sunne is placed in the middle of all the Planets: most cleere and bright, the well of pure light: euery yeare finishing his course. Di 11. ad 2. ♀VEnus is next to the Sunne, colde, moyst, and cleere: yea more bright then Iupiter, her course is like vnto the Sunnes: neuer aboue 48. degrees from the Sunne: called the morning starre when she goeth before the Sunne, comming after the Sunne she is named the euening starre. Di. 3. ad 10. ☿MErcurie is next vnder Venus, somewhat shining but not ve∣ry bright: neuer aboue 29. degrees from the Sun, his course is like to Venus, or the Sunnes motion.   ☽THe Moone is lowest of al the seauen, running ouer the whole Zodiake in 27. dayes, and eight houres, and somewhat more. Di. 5. ad. 7. For more plainnesse of that which is opened, now shall follow a figure, by the which ye may perceiue how the Obe of the one Planet compasseth the other. Also, how these Planets are pla∣ced in the heauen: yea, which Planets is highest from the earth, and which neerest vnto vs. Consider wel this figure, so needeth no farther declaration.
Ye may here behold first th Elementall part subiect vnto alte∣ration, consisting of the foure Elements, first Earth and Water, whereon we are: then Ayre and fire. The other Etheriall part, (which the Philosophers cal quinte essence) containeth the tenne Orbes: the bigger compasseth the next lesser, as the figure before sheweth. It beginneth at the Moone, then Mercurie, Uenus, &c. in height more and more. As the figure declareth Saturne to bee the highest Planet: so is the Moone lowest. The distance or miles that the Moone is from the Earth and euery Planet from other. Haec incredi∣bilia viden u tantum ijs qui Mathematicis demonstratio∣nibus non as∣sueuerunt, &c.AS some haue published, it is from the Earth to the Moone, 1570. miles. From the Moone to Mercurie, is 12812. miles. From Mercurie to Uenus, as many miles. From Uenus to the Sunne, is 23437. miles and a halfe. From the Sunne to Mars, is 1575. miles. From Mars to Iupiter, is 18721. miles. From Iupiter to Saturne, as many miles. From Saturne to the firmament, 120485. miles. The whole summe from the Earth to the Firmament, is 358463 miles and a halfe. Here Demonstration might bee made of the distance of these Orbes, but that passeth the capacitie of the common sort. The naturall operations of these Planets by coniunction, oppo∣sition &c. ensueth: but more largely of me opened in a pleasant booke shortly to bee published. First here will I end the naturall causes of many Sunnes and Moones: then of the Planets by con∣iunction. The naturall causes of many Sunnes or Moones. Milichius no∣teth the king of Pole to haue seene 6. Suns at once.THese come to passe, when a thicker clowde is gathered toward the side of he Sun or Moone, in the which the broken beames of the Sunne do leaue the fashion and very forme of that Sunne. Thus as followeth, sayth Plinius in his second booke of the histo∣rie of Nature, and 31. chapter. No moe Sunnes are perceiued in our time then three: and they are neuer seene, either aboue or be∣neath
the Sunne, but on the sides: neuer in the night, but onely at the Sunne rising or going downe. What is to be chosen or auoyded vnder euery aspect of the Moone, with her signification in the 12. signes touching the same. THe Coniunction, Quadrature,♄ ☌ □ & ☍ cum ☽ or Opposition of Saturne with the Moone, causeth an euill vnluckie day for all maters. Leaue therefore to haue to doe any manner way: nothing shall prosper or come well to passe then attempted.♄ ✶ △ cum ☽ Yet the Sextile or Trine of Saturne with the Moone, declareth a conuenient time to til, delue, or digge, to sow, to lay foundations, to erect or repayre houses, yea, a meete time to obtaine suites of fatherly farmers. The Moone in Capricornus or Aquarius,☽ in ♑ vel ♒ bringeth this latter ef∣fect of the Sextile and Trine. The Coniunction, Sextile, Trine,♃ ☌ ✶ △ □ vel ☍ cum ☽ Quadrature or Opposition of Iupiter with the Moone, sheweth a fortunate day, chiefly to ob∣taine suites of Kings, noble Princes, Prelates, of Lawyers and Religious persons: and a meete time to studie, to iourney, to take an honest matter in hand. The Moone in Taurus, in Leo,☽ in ♉ ♌ vel ♐ or Sa∣gittarius, sheweth the same. The Coniunction, Sextile, Trine,♂ ☌ ✶ △ □ vel ☍ cum ☽ Quadrature or Opposition of Mars with the Moone, warneth thee not to match thy selfe that day with warriours: notwithstanding very good and most meete to finish all maner firie works: naught to iourney: yet most con∣uenient for valiant Captaines to worke their feate: to leade, en∣courage or stomacke their souldiers: most vnmeete to treate peace, to take seruants, or to seeke friendship. The Coniunction,☉ ☌ □ vel ☍ cum ☽ Quadrature or Opposition of the Sunne with the Moone, declareth a very vnhappie day for all matters: therefore attempt nothing, ne any manner suite, neither plant, build, ne iourney. Yet the Sextile and Trine are very fortunate, specially to obtaine suite of Kings, Princes, and other Nobles. The Moone in Aries, enforceth the effect of this latter part.☽ in ♈
♀ ☌ ✶ △ □ vel ☍ cum ☽The Coniunction, Sextile, Trine, Quadrature, or Opposition of Venus with the Moone, causeth a day most apt to obtaine all suites of women, good i woo, to attempt mariage, and to follow al manner of pleasures, and pleasant pastimes: not vnmeet to hire seruants, to let blood, &c. The Moone in Libra or Pisces prouo∣keth the like. ☿ ☌ ✶ △ □ vel ☍ cum ☽The Coniunction, Sextile, Trine, Quadrature or Opposition of Mercurie with the Moone, promiseth a fortunate happie day to buy and sell: very good to enter children in liberall Arts: an apt time for the Uersifier: good to vse Merchandise, to iourney, to send embassage, to giue accounts, and such like. ☽ in ♊ ♋ vel ♍.The Moone in Gemini, Cancer, or Virgo, enclineth euen to the same aforesayd. ☽ ☊The Moone with the Dragons head, sheweth a luckie day for all matters: with the taile, contrarie. Now ensueth a table shewing what Signe the Moone is in, and shall be for euer: declaring also the meetest time to let blood, to purge and to bathe. THe Table hath at the head seuen titles. The first moneths: the second dayes: then the Prime: the twelue Signes: the times to let blood, to purge, and to bathe. Here is to be noted, that those dayes are good for these purpo∣ses, which be signed with this letter G. and those euill dayes, that are noed with B.
¶This Table declareth for euer, in what Signe the Moone is or shall be at any daye in the yeare. It serueth also very well to let Bloud, to Purge, and Bathe. Monethes. Daies. Prime. The 12. Signes. To let Bloude To Purge. To Bathe.A table for letting of blood, &c. Febr. Nouē. 1 3 Aries. G B G Marche. 2   Aries. G B G   3 14 Taurus. B B B Decembre. 4 6 Taurus. B B B   5   Gemini. B G   Aprill. 6 17 Gemini. B G     7 9 Cancer.   G G Maie. 8 1 Cancer.   G G   9   Cancer.   G G   10 12 Leo. B B G   11 4 Leo. B B G Iune. 12   Virgo. B B B   13 15 Virgo. B B B Iuly. 14 7 Libra.         15   Libra.         16 18 Scorpius.   G G   17 10 Scorpius.   G G Auguste. 18 2 Scorpius.   G G   19   Sagittarius G   G   20 13 Sagittarius. G   G   21 5 Capricornus B B B Septembre. 22   Capricornus B B B   23 16 Aquarius.     G Ianua. Octo. 24 8 Aquarius.     G   25   Pisces   G G   26 19 Pisces.   G G   27 11 Pisces.   G G
SEeke out vnder the titles of the Moneths, the name of the mo∣neth, whose day you must looke out right against the moneth, vnger the title of daies, and there begin to tel downewards, 1.2.3. &c. to the end, if it so require, and then from the beginning, if neede be, vntill ye haue reckoned the number of the day that you seeke. Looke what number it falleth vpon in this table vnder the title of daies, that number keepe in minde. Then seeke vnder the title of the Prime, the Golden number for the yeare, right against that, leftward vnder the title of dayes: begin to tell downwards, 1.2.3. &c. vntill you haue reckoned the number which you did keepe in minde. Against that, towards your right hand vnder the the title of Signes, is the signe wherein the Moone shall bee that day. Euen then vnder the other titles, ye shall finde in right or∣der for letting Blood, for puring and bathing, according as they be noted with G. which is good, and B. signifying bad. Example. The sixt day of March in the yeare of our Lord 1555. I desire to know what celestical signe the Moone doth then occupy. I find first the name of the moneth, that is March: and the day as follo∣weth, in the next order of this table. I begin here to tell right a∣gainst my moneth, at the figure of 2. saying, 1.2.3. &c. so I haue at the end and count of sixe daies this figure 7. which I keep in mind. Now I must seeke out the Golden number for the yere aforesaid, vnder the title of the Prime here, that is 7. against the which on the left side is 6. There ye must beginne againe to count 1.2.3. &c. vntill you come to your number 7. So on your right hand in the row or order, you shall see Uirgo, the celestical Signe that the Moone is in: and after that these three leettrs B. which declare bad, or euill to let Blood, to Purge, or Bathe, agreeable to the ti∣tles in the head G. there had signified good. Forasmuch as letting of Blood, Purging, and Bathing, Inun∣dations, Floods, Timber sailing, Sowing, Planting, Graffing, Cutting, &c. depend chiefly on the Signe wherein the Moone is, which I haue euen before plainly opened: I thought it meete to haue them now orderly touched as followeth.
Profitable Rules A conducible note for letting blood. LEt blood at no time without great cause, for it bringeth weak∣nesse and many infirmities. If ye doe,Malum mi∣nui, vel purga∣tionibus vti, tempore calo∣ris, propter defectum hu∣moris. see it be after good dige∣stion, and fasting, in a faire temperate day. Beware before of all manner exercises, bathings, watchings, and carnal copulation, &c. After vse fine meates, of light digestion, abstaining from all the aforesayd, vntill the fourth day. These Signes are most dangerous for bloodletting,Ill to let blood in ♉ ♊ ♌ ♍ ♑ the Moone being in them: Taurus Gemini, Leo, Uirgo, and Capricornus, with the last halfe of Libra, and Scorpius. The rest are all good, so the Moone beare no dominion in that member which ye cut: as followeth. Behold this figure. bloodletting man
The Dominion of the Moone in mans body. Aries. The Head, and Face. Taurus. The Necke. Gemini. The Armes, Hands, Shoulders. Cancer. The Breast, Stomacke, Ribbes. Leo. The Heart, Backe. Virgo. The Bowels, Belly. Libra. The Raynes▪ Nauill, Buttockes. Scorpius. The Secret members. Sagittarius. The Thighes. Capricornus The Knees. Aquarius. The Shinnes, Legges. Pisces. The Feete. FRom the change to the first quarter, a meete time to let young men bloud. From the first quarter to the full, good for middle age. From the full to the last quarter, apt for aged folke. From the last quarter to the change, best for old men. Signes meete for the Complexions. Aries. For the Flegmatike: the Head, and Thighes ex∣cepted. Sagittarius. For the Flegmatike: the Head, and Thighes ex∣cepted. Haec diligen∣tissimè obser∣uare oportet solertem. Medicum, nisi maiora peri∣ula cogant.Libra. For Melancholike: Buttockes, and Legges ex∣cepted. Aquarius. For Melancholike: Buttockes, and Legges ex∣cepted. Cancer. For Cholerike: Breast, Members, and Feete ex∣cepted. Scorpius. For Cholerike: Breast, Members, and Feete ex∣cepted. Pisces. For Cholerike: Breast, Members, and Feete ex∣cepted. For the Sanguine, all be apt that tofore are na∣med good. In the Spring time, let blood at the right side. In Haruest time, at the left side. The learned Phisition will consider, beside all that is sayd, the Coniunctions, Oppositions, and Quadrat aspects of the Planets:
with many other things Astronomicall, most necessarie, both in blood-letting, purging, bathing, &c. For to take purgations, and to bathe. THe méetest time to take purgations, &c. is neither in hote, nor cold dayes: that is, from the tenth of March, to the twelfth of Iune. Further by rules Astronomicall,Good to purge ♋ in ♓ it must bee performed when the Moone is in cold, moyst, and watrie signes, as Cancer, Scor∣pius, and Pisces: comforted by aspects and radiations of Planets, fortifying the vertue of the bodie expulsiue. The Moone in Aries, Taurus, and Capricornus, naught.Bad to purge. ♈ ♉ ♑ One cause of vomiting the purgaion is, if the Moone haue aspect to any Planet retrograde. The Moone in these Signes following, very good to bathe:Good to bathe ♈ ♌ ♐ ♋ in ♓. Aries, Leo, Sagittarius, Cancer, Scorpius, and Pisces. These ensuing are euill to bathe, Taurus, Uirgo, Capricornus.Bad to bathe ♉ ♍ ♑ Of Inundations or floods: of timber selling, sowing, planting, graffing, haire clipping, shauing, and gelding. THe flood is biggest at the full: because then dispersing her ver∣tue,The fall of Timber. she filleth all places with moysture. By common experi∣ence ioyned with learning I knowe, at the full, the Moone lodeth all bodies with humors: and so are emptied, growing to the change. Of this some gather the fall of timber at the chaunge, more to the purpose then other times, wanting the superfluous moisture, the cause of putrifaction, Omnis putredo ab aqueo humido. ortum habet. Schoner willeth from the 15. day vnto the 22. day of the Moone trées to be felled, and that after Midsomer to Ianuary. So timber is strong, sound, and voyd of wormes. To sowe: Taurus, Cancer, Uirgo, Libra, and Capricornus,Good to sow. ♉ ♋ ♍ ♎ ♑ are best in the increase of the Moone. To plante or graffe, is best when the Moone hath her being in any sixed Signe, either in Taurus, or Aquarius in the increase.To plant or graffe. ♉ ♒
To cut haire ♉ ♑ ♎Hayre cut groweth well, the Moone encreasing, being in Tau∣rus, Virgo, or Libra. Cutting, Shauing, Clipping, in the wae causeth baldnesse: what is then cut, groweth litle. Caluitium prohibet oleum Tartari. The best time of Cutting is in Cancer, Scorpio, or Pisces, in the wane. These two rounde Tables that nowe ensue, conduce to the rest following A Table for the Sondaies letter and Leape yeare. The yere 1554. G. was Dominical. The next yere 1555. F shalbe. Then E, vnto S. Mathies day, and D. vnder him vnto the end of the yere. So orderly, rightward in this Circle for euer. Where two let¦ters are, that is the Leape yeare. Or thus for the Leape yeare. Deuide the yere of our Lorde by 4. if nothyng be left, it is the Leape yeare, The remayne noteth the .1. the .2.02.3. yeares, after the Leape yeare.
VVhen yee haue gone rounde about the yeares, of these two Tables, begin againe. A Table for the Golden number, or Prime: and also for the Epact. Seek out the yeare of the Lord, vn∣der it, is the prime. Thē the Epact. VVhich chaungeth euerye yeare at the first daye of Marche, the Dominicall letter and Prime, the fyrst of Ianuary.
The prime. The sondaies letter. The first Lent son∣daye. Faster daye. Roga∣tion. whitson∣tide. Betwixt whitsond. & midso. 16   Februarie. Marche. April. Maye. wek. daies 5 d 8 22 26 10 6 3   e 9 23 27 11 6 2 A table for moueable feasts.13 f 10 24 28 12 6 1 2 g 11 25 29 13 6 0   A 12 26 30 14 5 6 10 b 13 27 May. 1. 15 5 5   c 14 28 2 16 5 4 13 d 15 29 3 17 5 3 7 e 16 30 4 18 5   f 17 31 5 19 5 1 15 g 18 April. 1 6 20 5 0 4 A 19 2 7 21 4 6   b 20 3 8 22 4 5 12 c 21 4 9 23 4 4 1 d 22 5 10 2 4 3   e 23 6 11 25 4 2 9 f 24 7 12 26 4 1   g 25 8 13 27 4 0 17 A 26 9 14 28 3 6 6 b 27 10 15 29 3 5   c 28 11 16 30 3 4 14 d Marche. 1. 12 17 31 3 3 3 e 2 13 18 Iune. 1. 3 2   f 3 14 19 2 3 1 11 g 4 15 20 3 5 0   A 5 16 21 4 2 6 19 b 6 17 22 5 2 5 8 c 7 18 23 6 2 4   a 8 19 24 7 2 3   9 20 25 8 2 2   f 10 21 26 9 2 1   g 11 22 27 10 2 0   A 12 23 28 11 1 6   b 1 24 29 12 5   c 14 25 30 3
The vse of this Table appoynted for the moueable Feasts. THis Table containeth, in the first title the Prime: in the se∣cond, the Dominicall letter: in the third, Lent: in the fourth, Easter day: in the fift, Rogation day: in the sixt, Whitsunday: in the seuenth, how many weekes and dayes are betweene Whit∣sunday and Midsommer. Which all appeare by their titles. Ye shal consider by the little round Table before put forth, what number the Prime is that yeare, whereof ye require to knowe all these aforesayd: and seeke that number vnder the first title of this Table ensuing. Then seeke vnder the second the Dominical letter, next after the Prime for that yeare: which title ensueth the Prime. Directly against the same Dominicall letter, towards your right hand, in the same line, ye shall finde vnder the titles, what moneth and day, euery one of these aforesayd shall happen. Example. I would know this yeare of our Lorde 1555. These moueable Feasts: the first Lent Sunday, Easter day, Rogation dayes, Whit∣sunday, and how many weekes betwixt Whitsunday and Midsom∣mer day. First I finde the Prime this yeare 17. which 17. I looke out vnder the title of Prime in the Table before. Then I seeke in the next order, and after the Prime, for the Dominicall letter that yeare. Now in right order, according to the title, I finde the third of March to bee the first Lent Sunday: the 14. of Aprill Easter day: the 12. of May Rogation: the 2. of Iune Whitsunday: and 3. weekes and 1. day betwixt Whitsunday and Midsummer day. Thus for euer.
How to know the age of the Moone then the chaunge, and quarter for euer. By the Prime the change is knowne, but vncertainely: therefore here omitted. FIrst learne the Epact (as I haue instructed) for that yeare ye seeke to know the age of the Moone, then reckon how ma∣ny dayes are past of the moneth, which day ye desire to know the age. Put that number to the Epact. Then begin at March, and reckon for euery moneth from him orderly one, vntil your said day, including both the moneth of March, and also the moneth of your sayd day. Adde all these dayes vnto your former number, putting away as many thirtie dayes as ye finde. The rest is the age of the Moone. The age found, the chaunge is knowne. If ye adde seuen dayes to the change, yee haue the first quarter: then seauen dayes, and somewhat more, sheweth the full: and so to it adding seuen and more, bringeth the last quarter thus, by seuen vnto the new Moone. Example. In anno Bisex∣tili vnum adde The tenth day of Ianuary, the yeare then being 1555. I desire the age of the Moone, I finde the Epact vntill March ensuing to be twentie sixe, that added vnto tenne, maketh thirtie sixe, then e∣leuen for the moneths from March to Ianuary, including both moneths, bringing fortie seuen: now thirtie pulled away, lea∣ueth seuenteene the age of the Moone. Now ensue the perfect Tables, declaring the true houre and minute of ebbing and flowing in most coasts of England.
Example. The first day of Ianuarie, I desire all the aforesaid: that is, the breake of the day: the very minute of the Sunne rising, the length of the day, and also of the night: the Sunne going downe, and the twylight. I finde on the right hand of Ianuarie these numbers running downe, 1.10.20. which declare the first day, the 10. day, and twentith of that moneth. Now to my purpose. I require the breake of the day, &c. The first of Ianuarie in the Table, vnder the title, on the right hand of this figure 1, I see 5. houres, and 54. mi∣nutes, that is sixe of the clocke wanting 6. minutes. The rising of the Sunne in that order, is iust at eight, as this figure 8. there de∣clareth vnder that title in the row. The length of the day, eight houres: the length of the night 16. houres: the Sunne setting is at foure: the twylight at 6. and 6. minutes. Euen thus for the tenth day, and also for the twentith of that moneth, in the rowes accor∣ding to their titles in the head of my Tables. How to worke by proportion, when the day is not found. I Would know all the aforesaid: the first day of Ianuarie, I take for example the breake of the day. Remember the first day of Ia∣nuarie, I did finde the breake to be at fiue of the clocke and 54. mi∣nutes: and the tenth day I may finde the breake of the day to bée at 5. and 44. minutes, that is 10. minutes lesse. I see now 10. daies doe giue me 10. minutes lesse: I see therefore (by proportion) the fift day must giue 5. minuts lesse than 5. houres 54. minuts: which is 5. houres, 49 minutes my request. Thus for all the other titles. The houre of the night by the Moone, is otherwise found than before, and that diuersly. THe houre of her rising knowne, as is opened,How by the Moone the night houre is found. and a mark then made where she shadoweth, in any true fixed or moueable Sun diall, the houres and minutes from that marke all the night after are to be added to her rising. If more than 12. surmount, only that aboue 12. sheweth the true houre and minute. If at the rising she may not be seene, then by the Sunne rising, in that very Signe (with the helpe of this Almanack) you may perceiue what houre she would note at her rising. Therefore from that marke, count.
An other way. Of ebbing and flowing.WHen the moone is at the full, looke what houre her sha∣dow sheweth in any Dial, that is the houre of the night. After she is past the full 28. houres, ye must adde one houre: But afore the full, pull one from that yee finde in the Diall. If twise 28. two houres, &c. so haue ye the houre of the right. How the houre of the day, by Right shadow, that is, by any thing directly standing vp, is knowne: and by Squire shadow also. FIrst it behoueth you to haue a Staffe, or any other thing diuided in 12. equall parts. When ye list to haue the houre, set vp di∣rectly your deuided Staffe on a plaine leuell ground, or boord, &c. Note the iust length of the shadowe, what parts it containeth. With those enter your moneth in the peculiar Kalendar follow∣ing: beholding diligently vnder the name of the moneth, the small enclosed Tables: considering well, which of those small Tables are neerest vnto your day: and that iudge by the signe, or day there noted. That table serueth your purpose: where you must looke out the parts of the shadow afore ound, or neere vnto it: vnder or o∣uer the which the houre is set, before or after noone. Note the two prickes there, signifie halfe a part more then is noted: one pricke, halfe a part lesse. Here it is also to be noted, that euery table hath within, two rowes of figures: the vpper is for the Staffe, the other for the Squire shadow. And whatsoeuer is before said of the one, that same is meant here of the other, sauing of the Composition. The Squire must be deuided from the inward angle to the ende of one side, in 12. equall parts: euen so from that angle the other side into 24. like parts, as this figure sheweth. These to the wittie suffice. The composition of an Instrument for the houre of the night which is also a perfect Diall for the day, and excellent for the Mariner. THe taking of an Altitude supposed, I could exactly in few (and that without an Instrument) satisfie. For want of ye know∣ledge,
The vse of these Tables. WHen you will know the full Sea, seeke out the name of the place, where you desire the full water, in the head of the Tables: or learne the poynts of the Compasse there noted: or if you list, know of some mariner, what Moone maketh a full sea there: a Southwest or South Moone. &c. Then ye age of ye Moone found vnder ye place or point of ye compasse, sheweth in right order the houre and minute of the full water. The ebbe then is manifest. Example. I desire to know the full water at London bridge, the yeare of our Lord 1555. the sixt day of February. I finde by rules before put foorth, the 6 day of February the yeare aforesayd, the Moone to bee 14. dayes olde. I see also vnder the title where London is S.W. which letters signifie that a Southwest Moone maketh a ful Sea there: and that is at 2. of the clocke, and 12. minutes past. This is well perceiued in the first Table before put foorth, if you run downe to ye 14. day of the age of the Moone, vnder Lōdon title. A note of the houre of the day and night. THe ingenious may gather neere about the houre of the day and night, by the Moone: consideration had of the poynts in those Tables of tydes before noted. For the houre is orderly put vnder the poynt of the compasse. Euery part or poynt contayning 11. degres and ¼: this com∣passe is wel figured neere about the Centre in the instrument fol∣lowing for the night houre, because ye may by it haue a delectable large vse of these tide tables. How by the first of the tide tables, ye may readily know when the Moone commeth into the South, when she riseth and setteth: with her continuance on the earth. SEeke the age of the Moone (as is opened) then resort to the first tide table, looking out that age there: So vnder the South poynt in right order the houre appeareth, when she commeth vn∣to the South. Then hath she spent halfe that arcke that the Sun would haue had in that Signe▪ which pulled away, sheweth the ri∣sing: that halfe arcke also added to her comming vnto the South, declareth her going downe. The arck then that the Sun would haue had in the signe, is her continuance on the earth.
A Table at all times plainly and briefly declaring the breake of the day: the houre and mi∣nute of the Sunne rising: the iust length of the day: the length of the night also: the very minute of the Sunne setting: and the twylight. Monethes Dayes. Break of the day. Sunne rysinge. Lengthe of the day Lēgthe of the night Sunne settinge. Twy∣lyghte. Dayes. Monethes. of the daye.     H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M.     ber. 10 6 8 11 7 37 16 23 3 40 6 0 10 Dec.   20 5 58 8 10 7 40 16 20 3 5 6 2 1   Ianu. 1 5 54 8 0 8 0 16 0 4 0 6 6 20 Noue. 10 5 44 7 49 8 21 15 39 4 11 6 1 10 7 20 5 35 7 34 8 52 15 8 4 26 6 25 1 5 Febr. 1 5 15 7 13 9 34. 14. 26 4 47 6 45 20 Octo. 5 10 5 0 6 56 10 8 13 52 5 4 7 0 10 8 20 4. 50 6 36 10 47 13 13 5 24 7 10 1 5 Mar. 1 4 20 6 19 11 22 12 38 5 41 7 40 20 Sept. 3 10 4 0 6 1 11 58 12 2 5 59 8 0 10 16 20 3 40 5 41 12 37 11 23 6 19 8 20 1 13 Apr. 1 3 8 5 18 13 23 10 37 6 42 8 52 20 Aug. 12 10 2 40 5 1 13 57 10 3 6 59 9 20 10 15   20 2 10 4 43 14 33 9 27 7 17 9 50 1 11 May. 1 1 30 4 25 15 9 8 51 7 35 10 3 20   13 10 0 30 4 12 15 35 8 25 7 48 11 30 10 Iul. 13   20 Cōtinu∣all day. 4 0 15 59 8 1 8 0 Day co¦tinuall. 1 7 Iu. 1 3 51 16 17 7 43 8 9 20 0 3 48 16 23 7 37 8 12 10 Minutes to be added, to the Lg     H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M.     The vse of this table. COnsider the Moneth and day, that ye require any of the to foresayd: and seke in this Table that same under the title: procede in ryght ordre, so ye haue your purpose. If the uery day be not founde, take the nearest of your table. ¶ Or by proportion the truthe is geuen: whiche all by Ensample folowyng shall playnly be declared.
Qin South∣ampton. Ports∣mth Redban Aberdē Graues¦ende. Dūdee. S And. Age of the Moon London Tinmot Hertle¦pole. Ber∣wyke. Erith. Lyeth. Dūbar. Falmot South. S b w. S S w. S w b S   S w. S w b w w S w w b S. H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. ☽ H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. 12 48 1 33 2 18 3 3 1 3 48 4 33 5 18 6 3The first table for the Titles. 1 2 2 3 6 3 51 2 4 36 5 21 6 6 6 51 2 24 3 9 3 54 4 39 3 5 24 6 9 6 54 7 39 3 12 3 57 4 42 5 27 4 6 12 6 57 7 42 8 27 4 0 4 45 5 30 6 15 5 7 0 7 46 8 30 9 15 4 48 5 33 6 18 7 3 6 7 48 8 33 9 18 10 3 5 36 6 21 7 6 7 51 7 8 36 9 21 10 6 10 51 6 24 7 9 7 54 8 39 8 9 24 10 9 10 54 11 39 7 12 7 57 8 42 9 27 9 10 12 10 57 11 42 12 27 8 0 8 45 9 30 10 15 10 11 0 11 45 12 30 1 15 8 48 9 3 10 13 11 3 11 11 48 12 33 1 18 2 3 9 36 10 21 11 6 11 51 12 12 36 1 21 2 6 2 51 10 24 11 9 11 54 12 39 13 1 24 2 9 2 54 3 39 11 12 11 57 12 42 1 27 14 2 12 2 57 3 42 4 27 12 0 12 45 1 30 2 15 15 3 0 3 45 4 30 5 15 12 48 1 33 2 8 3 3 16 3 48 4 33 5 18 6 3 1 36 2 21 3 6 3 51 17 4 36 5 21 6 6 6 51 2 24 3 9 3 54 4 39 18 5 24 6 9 6 54 7 39 3 12 3 57 4 42 5 27 19 6 12 6 57 7 42 8 27 4 0 4 45 5 30 6 15 20 7 0 7 45 8 30 9 15 4 48 5 33 6 18 7 3 21 7 48 8 33 9 13 10 3 5 36 6 21 7 6 7 51 22 8 36 9 21 10 6 10 51 6 24 7 9 7 54 8 39 23 9 24 10 9 10 54 11 39 7 1 7 57 8 42 9 27 24 10 12 10 57 11 42 12 27 8 0 8 45 9 30 10 15 25 11 0 11 45 12 30 1 15 8 48 9 33 10 18 1 3 26 11 48 12 33 1 18 2 3 9 36 10 21 11 6 11 51 27 12 36 1 21 2 6 2 51 10 24 11 9 11 54 12 39 28 1 24 2 9 2 54 3 39 11 12 11 57 12 42 1 27 29 2 12 2 57 3 42 4 27 12 0 12 45 1 30 2 15 30 3 0 3 45 4 30 5 15 North. N b E N n E N e b N ☽ N E N e b E E n E E b N.
Foy Lin. Hūber. weimot. Dertm. Plimot. Bristo. Milfo. Bridg∣water. Portl. Peter. porte. Age of the Moone. Orkn. Pole. Or∣wel. Diep. Lux. Le∣noys. Boloig. Douer. Harwick Yarmot. Calice. East. E b S. E s E S e b E   S E S e b S S s E S b E H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. ☽ H. M. H. M. H. M. H. M. 6 4 7 33 8 18 9 3 1 9 48 10 33 11 18 12 3 7 36 8 21 9 6 9 51 2 10 36 11 21 12 6 12 51 8 24 9 9 9 54 10 39 3 11 24 12 9 12 54 1 39 9 12 9 57 10 42 11 27 4 12 12 12 57 1 42 2 27 10 0 10 45 11 30 12 15 5 1 0 1 45 2 30 3 15 10 48 11 3 12 18 1 3 6 1 48 2 33 3 18 4 3 11 36 12 21 1 6 1 51 7 2 36 3 21 4 6 4 51 12 24 1 9 1 54 2 39 8 3 24 4 9 4 54 5 39 1 12 1 57 2 42 3 27 9 4 12 4 57 5 42 6 27 2 0 2 45 3 30 4 15 10 5 0 5 45 6 30 7 15 2 48 3 33 4 18 5 3 11 5 48 6 33 7 18 8 3 3 36 4 21 5 6 5 51 12 6 36 7 21 8 6 8 51 4 24 5 9 5 54 6 39 13 7 24 8 9 8 54 9 39 5 12 5 57 6 42 7 27 14 8 12 8 57 9 42 10 27 6 0 6 45 7 30 8 15 15 9 0 9 45 10 30 11 15 6 48 7 33 8 18 9 3 16 9 48 10 33 11 18 12 3 7 36 8 21 9 6 9 51 17 10 36 11 21 12 6 12 51 8 24 9 9 9 54 10 3 18 11 24 12 9 12 54 1 39 9 12 9 57 10 42 11 2 19 12 12 12 57 1 42 2 27 10 0 10 45 11 30 12 15 20 1 0 1 45 2 30 3 15 10 48 11 33 12 1 1 3 21 1 4 2 33 3 18 4 3 11 36 12 21 1 6 1 51 22 2 6 3 21 4 6 4 5 12 24 1 9 1 54 2 39 23 3 24 4 9 4 54 5 39 1 12 1 57 2 42 3 27 24 4 2 4 57 5 42 6 2 2 0 2 45 3 30 4 15 25 5 0 5 45 6 30 7 15 2 4 3 33 4 18 5 3 26 5 48 6 33 7 1 8 3 3 36 4 21 5 6 5 51 27 6 36 7 21 8 6 8 51 4 24 5 9 5 54 6 39 28 7 24 8 9 8 54 9 39 5 12 5 57 6 42 7 27 29 8 12 8 57 9 42 10 27 6 0 6 45 7 30 8 15 30 9 0 9 45 10 30 11 15 VVest. w b n w n w n w b w ☽ n w n w b n n n w n b w
make vpon a plaine boord, or rather fine plate, a Circle: the bigger the better: part it into 360 portions, thus. The Circle made diuide it in 6 not mouing the compasse: then euery of them in 6. and each of those last in 10. so haue you 360. parts. Then charactor it, beginning at the North thus 10.20 30. &c. (as in the figure) going towarde the East, and ending at the North with 360. Now lay a ruler on a Centre, euen with some diuisions, drawing thorow to the extreames of the Circle a line. Then crosse that with another. These two must diuide your circle in 4. equall parts: which lines shew the very East, West, North and South, when by a Meridian or square diall, with a needle rec∣tified, they are placed. Now to the end, set a small straight wier, a foote or more long with a Uane in the top, plum vpright in the Centre: and there fa∣sten it. Thus this Instrumēt is finished, to be fixed about your house, equidistant or leuell with the Horizon: hauing a needle if ye list, in it, truly to plage it, when and where you will. That it may be also a Diall for the day, you must pull straight lines from ye extremitie of your circle outward, to euery fifteenth part decking them with Charactors conueniently as ye see the fi∣gure, your rule keeping the Centre. Thus when the Sunne shi∣neth▪ the shadow of the wier sheweth the true houre: the Uane, the windes, &c. being truly plaged, well placed, and reared as fol∣loweth, The points of the compasse are drawn within the circle, and about the Centre euery point containing 11. degrees and a halfe. The instrument as you see is enclosed round about with a Square, for the Mariners ayde. Truly few words cannot expresse the excellencie of this Square for their vse: No otherwise to bee opened, then learned Gemma hath inuented and plainly declared: here omitted of me, not fully occasioned now to write that way. I haue appoynted a meeter place for this and like matter. In the meane time I am readie in word and deede, to further the desirefull in this or any other.
Beholde this instrument for Nauigation most commodious, the vse of which is here only put forth accor∣ding to my inuention.
The right rearing and placing of the Diall tofore mentioned. LIft vp handsomely your Instrument or Diall toward the North in some meete place, the side of a squire lying on it, vn∣till the plummet and line,In winter the cōtrary super∣ficies or Plain, sheweth the day houre frō ♎ to ♈ centred in the extreame vpper part of the other side of your Squire like long, cut all that Squire side which lieth on your Instrument, the fift part onely except: Then moue your Instrument, hither and thither, this or that way, vntil the shadow of the wire fall vpon the houre of ye day, keeping dili∣gently your height before. Your Diall thus fixed, declareth all the yeere long, the exact houre and parts thereof. No Diall in trueth excelleth this. Haue in remembrance, that this Instrument must lie leuell, nothing at al reared, for the houre of the night by starre. To get the exact houre by two Starres of the first light, with an Instrument or Circle, tofore diuided, first of me inuented, calculated and practised. THe Instrument equidistantly set and plaged,Fit filo aut di∣gito, absque regula exa∣ctissimè. as is declared in composition, ye ought to lay the edge of a ruler vnto the wire, the other nether end touching the Instrument, mouing here and there still touching the wire, vntill either Starre doth offer it selfe with that edge, and that by the iudgement of the eye. Then put downe discreetly your ruler (euer touching the wire) the hin∣der end not mooued, obseruing how many parts are cut from the North, to the edge of the Ruler. Enter with them the peculiar Kalendar following: seeking out your moneth, placed in the mid∣dest of euery Table: then the day of that moneth must bee there found. Note that euery table hath on the sides, the daies thus ordered 1.5.10.15.20.25.30. Know, the order or row of figures which is right against, or neerest your day, serueth the turne. The number or parts before cut by the ruler, and now found in the row of your table, sheweth the precise houre. If it be too little, that houre ouer the head or vnder is not yet come: if contrarie, it is past.
How these two bright starres, being of the first light, are found: the one called Aldebaran or Oculus Tauri, the other Alramech. By what meanes these Starres are knowne.THe best way is thus: The moneth and day knowne with the true houre of the night, enter your Table considering that moneth and day, obserue what parts belongeth there to that starre and houre. Then resort to your Instrument, laying the edge of your ruler, as many parts from the North Eastward, circumspect∣ly lifting vp the edge close by the wire, so the fayre starre shineth e∣uen with that edge. Or thus grosly. Another way to finde them.OCulus Tauri is euer a meete rod and a halfe to the eye vnder the seuen starres, and somewhat North of them in the ri∣sing: Alramech is contrarie to him plaged, accompanied with three little dimme starres, a rod from him by the iudgement of the sight: in the forme of a Triangle, thus. Behold this figure: the great Starre dooth represent Alramech: the other three in the Triangle, which is placed alwayes with him, but commonly there doth appeare but one Starre of the Triangle.
NOW ENSVETH THE needefull, necessarie, peculiar Kalendar tofore mentioned: with Instruments belonging thereto. The composition and appliance of the said Tables, with the pleasant vse of them, are before suf∣ficiently opened: therefore further declaration here, might seeme superfluous.
A necessarie Instrument to finde exactly the houre of the day and night diuers waies, with the helpe of this peculiar Kalendar.
For the night.   5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12         From euening to midnight. 1 108 113 143 165 190 213 59 79         5 112 129 150 172 197 220 63 47         10 113 136 158 183 206 227 68 78         15 123 144 166 192 214 233 71 81         20 130 151 173 199 220 239 75 86Oculus Tauri.         25 137 158 183 207 228 244 79 90         30 144 165 191 213 233 249 82 91           Ianuary hath xxxj. dayes.   From midnight vnto day. 81 93 105 121 143 168 196           1 86 96 110 127 151 177 205           5 89 101 116 135 160 139 214           10Alramech. 93 105 122 143 169 198 213           15 98 111 128 152 179 207 230           20 10 116 135 159 190 216 286           25 190 121 144 168 193 222 242           30 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                   12 11 10 9 8 7     H       For the day. 10 Staffe 26 39 49 83 550 0       shad. 0   Squire 4 4 3 2 0 0       shad.Alramech▪     H 0 1 2 3 4 5                 12 11 10 9 8 7     H     gr. ♒ 20 Staffe 32 34 42 65 209 0       shad. 10 Squire 4 4 3 2 1 0       shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5               12 11 10 9 8 7     H     30 Staffe 27 29 35 119 0         shad. 0 Squire 5 5 4 3 1         shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5 0        
For the night.   6 7 8 9 10 11 12   From euening to midnight. 1 169 194 216 62 73 83 95   culus Tauri.5 174 199 222 64 25 86 98   10 184 207 228 68 79 70 102   15 191 214 234 71 82 94 106   20 198 220 233 75 86 93 111   25 205 226 243 78 88 110 116   Alramech.30                   February hath xxviij. dayes.   From midnight vnto day. 108 124 146 172 201 225     1 111 129 153 180 207 231     5 117 136 126 190 216 227     10 122 144 169 158 223 213     15 128 152 278 206 230 248     20 134 159 188 214 236 252     25                 30   1 2 3 4 5 6       For the day.     12 11 10 9 8 7       H     8 Staffe 23 25 30 42 80 6 6     shad. 0   Squire 6 6 5 3 2 0       shad.     H 0 1 2 3 4 5                 12 11 10 9 8 7       H     18 Staffe 20 21 25 54 61 226       shad. 10 gr. ♓ Squire 7 7 6 4 2 1       shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5             H 12 11 10 9 8 7           28 Staffe 17 18 22 29 45 112       shad. 20 Squire 8 8 6 5 3 1       shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5          
For the Night.   7 8 9 10 11 12       1 50 70 81 93 15 120     From euening to midnight. 5 62 74 84 95 108 125     10 65 76 87 99 113 131     15 69 80 91 103 118 138     20 72 83 94 107 123 146     25 75 86 98 112 129 153     30 80 90 102 117 136 161   Alramech.   March hath xxxj. dayes.   From midnight vnto day. 142 168 196 222 241       1 47 173 201 227 245       5 155 183 210 232 250       10 63 192 218 238 255       15 71 200 225 243 259       20 180 208 232 249 262       25 191 26 237 254 267       30Alramech.   1 2 3 4 5 6             12 11 10 9 8 7       H   gr. ♈ For the dry. 11 Staffe 15 16 19 24 37 74       shad. 0 Squire 9 9 8 6 4 2       shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5               12 11 10 9 8 7 6     H   21 Staffe 13 14 16 21 30 54 221     shad. 10 Squire 11 10 9 7 5 2 1     shad. H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6             12 11 10 9 8 7 6     H   31 Staffe 11 12 14 18 26 43 112     shad. 20 Squire 12 12 10 8 5 3 1     shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6        
For the night.   6 7 8 9 10 11 12           From euening to midnight. 1 92 104 118 138 164               Alramech.5 94 107 123 145 171               10 98 111 129 153 180               15 101 117 125 160 189               20 106 122 144 168 198               25 111 128 152 178 207               30 117 135 159 189 215                 Aprill hath xxx. dayes.   From midnight vnto day. 103 218 230 255                 1 199 225 244 258                 5 207 231 248 262                 10 215 236 253 266                 15 223 243 257 270                 20 230 248 262 274                 25 Alramech.236 252 266 278                 30 1 2 3 4 5                       12 11 10 9 8 7 6   H       For the day. 10 Staffe 0 11 13 16 23 36 76     shad. 0   Squire 14 13 11 9 6 4 2     shad.     H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6               12 11 10 9 8 7 6   H     gr. ♉ 21 Staffe 9 9 11 15 21 31 58 267   shad. 10 Squire 16 15 12 9 7 4 2 1   shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4   5 6           12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 H     31 Staffe 8 8 10 14 19 28 49 139   shad. 20 Squire 18 17 14 10 7 5 3 1   shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7      
For the Night.   8 9 10 11 12         1 117 136 160 190 216       From euening to midnight. 5 120 142 168 196 222       10 128 152 178 206 230       15 134 159 188 214 235       20 143 168 169 222 211       25 151 177 206 230 248       30 160 189 215 235 253         May hath xxxj. dayes.   From midnight vnto day. 237 253 267 278         1Alramech. 241 256 269 280         5 247 261 273 285         10 252 266 278 288         15 257 270 281 292         20 26 274 285 296         25 266 278 288 300         30   1 2 3 4 5               12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5   H   gr. ♊ For the day. 12 Staffe 7 8 10 13 17 26 43 100   shad. 1 Squire 20 18 15 11 8 5 3 1   shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7           12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 H   22 Staffe 7 7 9 12 17 24 39 82 2580 shad. 10 Squire 21 19 15 12 8 6 4 2   shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8         12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5   H   32 Staffe 6 7 9 12 16 23 37 74 565 shad. 20 Squire 22 20 16 12 9 6 4 2   shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7      
For the Night.   8 9 10 11 12         1 161 191 261 237 254       From euening to midnight. Alramech.5 169 197 223 242 257       10 180 207 231 249 262       15 191 216 237 254 267       20 199 224 243 259 271       25 207 231 249 262 275       30 216 237 254 267 279         Iune hath xxx. dayes.   From midnight vnto day. 269 279 290 301         1 270 282 292 303         5   Alramech.274 285 297 308         10 279 290 301           15 28 293 304           20 286 297 308           25 290 301 382           30   1 2 3 4 5         For the day.     12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 H   gr. ♊ 1 Staffe 6 7 9 12 16 23 37 47 565 shad. 20 Squire 22 20 16 12 9 6 4 2 0 shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7           12 11 10 9 8 7 6     H     12 Staffe 6 7 6 12 16 23 36 72 453 shad. 0 gr. ♋ Squire 22 20 16 12 9 6 4 2 0 shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8       H 12 11 10 9 8 7 6       23 Staffe 6 7 9 14 16 23 37 74 565 shad. 10 Squire 22 20 16 12 9 6 4 2   shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8    
For the night.   8 9 10 11 12       From euening to midnight. 1 219 239 255 263 280       5 225 244 29 272 283       10 233 250 264 275 286       15 238 254 267 279 290Alramech.       20 243 258 271 283 293       25 249 262 275 226 297       30 254 267 279 290 300         Iuly hath xxxj. dayes.   From midnight vnto day. 290 302 83           1Alramech. 293 304 86           5 267 79 90           10 301 82 93           15 304 86 98           20 308 89 101           25Oculus Tauri. 82 93 106           30   1 2 3 4 5               12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 H gr. ♌ For the day. 3 Staffe 7 7 9 12 16 24 39 82 2580 shad 0 Squire 21 19 15 12 8 6 4 2   shad   H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8         12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5   H   14 Staffe 7 8 10 13 17 26 43 100   shad. 0 Squire 20 18 15 11 8 5 3 1   shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7           12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5   H   24 Staffe 8 8 10 14 19 28 49 139   shad. 10 Squire 18 17 10 7 5 3 1     shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7      
For the night.   8 9 10 11 12       From euening to midnight▪ 1 255 267 279 291 302       Alramech.5 259 272 284 294 304       10 263 275 286 297 79       Oculus Tauri.15 267 279 290 300 81       20 270 282 292 303 86       25 274 285 296 303 88       30 278 288 299 81 92         August hath xxxj. dayes.   From midnight vnto day. 82 94 107 122 141       1 86 98 111 126 146       5 89 102 116 132 154       10 93 105 119 138 160       15 Oculus Tauri.96 110 125 144 167       20 100 114 130 152 174       25 104 118 136 158 183       30   1 2 3 4 5         For the day.     12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5   H   gr. ♌ 3 Staffe 9 9 11 15 21 31 58 207   shad. 20 Squire 16 15 12 9 7 4 2 0   shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7           12 11 10 9 8 7 6     H     14 Staffe 10 11 13 16 23 36 72     shad. 0 gr. ♍ Squire 14 13 11 9 6 4 2     shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6           H 12 11 10 9 8 7 6         24 Staffe 11 12 14 18 20 43 111     shad. 10 Squire 12 12 10 8 5 3 1     shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6          
For the night.   7 8 9 10 11 12             From euening to midnight. 1 267 279 290 301 82 93             5 270 281 292 303 85 96Alramech.             10 273 285 296 307 88 100             15 271 287 293 80 91 104             20 208 291 302 83 94 103             25 284 295 305 87 99 105Oculus Tauri.             30 287 297 80 91 103 117               September hath xxx. dayes.   From midnight vnto day. 106 120 139 161 186               1 109 124 194 166 192               5 113 129 150 173 199               10 117 135 155 180 204               15 123 142 164 189 212               20Oculus Tauri. 128 149 171 195 219               25 134 155 180 204 215               30 1 2 3 4 5 6                     12 11 10 9 8       H       For the day. 3 Staffe 13 14 16 21 30 54 221     shad. 20 gr. ♍ Squire 11 10 9 7 5 3 0     shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5 6               12 11 10 9 8 7     H     gr. ♎ 14 Staffe 15 16 19 24 37 73       shad. 0 Squire 9 9 8 6 4 2       shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5               12 11 10 9 8 7     H     4 Staffe 17 18 22 29 45 112       shad. 10 Squire 8 8 6 5 3 1       shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5          
For the night.   6 7 8 9 10 11 12           From euening to midnight. 1 27 2 29 80 92 104 117           Alramech.5 279 290 30 82 94 107 122           10 284 9 5 98 111 127           Oculus Tauri.15 286 68 79 90 10 116 133           20 290 71 82 93 106 121 140           25 294 75 86 98 111 126 146           30 297 79 90 102 116 132 154             October hath xxxj. dayes.   From midnight vnto day. 135 157 181 205 226 243             1 141 262 288 210 231 247             5 147 270 195 218 237 252             10 Oculus Tauri.154 178 202 225 242 256             15 162 186 210 230 246 260             20 169 194 217 235 251 264             25 177 202 224 241 255 268             30 1 2 3 4 5 6                   12 11 10 9 8 7     H       For the day. 4 Staffe 20 21 25 34 61 206       shad. 20 gr. Squire 7 7 6 4 2 0       shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5                 12 11 10 9 8 7     H     gr. ♍ 14 Staffe 23 25 30 42 79 6896       shad. 0 Squire 6 6 5 3 2 0       shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4 5               12 11 10 9 8         H   24 Staffe 27 29 35 19           shad. 10 Squire 5 5 4 3 1         shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4            
For the night.   5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12         From euening to midnight. 1 287 298 80 92 104 117 135 156         5 290 302 82 94 107 122 147 163         10 294 305 87 98 111 127 147 117       Alramech. 15 29 80 91 103 117 135 156 180         20 303 83 95 108 123 142 165 189         25 307 88 10 113 129 105 173 198       Oculus Tauri. 30 81 92 104 119 136 158 183 206           Nouember hath xxx. dayes.   From midnight vnto day. 1 7 0 281 292         1 188 211 231 2 61 273 285 296         5 196 218 237 252 265 7 28           10 204 225 243 257 269 281 9           15 213 232 248 261 274 285 297           20Oculus Tauri. 220 238 5 266 278 290 12           25 227 244 258 270 282 293 135           30 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8                 12 11 10 9         H       For the day. 2 Staffe 32 34 42 65 209         shad. 20 gr. ♍ Squire 4 4 3 2 1         shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4                   12 11 10 9 8       H     gr. ♐ 13 Staffe 36 39 49 83 550         shad. 0 Squire 4 4 3 2 0         shad.   H 0 1 2 3 4                 12 11 10 9         H     22 40 5 57 104           shad. 10 Squire 3 3 2 1           shad.   0 1 2 3              
For the night.   5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12         From euening to midnight. 1 81 92 115 119 136 158 183 107         5 84 90 109 124 144 166 192 214         Oculus Tauri.10 89 11 115 132 153 173 201 222         15 93 10 120 139 161 186 209 230         20 98 111 127 147 169 191 217 236         25 152 116 133 154 177 202 224 242         30 107 122 141 163 188 211 231 248           December hath xxxj. dayes.   From midnight vnto day. 228 244 258 271 283 293 135           1 234 259 263 275 286 122 144           5 240 255 267 279 291 129 163           10 Oculus Tauri.246 260 272 284 265 138 153           15 251 264 276 287 124 147 134           20 256 263 280 291 132 155 184           25 Alramech.261 273 285 296 140 165 194           30 1 2 3 4 5 6 7                   12 11 10 9         H       For the day. 2 Staffe 43 47 92 122           shad. 20 gr. Squire 3 3 2 1           shad. 12 Staffe 45 49 65 131           shad. 0 gr. ♑ Squire 3 3 2 1           shad. 22 Staffe 43 47 62 122           shad. 10 Squire 3 3 2 1           shad. 31 Staffe 40 45 47 104           shad. 20 Squire 3 3 2 1           shad.   H 0 1 2 3              
The generall Kalendar. Thus endeth the Peculiar Kalendar, very commodious for the day and night houre. I here adioyned the Instrument without the Square, which sumay ffie for the whole vse of the toforesayd Kalendar, with the helpe of the Squire and Staffe. I May not here omit a Kalendar generall diuided into two parts, whereof the first containeth sixe moneths, from Ianuary to Iune:
The second, other sixe monethes, from Iuly to December. In this Kalendar are set foorth the Festiuall dayes, the entring of the Sunne in the Signes celestiall, the euill dayes noted with one pricke. For a further declaration of those euill dayes: reade this following. The yeare hath xxxiii. euill dayes generall for euer. IAnuary hath eight such dayes: the first, the second, the fourth, the fift, the tenth, the ffteenth, the seuenteenth, the nineteenth. Drinke white wine in this moneth. February hath three daies▪ the viii. the x. the xvii. These not so euil, the xxvi. the xxvii. the xxviii. Eate no potage of Okes, or Mallowes: they are venomous. March three daies: the xv. the xvi. the xix. this not so euill, xxviii day. This moneth all sweete meates are good. Aprill two daies: the xvi. the xxi. These not so euill, the vii. the viii. the x. the xx. Use hote meates, of light digestion. May three daies: the vii.xv. the xx. These not so euill, the iii. the vi. Rise early, and vse breakfast. Iune two: the iiii. the vii. These not so euill, the x. the xv. the xxii. Sage and Lettise are good to eate. Colde water fasting hur∣teth not. Iuly two dayes: the xv. the xx. Abstaine from carnalitie. August two dayes: the xix. the xx. These not so euill, the i. the xxix. the xxx. It hurteth not to abstaine from potage, and all hote meates, and drinkes of spicerie. September two dayes: the vi. the vii. These not so euill, the iii. the iiii. the xxi. the xxii. Eate good fruite. Octtober one day: the vi. These not so euill, the iii. the xvi. the xxiiii. Good wine is wholesome this moneth. Nouember two dayes: the xv. the xix. These not so euill, the v the vi. the xxviii. the xxix. Bleede not. December three dayes: the vi. the vii. the ix. These dayes not so euill, the xv. the xvii. the xxii. Bleede not ouer much. Warme not thy legges at the fire.
Now ensueth the generall Kalender. ¶The first part of the generall Kalendar: from Ianuarie to Iune. Ianuarie. Februarie. March. Daies April. May. Iue. :A Circūci. d d 1 g b hi. Iac. e :b e Purifi. e 2 A c f c f f 3 b .d g :d g g 4 c e :A :e A A 5 d f b f Epiph. b b 6 e .g c g c c 7 .f :A A :d d 8 .g b c b ☉ in ♓ e 9 A c f :c :f f 10 .b d .g d ☉ in ♒ g g ☉ in ♈ 11 c ☉ in ♉ e A Barna. e A A Spring. 12 d f ☉ in ♊ b ☉ in ♋ f Hilar. b b 13 e g c Sūmer. g c Valen. c 14 f A d A d :d 15 g :b .e b e :e 16 :A c f :c :f f 17 b d g d g g 18 c e A e A :A 19 d f b f b b 20 .e :g c g c c 1 :f A d A d d 22 g b .e b e e 23 A Georg. c f c f Ath. f 2 b d g Ioā bap. d Cō. Pau. g g Anu. 2 c Marc. e A e A A 26 d f b f .b b 27 e g c g .c c 2 f A d ·A   d 29 g b e Pe. Pa. b   e 30 A c f c   f 31   d  
¶The seconde part of the generall Kalendar: from Iulie to December. Iuly. August. Septemb. Dayes October. Nouem. Decem. g .c Pet. Vin. f 1 A d Om. sā. f A d g 2 b e Om. an. g b e .A 3 .c f A c f .b 4 d g b d g c 5 e .A c e Dog beg. A :d 6 :f .b :d Nico. f b :e 7 g c :e g c f Na. Ma. 8 A d f Cō. ma. A d g 9 b e :g b e A 10 c f A c f b 11 d g b d g c 12 e A c ☉ in ♑ e A d 13 f b ☉ in ♐ dwyntes. f ☉ in b ☉ in ♍ e ☉ in ♎ 14 g ☉ in ♏ c e :g c f Heruest. 15 A :d .f A d g 16 b. e g b e Dog end A 17 c .f .A c f b 18 d Luc. g b d :g c 19 e :A c :e :A d 20 f b d f b .e Mathe. 21 g c e Tho. ap. g Ma. mag. c f 22 A d f A d g 23 b e g b e Bartho. A 24 .c f A c Iac. Apo. f b 25 d g b Na. do. d g c 26 e A c Steph. e A d 27 f b d Io. euā. f b e 28 g St. Iud. .c e Innoce. g .c decol. Io. f Micha. 29 A .d f Tho. A .d g 30 b e Andre. g b e   31 c   A
Lo the briefe vse of this generall Kalendar. ENter the Columne where your Moneth is no∣ed in the head, yee shall there finde running downe the columne the Festiual daies of that Moneth, the entrie of the Sunne in the cele∣stiall signes, the euill dayes pricked, &c. I would haue placed in this Kalendar the Fayres and Termes also: but that cannot re∣maine continually true. For those that ensue moueable Feasts are moueable, and therefore may haue no certaine place. For the Termes also, note these precepts following. The Fayres shall be declared by two Tables immediatly ensuing this Kalendar Ge∣nerall. How to know the Termes. KNow that Easter Terme alwaies beginneth the 18. day after Easter, reckoning Easter day for one: and endeth the Mon∣day next after the Ascension day. Trinitie Terme beginneth the Friday next after Corpus Chri∣sti day, and endeth the Wednesday fourtnight after. Michaelmasse Terme beginneth the 9. or 10. day of October: and endeth the 28. or 29. of Nouember. Hillarie Terme beginneth the 23. or 24. day of Ianuarie: and endeth the 12. or 13. day of Februarie. FINIS.
Generall Fayres. A Table contayning the Moneth, day, and place of the principall Fayres of England, to be augmen∣ted at pleasure, in order following. Ianuary.THe sixt day of Ianuary, the faire is at Bristow, and also at Salisburie. The first of Lent at Exceer. February.The second day at Bathe, at Maidstone. The 14 at Feuersame. On Ashwensday at Lichfield, at Roystone, at Tamworth. The first Munday in Lent, at Ciciter, at Abington. The 24. at Henley vpon Thames, at Teukesburie. March.The 4. Sunday in Lent, at Stamforth, at Sudburie. The fit Sunday, at Grantam. The Monday before our Lady day, at Salisburie. Palme euen, at Wisbitch. The 13. at Wic. The 25. at Northamton, at great Chare, at Waulden. Aprill.The 5. day at Wallingford. The 7. at Darby. The 9. at Bic∣kelsworth, at Billingsworth. At Easan the Monday after. The Sunday after Easter, at Louth. The 23. at Charing, at Ipswich, at Antill, at Hinigam, at Gilford. The 25. at Darbie. The 26. at Tenterden. May.The 1. day, at Stow the old, at Reading, at Maidstone, at Lei∣cester, at Chensford. The 8. day at Beuerley. Ascension day, at Brimingham, at S. Edes, at Bishops Statford. Whitsunday, at Kingstone vpon Thames. Trinitie Sunday, at Rowch. At Cranebroke the 19. day. The 27. day at Lenham. Iune.On Corpus Christi day▪ at Couentrie, S. Edes, at Bishop Tanford, at Rosse. The 9. at Maidstone. The 11. at Okingam. The 23. at Shrowsbury, at S. Albones. The 24. at Cambridge, at Glocester, at Lincolne, at Windsore▪ at Colchester. The 29. at Wllerhampton, at Peterborrow. The 17. at Flkstone. The 24. at Harisam. The 8. at Hetcorne.
A Table contayning the Moneth, day, and place of the principall Fayres of England: to bee augmented at pleasure, in order following. The 11. day, Horse fayre at Partney, at Nabor, at Felix.Iuly. The 12 day at Lid. The 15. at Pinchbacke. The 17. at Winchcome. The 20. at Uxbridge, at Catesby. The 22. at Marleborow, at Winchester, at Colchester, at Tetburie. The 25. at Bristow, at Douer, at Chilham, at Ipswich, at Northampton, at Darbie, at S. Iames by London, at Reading, at Louth, at Malmsburie. The 1. day at Feuersame, at Dunstable, at S. Edes,August. at Bud∣forth, at Marram Church, at Wisbich. The 9. at Rumney. The 10. at Bedforth, at Fernam, at Strodes, at Blackamore, S. Lau, at Waltom. The 24. at London, at Teukesburie, at Sudburie, at Norwich, at Northallerton, at Douer, at Rye. The 28. at ashford. The 8. day at Cambridge, at Sturbridge,September. at London in South∣warke, at Smide, at Reculuer, at Partney three Lady dayes. The 14. at Waltain Abbey, At Wotton vnder hedge, at Spalding. The 21. at Croydon, at Holden in Holdernesse, at S. Edmonds∣burie, at S. Iues, at Haldy Lanam, at Wiltemall, at Sitting∣borrow, at Douer, at Estry. The 29. day at Canterburie. The 6. day, at S. Sithes besides Norwich.October. The 13. at Graues end, at Windsore, at Marchfield. The 18. at Ely, at Stanton, at Charing. The 23. at Harford, at Ciciter, at Newmarket. The 2. day at Kingstone, at Blechingly.Nouember. The 6. at Newport Pond, at Stanly. The 11. at Douer. The 13. at S. Edmonsbury. The 20. at Hyth. The 23. at Sandwich. The 30. at Rochester, at Maydenhead. The 29. at Canterbury. The 5. at Pluckly The 6. at Spalding.December. The 7. at Sandhurst.
BEcause I vnderstand many are desirous how to get exactly the iust length of Staffe and Squire shadowe before treated of, vpon vnleuell grounds, or otherwayes wheresoeuer it be, yea, without either Squire or Staffe: I haue calculated a Table fol∣lowing throughly satisfying thē, so that they get the height of the Sunne any way: or as I shall now instruct. Behold this Instrument called a Quadrant the iust fourth part of a Circle, euen such a Circle as I taught you before to make for the night Diall: containing the fourth part of his diuisions, that is 90. degrees, only two sights and a plum line added, to be placed at the beginning of this booke, as ye may there, and here see. I haue here also put the Scale to the Quadrant, which serueth well for sha∣dowes, and as well for heights. The vse of this Scale is declared in my booke called Tectonicon. quadrant How by this Instrument to get the height of the Sunne at all times.LIft vp handsomely your Quadrant, the Sunbeames persing the sights. The Plummet and Line then at libertie falling, no∣teth there ye degrees of height at ye present, with the which ye shall enter this table immediatly following, to get then, and in like mā∣ner at all other times, the iust shadow of the Staffe or Squire.
A Table generall of Shadowes, right and contrary, for euery grade of the Sunnes heyght: The thinge cau∣sing Shadowe, supposed 12 partes. Heyght of the Sunne. Staffe. Shadow. Heyghte of the Sunne. Staffe. Shadow. Heyghte of the sunne. Staffe. Shadowe G g P M G G P M G g P M 0 90 Sha W. 30 60 20 47 60 30 6 56 1 89 687 34 31 59 19 58 61 29 6 3 2 88 343 43 32 58 19 12 62 28 6 23 3 87 228 59 33 57 18 29 63 27 6 7 4 86 171 37 34 56 17 47 64 26 5 51 5 35 137 10 35 55 17 8 65 25 5 6 6 84 114 10 36 54 16 30 66 24 5 21 7 8 97 49 37 53 15 52 67 23 5 6 8 82 85 28 38 52 15 21 68 22 4 51 9 81 75 46 39 51 14 49 69 21 4 36 10 80 68 3 40 50 14 18 70 20 4 22 11 79 61 44 41 49 13 48 71 19 4 8 12 78 56 27 42 48 3 20 72 18 3 54 13 77 51 59 43 47 12 52 73 17 3 40 14 76 48 8 44 46 12 26 74 16 3 26 15 75 44 47 45 45 12 0 75 15 3 13 16 74 41 51 46 44 11 35 76 14 3 0 17 73 59 15 47 43 11 11 77 13 2 46 18 72 36 54 48 42 10 48 78 12 2 32 19 71 34 51 49 41 10 26 79 11 2 20 20 70 32 58 50 40 10 4 80 10 2 7 21 69 31 16 51 39 9 43 81 9 1 54 22 68 29 42 52 38 9 22 82 8 1 41 23 67 28 16 53 37 9 3 83 7 1 28 24 66 26 57 54 36 8 43 84 6 1 16 25 65 25 44 55 35 8 24 85 5 1 3 26 64 24 37 56 34 8 6 86 4 0 50 27 63 23 33 57 33 7 48 87 3 0 38 28 62 22 34 58 32 7 30 88 2 0 25 29 61 21 40 59 31 7 13 89 1 0 12 30 60 20 47 0 30 6 56 90 0 0 0 Heyght of the Sunne Squire Shadow. Heyht of the Sun. Squier. Shadow. Heyght of the Sunne Squyre. Shadow
The vse of this Table, and first for staffe shadow. Example. I Suppose the height of the Sunne, taken by the Quadrant, 34. degrees: Now I require the exact length of Staffe and Squire shadow. For right shadow, first seeke out the degrées in the left part of the Table, and vnder this title the height of the Sunne: if they be not in that left row downewards, resort to the next rowe and like title, vntill ye finde the degrees: then in right order to∣ward the right hand, in the next Columne vnder the title of Staffe shadow, are 17. parts, and 47. minites, your desire. For Squire shadow, titled contrarie Shadow. SEeke your degrees in the right part vpwarde, at this title Height of the Sunne, in the bottom of this Table: then shall ye finde on the right hand of 34. degrees, in the next colume, eight parts and sixe minutes: that is the very length of Squire shadow when the Sunne is 34. degrees in height. OCcasioned I cannot here omit another Table faithfully sup∣putated for the Sunnes altitude, by the which with quicke spéede the houre is knowne. This Table conduceth manifolde wayes, yea, to the composition of diuers and many Instruments: as Quadrants, Nauicles, Cylindres, Rings, &c. Behold now it doth ensue, and also the briefe vse of it.
A Table of the Sunnes altitude, for euery houre: the Pole mounted .51. degrees 30. Minutes, exactely calculated.VVhen the Sunne entreth the 22 grade of ♋, he toucheth our  4. in the morninge. Entring the 22 of ♑ he ryseth at 8 in the fyrst  at 5. in the first of ♍, at .7. Note in all my tables▪ one p i folowing the Minutes, dimishth: two, augmenteth  some smale quantitye. Houres before n. 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 Houres after n.     1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Si. G S G G M g M g M g M g M g M g M g M g M   30 ♋ 0 62 0 59 43: 53 45 45 42: 36 42: 27 23: 18 11 9 28: 1 31.   25   5 61 54:                                   20   10 61 37▪ 59 21. 53 26: 45 24. 36 25 27 6 17 54. 9 9. 13 :   15   15 61 9:                                   10   20 60 30: 58 17. 52 23. 44 32 35 35 26 16. 17 3 8 1. 0 16   5   25 61 41:                                 ♊ 0 ♌ 0 5 2: 56 3. 50 55: 43 6. 34 3. 24 56: 15 41: 6 50. 0 0   25   5 557 34.                                   20   10 13 17: 54 15 48 48: 41 10. 32 22. 23 6. 13 50 4 5: 0 0   15   15 4 52:                                   10   20 53 21: 51 26: 46 12: 38 46: 30 6. 20 52. 11 34. 2 34. 0     5   25 51 43:                                 ♉ 0 ♍ 9 0 0 11. 43 11. 35 53 27 2. 18 1. 8 59: 0 0       2   5 48 12:                                   2   10 46 20· 44 37. 39 51 32 53: 24 32. 15 27. 6. 8: 0 0       15   1 44 25:                                   10   20 2 23: 40 51: 36 18 2 34: 2 24: 12 25: 3 6. 0         5   2 0 2:                         ♈ 0 ♎ 0 3 3: 3 58 32 3. 26 7: 18 . 16. 0 0   25   5 36 30                           20   10 34 32. 3 4 28 55: 22 3: 14 51: 6 7 0 0   15   5 32 35.                           10   2 30 4. 29 16. 25 18 19 14: 1 33 3 2: 0     5   25 28                         0 27 0 25 40 21 51: 15 50: 8 3. 6 0.       25   5 25 1.                           20   10 23 39 22 22▪ 18 42: 13 1: 5 45: 0 0       15   15 2 8.                           10   20 20 43. 19 29 15 55. 10 23▪ 3 17 0         5   25 19 26:                 0       ♒ 0 ♐ 18 18. 17 6 13 38: 3 3. 1 15.           25   5 17. 19.                           0   1 15 3. 14 48: 11 55. 6 3: 0 0           15   15 15 51.                           10   20 15 23. 14 13: 10 52: 5 3. 0             5   25 15 6                        
Briefe Collections. The briefe vse of this Table. SUppose the height of the Sunne taken by the Quadrant, eight degrees and 13. minutes, the Sunne being in the beginning of Aquarie, or Sagittarie, I seek, and find in this table and in the row which directly answereth ♒ and ♐ eight degrées and 13. minutes: that is agreeable to 9. or 3. of the clocke in the head of this Table. Therefore I pronounce, that when the Sun was 8. degrees and 13. minutes in height, entring ♒ or ♐, it was precise nine of the clocke in the morning or three at after noone. Thus at all times ye may know the iust houre. Ye may also conclude the height of the Sunne at all times, the place of the Sunne knowne, and the houre. Note, when the pre∣cise numbers either of height, or degree of the Sunne are not found in the Table, then make proportion according to the diffe∣rence, &c. Practise, better than many words, openeth this. Now to end this matter: this following to him that hath tasted these knowledges, I write. Dato loco Solis & eius altitudine, horam ipsam calculare. DVc sinum inuentae solaris altitudinis, in sinum arcus semidiurni, & productum diuide per sinum altitudinis meridianae eiusdem Solis, & prouenientis inde partium numeri sumito arcum, quem tandem in horas vertas. Collectus horarum numerus quaesitam indicabit horam: ab ortu quidem Solis, si altitudo fuerit antemeridiana, vel ab occasu, si eadem Solis altitudo acciderit post meridiem. NOw hauing some occasion, I could here adioyne a briefe Sup∣putation Sinicall, touching most workings Astronomicall, but how farre that passeth the capacitie of the common sort of men, they that bee trauailed knowe. For this cause I leaue to giue any precepts this way: desiring prouocation meete to haue to doe in the like: then God suffering, my penne shall not stay to
open readie chosen generall waies, for pleasant Astronomicall o∣peration. HEre shall now follow briefly collected certaine rules, perfor∣med before by Tables: but now done by quicke supputation, to bee had in memorie: by that, auoyding caryage or burthen of bookes. A way to get the Golden number or Prime without a table. ADde vnto the yeere of our Lord 1. then diuide that summe by 19. the remaine is the Prime or Golden number. The Epact is thus euer found. MUltiplie the Prime by 11. diuide by 30. the remaine is your desire. These two numbers begin at March, their vse is chief∣ly to finde out the change, quarters and full Moone, as ensueth. A rule for the Chaunge, Full, and Quarters of the Moone. PUt vnto the Epact all the moneths from March, including the moneth of March: pull then that summe from 30. the remaine sheweth the day of the change. Here note the full Moone is the 15. day after the chaunge. Also if the remaine be lesse then 15. substract that lesse from 15. the rest is the full Moone. If the remaine passe 30. substract it from 45. then the full doth also appeare. To conclude, if from the full Moone yee pull 15. dayes, ye haue the chaunge going before. The chaunge had, the quarters are knowne, by adding or pulling away seuen dayes.
For the age of the Moone, worke thus for euer. ADde to the dayes of your Moneth the Epact, and also as ma∣ny daies more as are moneths from March to your moneth, including both moneths. Now substract thirtie, if ye may, the age then remaineth. Now shall be declared what Signes and degrees the Moone differeth from the Sunne, by the which is gathe∣red at all times, the Signe and Grade wherein she is. MUltiplie the age of the Moone by 4. diuide by 10. the quo∣tient sheweth the Signes that the Moone differeth from the Sunne. The remaine augmented by 3. bringeth de∣grees to be added. Ye must put these Signes and degrees to the place of the Sunne. The product, I meane the increase or ende of all these Signes and degrees in order counted from the Sunne, declare the place of the Moone in the Zodiacke. The place of the Sunne in the Zodiacke is thus found. FIrst know that the 11. day of Ianuary, the Sunne is entred into ♒. The 10. day of February ♓. The 11. of March ♈. The 11. of Aprill ♉. The 12. of May ♊. The 12. of Iune ♋. The 14. of Iuly ♌. The 14 of August ♍. The .14. of September ♎. The 14. of October ♏. The 13. of Nouember ♐. The 12. of December ♑. This knowne, the place of the Sunne is well found, adding for euery day past any entrey, 1. degree.
Example. I Require the place of the Sunne the 21. day of August. I finde that the Sun is entered in ♍ the 14. day of the moneth. I must for euery day past any entry adde 1. degree. There are seuen daies past that entrie, then I conclude the Sunne readie to haue place in the 8. degree of ♍ the 21. of August. To know how long the Moone shineth. FOr her shining in the encrease, multiplie the age of the Moone by 4. In the wane augment the rest of the age which she lac∣keth of 30. by 4. and diuide by 5. The Quotient sheweth the houres: the remaines if there be any, multiplied by 12. bringeth minutes to be added. How the moueable feasts are found readily. SEeke the change of the Moone in February, for that yeere yée require these moueable Feasts. Note what day it falleth on, the next Tuesday is Shrouetuesday. But if the change be on Tueseday, the next Tuesday ensuing is it. The next Sunday is the first Sunday of Lent. Sixe Sundayes after is Easter day. Adde 35. dayes, or 5. weekes to Easter day, ye haue Rogation Sunday. To that adde 4. dayes, so ye haue Ascension day. Then haue ye 10 daies to Whitsunday. Seuen dayes after is Trinitie Sunday. And foure dayes after is Corpus Christi day. Without Tables, at all times to know the Tydes. LEarne as is declared the age of the Moone: also remember the houre of the Full or Change, for your place or poynt which doth neuer varie: these knowne, worke thus.
Example. WHen the Moone is tenne daies olde, I desire to know at what of the clocke it is full sea at London bridge. Multi∣plie tenne by fortie eight, so haue ye foure hundred eightie: diuide that by sixtie, ye haue eight houres. To that adde three, which is the houre of the full or change appointed for that place. All then commeth vnto eleuen of the clocke high water at London bridge. If any thing remaine they are minutes of an houre. If the houres amount aboue twelue, cast the twelues away, the rest is your request. FINIS.
TO THE READER. HAuing of late (gentle Reader) corrected and re∣formed sundrie faults, that by negligence in printing haue crept into my Fathers Generall Prognostication: Among other things I haue found a description or Modill of the world, and situation of Spheres Coelestiall & elemen∣tarie according to the doctrine of Ptolomie, whereunto all Vniuersities (led thereunto chiefely by the authoritie of (Aristotle) sithens haue consented. But in this our age, one rare wit (seeing the continuall errors that from time to time more and more haue been discouered, besides the infinite absurdities in their Theoricks, which they haue been forced to admit that would not confesse any Mobilitie in the ball of the earth) hath by long study, painefull practise, and rare inuention deliuered a new Theoricke or Modill of the world, shewing that ye earth resteth not in the Centre of the whole world, but not onely in the Centre of this our mortall world or Globe of Elements, which enuironed and enclosed in the Moones Orbe, and together with the whole Globe of mortalitie is caried yeerely round about the Sunne, which like a king in the mid∣dest of al raigneth and giueth lawes of motion to the rest, sphaerical∣ly dispersing his glorious beames of light through all this sacred Coelestial Temple. And the Earth it self to be one of the Planets, ha∣uing his peculiar and strange courses turning euery 24 houres round vpon his owne Centre: whereby the Sun and great Globe of fixed starres seeme to sway about and turne, albeit indeede they remaine fixed. So many waies is the sense of mortall men abused. But reason & deep discourse of wit hauing opened these things to Copernicus, and the same being with demonstrations Mathematical, most appa∣rantly
by him to the world deliuered: I thought it conuenient toge∣ther with the old Theorick also to publish this, to the end such no∣ble English mindes (as delight to reach aboue the baser sorte of men) might not be altogether defrauded of so noble a part of Phi∣losophie. And to the ende it might manifestly appeare, that Coper∣nicus meant not (as some haue fondly excused him) to deliuer these grounds of the earths mobilitie, onely as Mathematical principles fayned, and not as Philosophicall truly auerred: I haue also from him deliuered both the Philosophical reasons by Aristotle and o∣thers, produced to maintaine the Earths stabilitie, & also their solu∣tions and insufficiencie, wherein I cannot a little commend the mo∣destie of ye graue Philosopher Aristotle, who seeing (no doubt) the sufficiencie of his own reasons in seeking to confute the earths mo∣tion, vseth thse words: De his explicatum est, ea, qua potuimus facul∣tate: howbeit his disciples haue not with like sobrietie maintained the same. Thus much for my owne part in this case I will only say. There is no doubt, but of a true ground, truer effects may be produ∣ced, then of principles that are false: and of true principles, false∣hood or absurdities cannot be inferred. If therfore the Earth be situate immoueable in the Centre of the world, why find we not Theoricks vpon that ground to produce ef∣fects as true and certaine as those of Copernicus? Why cast we not away those Circles Aequātes and motions irregular? seeing our own Philosopher Aristotle himselfe the light of our Vniuersities hath taught vs: Simplicis corporis simplicem oportet esse motum. But if con∣trarie, it be found impossible (the Earths stabilitie being graunted) but that we must necessarily fall into these absurdities, and cannot by any meane auoyd thē: why shall wee so much doe in the appa∣rance of our sences, which many waies may be abused, and not suf∣fer our selues to be directed by the rule of Reason, which the great God hath giuen vs as a lampe to lighten the darknes of our vnder∣standing, and the perfect guide to leade vs to the golden branch of Veritie amidde the Forrest of errors. Behold a noble Question to be of the Philosophers & Mathema∣ticians of our Vniuersities, argued not with childish inuentions, but with graue reasons Philosophical, and irreproueable Demonstrati∣ons
Mathematical. And let vs not in matters of reason be led away with authority and opinions of men, but with the Stellified Poet let vs say: Non quid Aristoteles vel quiuis dicat eorum: Dicta nihil moror, à vero cum fortè recedunt. Magni saepè viri mendacia magna loquuntur. Nec quisquam est adeo sagax, quin saepius erret. Ratio dux fida Sophorum. THe Globe of Elements enclosed in the Orbe of the Moone, I call the Globe of Mortality, because it is the peculiar Empire of death. For aboue the Moone they feare not his force: but as the Christian Poet sayth, Omne quod est supra lunam, aeternumque bonumque. Esse scias: nec triste aliquid Coelestia tangit. Quicquid vero infra lunae conuexa creauit Omniparens, natura malum est, mortis{que} seueras Perpetitur leges & edaci absumitur aeuo. Againe. Omne malum est infra lunam, nox atra, procellae Terribiles, frigus, caler, importuna senectus, Pauperies malesuada, labor, dolor, improbitas, Mors. Supra autem lunam, lucis sunt omnia plena, Nec non laetitiae & pacis, non tempus & error, Et MORS, & senium est illic, & inutile quicquam. Foelix ô nimium Foelix, cui sedibus illis. Tam pulchris & tam incundis tamque beatis Viuere concessum est, supremi munere Regis. And againe. Singula nonnulli credunt quoque sydera posse Dici Orbes, Terram{que} appellant sydus opacum, Cui minimus Dium praesit, &c.
In the middest of this Globe of Mortality hangeth this dark star or ball of the earth and water, balanced and sustayned in the mid∣dest of the thinne ayre onely with what proprietie which the won∣derfull workeman hath giuen at the Creation to the Center of this Globe, with his magnetical force vehemently to draw and hale vn∣to it selfe all such other Elementall things as retayne the like na∣ture. This ball euerie 24. houres by naturall vniforme, and wonder∣full slie & smooth motion rolleth round, making with his Period our natural day, whereby it seemes to vs that the huge infinite im∣moueable Globe should sway and turne about. The Moone Orbe that enuironeth and contayneth this darke star, and the other mortall, changeable, corruptible Elements and Ele∣mentary things, is also turned round euery 20. daies .31. Minutes, 50. seconds, 8. thirds, 9. fourths, and 20. fiftes: and this Period may most aptly be called the month. The rest of the Planets motions appeare by the Picture, and shall more largely be hereafter spoken of. Herein good Reader, I haue waded farther then the vulgar sorte, Demonstratiuè & Practicè, and God sparing life I meane, though not as Iudge to decide, yet at the Mathematical barre in this case to plead, in such sorte, as it shall manifestly appeare to the world, whe∣ther it bee possible vpon the Earths stabilitie to deliuer any true or probable Theorick, and then referre the pronouncing of sentence to the graue Senate of indifferent discreete Mathematicall Readers. Farewell, and respect my trauailes as thou shalt see them tende to the aduancement of truth, and discouering the monstrous loathsom shape of error.
❧ A perfit description of the Coelestiall Orbes, according to the most auncient doctrine of the Pythagoreans, &c.
A PERFIT DESCRIPTION OF THE COELESTIALL ORBES, according to the most ancient doctrine of the Pythagoreans: lately reuiued by Copernicus, and by Geomtriall Demonstra∣tions approued. ALthough in this most excellent and difficile part of Philosophie in all times haue béen sundrie opinions touching the situation and mouing of the bodies celestiall, yet in certaine principles, all Philosophers of any account of all ages haue agréed & consented. First that the Orbe of the fixed stars is of all other the most high, the farthest distant, & comprehendeth the other Spheres of wan∣dring starres. And of these straying bodies called Planets, the old Philosophers thought it a good ground in reason, that the nighest to the Centre should swiftliest mone, because the circle was least and therby the sooner ouerpassed, and the further distant, the more slowly. Therefore as the Moone being swiftest in course, is found also by measure nighest, so haue all agreed that the Orbe of ♄ be∣ing in mouing the slowest of all the Planets, is also the highest: ♃ the next, and then ♂: but of ☌ and ☿ there hath bin great con∣trouersie, because they stray not euery way from the Sunne, as the rest doe. And therfore some haue placed them aboue the Sun, as Plato in his Timaeo: others beneath, as Ptolomie, and the grea∣ter part of them that followed him. Alpetragius maketh ☌ aboue the Sunne, and ☿ beneath, and sundrie reasons haue béen of all sides alleaged in defence of their opinions. They that follow Pla∣to (supposing that all starres should haue obscure and darke bodies shining with borrowed light like the Moone) haue alleaged that if those Planets were lower than the Sunne, then should they sometime obscure some part of the bodie of the Sunne, and also
shine, not with a light circular, but segmentarie, and that variable as the Moone: which when they see by experience at one time to happen, they conclude with Plato. On the contrarie part, such as will maintaine them beneath, frame a likelihood by reason of the large space betwéene the Orbes of the ☉ and ☽. For the greatest distance of the ☽ is but 64. semidiameters of the earth: and to the nighest of the Sunne are 1160. so that there remaineth betwéene the ☽ and the ☉ 1905. semidiameters of the earth. And therefore that so huge a space should not remaine emptie, there they situate the Orbes of ☿ and Venus. And by the distance of their Absides, whereby they search the thicknes of their Orbes, they finde that they of all the rest best answere that situation, so as the lowest of ☿ Orbe may reach downe almost to the highest of the Moones, and the top of ☿ to the inferiour part of ☌ Sphere, which with his Absis should reach almost vnto the Sunne. For betwéene the Absides of ☿ by their Theoricks, they supputate 177. semidiame∣ters of the earth, and thē the crassitude of Venus Orbe, being 910 semidiameters both very nigh supplie and fill the residue. They therefore will not confesse that these Planets haue any obscuritie in their bodies like the ☽, but that either with their owne proper light, or else being throughly pierced with solare beames, they shine and shew circulare. And hauing a straying course of latitude, they seldome passe betwéene the Sunne and vs: or if they should, their bodies being so small could scarcely hide the hundred part of the Sun, and so small a spot in so noble a light could hardly be di∣scerned. And yet Auerrois in his Paraphrasis on Ptolomie affir∣meth, that he saw a little spot in the Sunne at such time as by Cal∣culation he had forecast a corporal Coniunction. But how weake this their reason is, it may soone appeare if we consider how from the earth to the lowest of the Moones Orbe there is 38. semidia∣meters of the earth, or by the truer computation according to Co∣pernicus 52. And yet in all that so huge a space we know nothing but the ayre or firie Orbe, if any such be. Againe, the diameter of the circle whereby Venus should be carried nigh 45. grades distant from the Sun, must néedes be sixe times greater at the least, than the distance of that circles lowest part from the earth: than if that whole circle comprehended within the Orbe of Venus should be
turned about the earth, as néedes it must, if we will not attribute to the earth any motion, we may easily consider what rule in the Heauens so vaste and huge an Epicicle, containing a space so ma∣ny times greater than the earth, Aire, and Orbs of the Moone and ☿ also, wil make: especially being turned round about the earth. Againe, the reason of Ptolomie▪ that the ☉ must néedes be placed in the middest of those Planets that wander from him at libertie, and those that are as it were combined to him, is proued senselesse by the motion of the Moone, whom wee see no lesse to stray from the Sun, than any of those other three superiour Planets. But if they will néedes haue these two Planets Orbes within an Orbe of the Sunne, what reason can they giue why they should not de∣part from the Sunne at large, as the other Planets doe, conside∣ring the increase of swiftnes in their motion must accompanie the inferiour situation, or else the whole order of Theoricks should be disturbed? It is therefore euident, that either there must be some other Centre, whereunto the order of these Orbes should be re∣ferred, or else no reason in their order, nor cause apparant, why we should rather to ♄ than to. ♃ or any of the rest attribute the high∣er or remoter Orbe. And therefore séemeth it worthie of conside∣ration that Martianus Capella wrote in his Encyclopedia, and cer∣taine other Latines held, affirming that ☌ and ☿ do run about the Sunne in their spheres peculiar, and therefore could not stray further from the ☉ than the capacitie of their Orbes would giue them leaue, because they encompasse not the earth as the others doe, but haue their Absides after another maner conuersed. What other thing would they hereby signifie, but that the Orbs of these Planets should enuiron the Sunne as their Centre. So may the Sphere of ☿ being not of halfe the amplitude of Venus Orbe, bée well situate within the same. And if in like sort wee situate the Orbes of ♄, ♃ and ♂, referring them as it were to the same Centre so, as their capacitie be such as they containe and circulate also the earth, happily wee shall not erre, as by euident Demon∣strations in the residue of Copernicus Reuolutions is demon∣strate. For it is apparant that these Planets nigh the Sunne, are alwaies least, and further distant, and opposite, and much greater in sight, and nigher to vs: whereby it cannot be, but the Centre
of them is rather to the ☉, than to the earth to be referred: as in the Orbes of ☌ and ☿ also. But if all these to the Sunne as to a Centre in this manner be referred, thē must there néeds betwéen the conuexe Orbe of ☌ and the concaue of ♂ an huge space be left, wherein the earth and Elementarie frame, inclosed with the Lu∣narie Orbe, of dutie must be situate. For, frō the earth the Moone may not be farre remoued, being without controuersie of al other nighest in place and nature to it: especially considering betwéene the same Orbes of ☌ and ♂ there is roome sufficient. Therefor néede we not to be ashamed to confesse, this whole globe of Ele∣ments enclosed with the Moones sphere, together with the earth as the Centre of the same, to be by this great Orbe, together with the other Planets about the Sunne turned, making by his reuo∣lution our yéere. And whatsoeuer seeme to vs to procéede by the mouing of the Sunne, the same to procéede indeede by the reuolu∣tion of the earth, the Sunne still remaining fixed and immoueable in the middest. And the distance of the earth from the Sunne to be such, as being compared with the other Planets, maketh eui∣dent alterations, and diuersitie of aspects: but if it be referred to the Orbe of starres fixed, then hath it no proportion sensible, but as a point or a Centre to a circumference, which I hold far more reasonable to be granted, than to fall into such an infinite multi∣tude of absurd imaginations, as they were faine to admit that wil néedes wilfully maintaine the earths stabilitie is the Centre of the world. But rather herein to direct our selues by that wise∣dome, we see in all Gods naturall workes, where we may behold one thing rather endued with many vertues and effects, than any superfluous or vnnecessarie part admitted. And all these things, although they seeme hard, strange, and incredible, yet to any rea∣sonable man that hath his vnderstanding ripened with Mathe∣maticall demonstration, Copernicus in his Reuolutions accor∣ding to his promise, hath made them more euident and cleere than the Sunne beames. These grounds therefore admitted, which no man reasonably can repugne, that the greater Orbe requireth the longer time to runne his period: the orderly and most beautifull frame of the heauens doth ensue. The first and highest of all is the immoueable sphere of fixed starres, containing it selfe and all the
rest, and therefore fixed: as the place vniuersall of rest, whereun∣to the motions and positions of al inferiour spheres are to be com∣pared. For albeit sundrie Astrologians finding alterations in the declination and longitude of starres, haue thought that the same also should haue his motion peculiar: yet Copernicus by the mo∣tions of the earth salueth al, and vtterly cutteth off the ninth and tenth spheres, which contrarie to all sense the maintainers of the earths stabilitie haue béen compelled to imagine. The first of the moueable Orbes is that of ♄, which being of all other next vnto the infinite Orbe immoueable, garnished with lights innumerable, is also in his course most slow, and once only in thirtie yéeres passeth his period. The second is ♃, who in twelue yéeres performeth his circuit. Mars in two yéeres runneth his circular race. Then followeth the great Orbe, wherein the Globe of morta∣litie inclosed in the Moones Orbe as an Epicicle, and holding the earth as a Centre by his owne waight resting alway permanent in the middest of the aire, is carried round once in a yéere. In the fift place is Venus, making her reuolutiō in 9. moneths. In the sixt is ☿, who passeth his circuit in 80. daies. In the middest of all is the Sunne. For in so stately a Temple as this, who would desire to set his lampe in any other better or more conuenient place than this, from whence vniformely it might distribute light to all: for not vnfitly it is of some called the Lampe or light of the world, of o∣thers the minde, of others the Ruler of the world. Ad cuius numeros & dii moueantur, & Orbes Accipiant leges, praescriptáque foedera seruent.
Trisinegistus calleth him the visible God. Thus doth the Sun like a King sitting in his throne, gouerne his Courts of inferiour powers: neither is the Earth defrauded of the seruice of the Moone: but Aristotle saith, of all other the Moone with the Earth hath nighest alliance, so heere they are matched accor∣dingly. In this forme or frame may we behold such a wonderfull Sym∣metry of motions and situations, as in no other can be proponed. The times whereby wee the inhabitants of the Earth are direc∣ted, are constituted by the reuolutions of the Earth: the circula∣tion of her Centre causeth the yéere, the conuersion of her circum∣ference maketh the naturall day, and the reuolution of the ☽ pro∣duceth the moneth. By the onely view of this Theorick, the cause and reason is apparant, why in ♃ the progressions and Retrogra∣dations are greater than in ♄, and lesse than in ♂, why also in Ve∣nus they are more than in ☿: and why such changes from direct to retrograde Stationarie, &c. happeneth, notwithstanding more risely in ♄ than in ♃, and yet more rarely in ♂: why in Venus not so commonly as in ☿. Also why ♃ and ♂ are nigher the earth in their Acronicall, than in their Cosmicall or Heliacall rising: e∣specially ♂, who rising at the Sunne set, sheweth in his ruddie fierie colour equall in quantitie with ♃, and contrariwise setting little after the Sunne▪ is scarcely to be discerned from a starre of the second light. All which alterations apparantly follow vpon the Earths motion. And that none of these doe happen in the fixed starres, it plainly argueth this huge distance and immeasurable altitude, in respect whereof this great Orbe, wherein the Earth is carried, is but a point, and vtterly without sensibe proportion, being compared to that Heauen. For as it is in perspectiue de∣monstrate: euery quantitie hath a certaine proportionable di∣stance whereunto it may be discerned, and beyond the same it may not be seene. This distance therefore of the immoueable Heauen is so excéeding great, that the whole Obis magnus vanisheth a∣way, if it be conferred to that Heauen. Herein can wee neuer sufficiently admire this wonderfull and incomprehensible huge frame of Gods worke proponed to our senses, seeing first this ball of the Earth wherein wee moue, to the
common sort seemeth great, and that in respect of the Moones Orbe is very small, but compared with Orbis magnus wherein it is carried, it scarcely retaineth any sensible proportion: so mar∣ueilously is that Orbe of annuall motion greater than this little darke Starre wherein wée liue. But that Orbis magnus, being (as is beore declared) but as a poynt in respect of the immensi∣tie of the immoueable Heauen, we may easily consider what little portion of Gods frame our Elementare corruptible world is, but neuer sufficiently be able to admire the immensitie of the rest: e∣specially of that fixed Orbe garnished with lights innumerable, and reaching vp in Sphericall Altitude without ende. Of which lights Celestiall it is to be thought, that we onely behold such as are in the inferiour parts of the same Orbe: & as they are higher, so seeme they of lesse and lesser quantitie, euen till our sight, being not able frther to reach or conceiue the greatest part of the rest, by reason of their wonderfull distance inuisible vnto vs. And this may well bee thought of vs to bée the glorious Court of the great God, whose vnsearchable works inuisible we may partly by these his visible, coniecture: to whose infinite power and Maiestie, such an infinite place surmounting all other both in quantitie and qua∣litie only is conuenient. But because the world hath so long a time beene carried with an opinion of the Earths stabilitie, as the contrarie cannot but be now very imperswasible, I haue thought good out of Copernicus also, to giue a taste of Reasons Philoso∣phicall alleaged for the Earths stabilitie, and their solutions: that such as are not able with Geometricall eyes to beholde the secret perfection of Copernicus Theorick, may yet by these familiar and natural reasons be induced to search farther, and not rashly to con∣demne for phantasticall, so ancient doctrine reuiued, and by Coper∣nicus so demonstratiuely approued. What reasons moued Aristotle, and others that followed him, to thinke the earth to rest immoueable as a Centre to the whole world. THe most effectuall reasons that they produce to prooue the Earths stabilitie in the middle or lowest part of the world,
is that of Grauitie and Leuitie. For of all other the Element of the earth (say they) is most heauie, and all ponderous things are carried vnto it, striuing (as it were) to sway euen downe to the inmost part thereof. For the earth being round, into the which all waightie things on euery side fall, making right angles on the superficies, passe to the Centre, seeing euery right line that falleth perpendicularly vpon the Horizon in that place where it toucheth the earth, must needes passe by the Centre. And those things that are carried toward that Medium, it is likely that there also they would rest. So much therefore the rather shall the earth rest in the middle, and (receiuing all things into it selfe that fall) by his owne waight shall bee most immoueable. Againe, they seeke to prooue it by reason of motion and his nature: for of one and the same simple bodie, the motion must also be simple, saith Aristotle. Of simple motions there are two kindes, Right and Circular: Right are either vp or downe: so that euery simple motion is ei∣ther downward toward the Centre, or vpward from the Centre, or Circular about the Centre. Now vnto the earth and water in respect of their waight, the motion downward is conuenient to seeke the Centre: to Aire and Fire in regard of their lightnesse, vpward and from the Centre. So is it méete to these Elements to attribute the right or straight motion, and to the Heauens one∣ly it is proper circularly about this meane or Centre to be turned round. Thus much Aristotle. If therefore (saith Ptolomie of A∣lexandria) the Earth should turne but onely by that daily motion, things quite contrarie to these should happen. For his motion should be most swift & violent, that in foure and twentie houres should let passe the whole circuit of the Earth: and those things which by sudden turning are stirred, are altogether onméet to col∣lect, but rather to disperse things vnited, vnlesse they should by some firme fasting be kept together. And long ere this, the Earth being dissolued in péeces, should haue béen scattered through the heauens, which were a mockery to think of: & much more, beasts, and all other waights that are loose could not remaine vnshaken. And also things falling should not light on the places perpendicu∣lar vnder them, neither should they fall directly thereto, the same being violently in the meane while carried away. Cloudes also
and other things hanging in the Ayre should alwaies seeme to vs to be carried toward the West. The solution of these Reasons, with their insufficiencie. THese are the causes, and such other, wherewith they approue the Earth to rest in the middle of the world, and that out of all question. But he that will maintaine the Earths mobilitie, may say that this motion is not violent but naturall. And these things which are naturally mooued haue effects contrarie to such as are violently carried. For such motions wherein force and violence is vsed, must needes bee dissolued, and cannot bee of long conti∣nuance: but those which by nature are caused, remaine still in their perfite estate, and are conserued and kept in their most ex∣cellent constitution. Without cause therefore did Ptolomie feare least the Earth, and all earthly things should bee torne in pecces by this Reuolution of the Earth, caused by the working of Na∣ture, whose operations are farre different from those of Arte, or as such humane intelligence may reach vnto. But why should he not much more think and misdoubt the same of the world, whose motion must of necessitie bee so much more swift and vehement then this of the Earth, as the Heauen is greater then the Earth? Is therefore the Heauen made so huge in quantitie that it might with vnspeakeable vehemencie of motion bee feuered from the Centre, least happily resting it should fall, as some Philoso∣phers haue affirmed? Surely, if this reason should take place, the magnitude of the heauen should infinitly extend. For the more this motion shoulde violentlie bee carried higher, the greater should the swiftnesse be, by reason of increasing of the circum∣ference, which must of necessitie in 24. houres be past ouer, and in like manner by increase of the motion, the Magnitude must also necessarilie bee augmented: thus should the swiftnesse increase Magnitude, and the Magnitude the swiftnsse infinitly. But ac∣cording to that ground of nature: whatsoeuer is infinite can ne∣uer be passed ouer. The Heauen therefore of necessity must stand and rest fixed. But say they, without the heauen there is no body,
no place, no emptinesse, no not any thing at all whether heauen should or could farther extend. But this surely is very strange, that nothing should haue such efficient power to restraine some thing, the same hauing a very essence and being. Yet if wee would thus confesse that the Heauen were indeede infinite vpward, and onely finite downeward in respect of his sphericall concauitie: much more perhaps might that saying bee verified, that without the heauen is nothing, seeing euery thing in respect of the infinite∣nesse thereof had place sufficient within the same. But then must it of necessitie remaine immoueable. For the chiefest reason ye hath mooued some to thinke the Heauen limitted, was Motion, which they thought without controuersie to bee indeede in it. But whe∣ther the world haue his bounds, or bee indeede infinite and with∣out bounds, let vs leaue that to bee discussed of Philosophers: sure we are that the Earth is not infinite, but hath a circumference li∣mitted. Seeing therefore all Philosophers consent the limitted bodies may haue motion, and infinite cannot haue any: why doe we yet stagger to confesse motion in the Earth, being most agrée∣able to his forme and nature, whose bounds also and circumfe∣rence wee knowe, rather then to imagine that the whole world should sway end turne, whose ende wee knowe not, no possiblie can of any mortall man be knowne? And therfore the true motion indeede to be in the Earth, and the apparance onely in the Heauen: and that these apparances are not otherwise then if the Virgilian Aeneas should say: Prouehimur portu, terraeque vrbésque recednt. FOr a ship carried in a smooth Sea with such tranquilitie doth passe away, that all things on the shores and the seas, to the saylers seeme to moue, and themselues onely quietly to rest with all such things as are aboord with them▪ so surely may it be in the Earth, whose motion being naturall and not forcible, of all other is most vniforme and vnpeeceiueable, whereby to vs that sayle therein, the whole worlde may seeme to roule about. But what shall we then say of Clowdes and other things hanging or resting
in the ayre, or tending vpward, but that not onely the Earth & sea making one Globe, but also no small part of the ayre is likewise circularly carried, & in like sort al such things as are deriued from them, or haue any manner of alliance with them: either for that the lower Region of the ayre being mixt with earthly and watrie va∣pours, ollow the same nature of the Earth: either that it be gai∣ned and gotten from the Earth by reason of Vicinitie or Contigni∣tie. Which if any man maruaile at, let him consider how the olde Philosophers did yeeld the same reason for the Reuolution of the highest Region of the ayre, wherein wee may sometime beholde Comets carried circularly no otherwise then the bodies Celesti∣all seeme to be, and yet hath that Region of the ayre lesse conue∣nience with the Orbes Celestiall then this low part with the Erth. But we affirme that part of the ayre in respect of this great distance to be destitute of this motion terrestriall, & that this part of the ayre that is next to the Earth doth appeare most still and quiet, by reason of his vniforme naturall accompanying of the Earth, and likewise things that hang therein, vnlesse by windes or other violent accident they bee tossed to and fro. For the winde in the ayre is nothing els but as waues in the Sea. And of things ascending and descending in respect of the world we must confesse them to haue a mixt motion of right and circular, albeit it seeme to vs right & straight, not otherwise then if in a ship vnder sayle a man should softly let a plummet down from the top along by the mast euen to the deck: this plummet passing alwayes by the straight mast, seemeth also to fall in a right line, but being by dis∣course of reason weyed, his motion is found mixt of right and circular. For such things as naturally fall downward, being of earthly nature, there is no doubt but as parts they retaine the na∣ture of the whole. No otherwise is it to these things that by fiery force are caried vpward. For the earthly fire is chiefly nourished with earthly matter: and flame is defined to bee naught els but burning fume or smoke, and that the propertie of fire is to ex∣tend the subiect whereinto it entereth, the which it doth with so great violence, as by no meanes or engines it can be constray∣ned, but that with breach of ants it will performe his nature. This motion extensiue is from the Centre to the circumference:
so that if any earthly part be fiered, it is carried violently vpward. Therefore whereas they say, that of simple bodies the motion is altogether simple, of the circular it is chiefely verified so long as the simple bodie remayneth in his naturall place, and perfite vni∣tie of composition: for in the same place there can bee no other motion but circular, which remaining wholy in it selfe, is most like to rest an immobilitie. But right or straight motion onely happen to those things that stray and warder, or by any meanes are thrust out of their natural place. But nothing can be more re∣pugnant to the forme and ordinance of the world, then that things naturally should be out of their naturall place. This kind of mo∣tion therfore that is by right line, is onely accident to those things that are not in their right state or prefection naturall, while parts are disioyned from their whole bodie, and couet to returne to the vnitie there of againe. Neither doe these things which are carried vpward or downeward besides this circular moouing make any simple vniforme, or equall motion, for which their leuitie or pon∣derositie of their bodie, they cannot be tempered, but alwayes as they fall (beginning slowly) they increase their motion, & the fur∣ther the more swiftly, whereas contrariwise this our earthly fire (for other wee cannot see) wee may beholde as it is carried vp∣warde to vanish and decay, as it were confessing the cause of vio∣lence to proceede onely from his matter terrestriall. The circular motion alway continueth vniforme and equall, by reason of his cause which is indeficient and alway continuing. But the o∣ther hasteneth to the end and to attaine that place where they leaue longer to be heauie or light, and hauing attained that place, their motion ceaseth. Seeing therfore this circular motion is pro∣per to the whole, as straight is onely vnto parts, we may say that circular doeth rest with straight, as animal cum aegro. And where∣as Aristotle hath distributed simplicem motum into these three kinds, A medio ad medium, and circa medium, it must bee one∣ly in reason, and imagination, as wee likewise seuer in considera∣tion Geometricall, a poynt, a line, and a superficies, whereas in deede neither can stande without other, ne any of them without a bodie. Hereto wee may adioyne, that the condition of immobilitie is
more noble and diuine than that of change, alteration, or instabili∣tie: and therefore more agréeable to Heauen than to this Earth, where all things are subiect to continuall mutabilitie. And seeing by euident proofe of Geometricall mensuration, wée finde that the Planets are sometimes nigher to vs, and somtimes more remote, and that therefore euen the maintainers of the Earths stabilitie, are enforced to confesse, that the earth is not their Orbes Centre, this motion circa Medium, must in more generall sort bée taken, and that it may bée vnderstand that euery Orbe hath his peculiar Medium and Centre, in regard whereof this simple and vniforme motion is to be considered. Séeing therfore that these Orbs haue seuerall Centres, it may bee doubted whether the Centre of this earthly grauitie, be also the Centre of the world. For grauitie is nothing else but a certaine procliuity or naturall coueting of parts to be coupled with the whole: which by diuine prouidence of the Creator of all, is giuen and impressed into the parts, that they should restore themselues into their vnitie and integritie, concur∣ring in Sphericall forme. Which kind of proprietie or affection, it is likely also that the Moone and other glorious bodies want not, to knit and combine their parts together: and to maintaine them in their round shape, which bodies notwithstanding are by sundrie motions, sundrie waies conueied. Thus as it is apparant by these naturall reasons, that the mobilitie of the Earth is more probable and likely than the stabilitie: so if it be Mathematically considered, and Geometricall mensurations euery part of euerie Theoricke examined: the discréete student shall finde, that Coper∣nicus, not without great reason did propone this ground of the Earths mobilitie.
A short discourse touching the variation of the Compasse. MArueilous (no doubt) is that naturall proprietie of the Magnes, whereby the néedle touched immediatly turneth to some one certaine point of the Heauens, and after sundrie mo∣tions hither and thither, findeth rest onely in one place and point. And albeit this point in seuerall Horizons be different, yet in any one Horizon it remineth alway permanent, and therfore it plain∣ly appeareth that the same proceedeth of some constant permanent cause naturall, and not of any mutable vncertaine cause acciden∣tall. But what this cause should bee▪ no man hitherto hath truely discouered. To omit apparant absurd opinions, the most probable of those that haue been giuen and generally best allowed, is the point Attractiue, which should bee of such vertue as to draw the needle touched alway toward the same point: but whether this point should bee in the heauens or earth, is another controuersie. Such as will haue it in the earth, affirme it to bee a huge moun∣taine or rocke of Magnes stone, distant from the Pole certaine grades, which drawing the needle to it selfe, alwaies causeth it to make an angle of variation from the Pole of the world, saue onely vnder the Meridian that passeth by the same Attractiue point. But the error of this opinion will soone be found of them that shall vp∣on this supposition, and two different angles of variation, search out the place of that point Attractiue (the same being in that In∣tersection of the two Circles of position by the variations deter∣mined) and then conferre that with some third angle of variation: wherby it shal plainly appeare that in the earth no such one Attra∣ctiue point can be imagined, as shal by circle of opposition produce such variations as in Nauigation haue been discouered. And to place this point Attractiue in any of the heauēs, it would appeare more absurd. For whether the Heauens moue, and the Earth rest immoueable, or the Earth moue, and the great Orbe of starres be permanent, as of necessitie the one or the other must be true (con∣sidering a motion is apparant) it must necessarily follow, that his alteration should be in continuall alteration euery houre and mo∣ment
of the day: but by experience we find the contrary, and ther∣fore may necessarily be inferred, no such Attractiue poynt in that Heauen. So that hauing found by these trials this imagination of a poynt Attractiue, and such instruments as haue been vpon that ground deuised, but meere vanities, I haue somewhat further sought. And among sundrie imaginations that I haue Mathema∣tically handled, I thinke it is not amisse to propone one to be con∣sidered, weied and examined by exquisite triall of Geometricall demonstration, and Arithmeticall calculation: for it is no question for grosse Mariners to meddle with, no more then the finding of the Longitude. And therfore I cannot a little wonder at the blind boldnes of Sebastian Cabotto, and some others, that being igno∣ran both in Geometricall demonstration, and Arithmeticall Sy∣micall calculations, haue nathelesse tane vpon them in these most diffile questions to promise resolution, being no more able or likely to performe it, then an Oxe to flie between two mountaine tops. Those sciences being the only wins to eleuate our grosse senses to matter so high and mysticall, let such content themselues with the praise of painfull hard, farre trauelled mariners, and for their new discoueries let them learne Apolles lesson: Ne sutor vtra crepidam. Of these two Problemes thus much I promise for the inuention of the Longitude, I will (God sparing life) deliuer meanes as exact, certaine▪ and feazible, at all times of the yeere in what place soeuer, is by Eclipses. And for the other if I deliuer not the like, at the least s farre I will wade therein, that such blind boldnesse knowing smwhat more their owne imperfecti∣on, shall in such mysteries vs more modestie. An Hypothesis or supposed cause of the variation of the Compasse, to be Mathematically weied. AS the Axis of the Earth, notwithstanding all other motions remaineth as it were immueable, and yet in respect of the sphericall fourme of the Earth in euery seuerall Horizon maketh a seuerall line Meridionall, by reason of the section made in the superficies of the Horizons by Meridians, hauing all that Axis as their common diametre, so
may it also come to passe of the line of the needle and his varation, the needle being alway permanent in one plaine superficies, ac∣cording to the seuerall section of the plaine wherein it resteth, and the Horyzon there may be continually made, in euery plaine new variations. More plainely to open this imagination, thus I say: that as in a payre of ballance of equall waight there is a certaine motion to and fro before they finde their true place of rest (the same being only in the leuell of the Horizon) which commeth to passe as Copernicus affirmeth, by the attractiue Centre of the Earth, who drawing vnto him either waight with like force, fin∣ding the subiects like also, compelleth them to rest in the super∣ficies like distant from that Attractiue Centre: so in the needle be∣ing a body endued with two seuerall properties, the one of Gra∣uitie & Leuitie, which being equally poyzed, forceth him to abide in the Horizon: the other being Magneticall and receiued by the touch, which causeth him to rest alway in that one Meridiā, to the Magnes appropriate, it thereby commeth to passe, that after sundry ballancing this way and that way, it onely setleth in the common section of this peculiar Meridian and the Horizon. So that euen as in Dyals the line of the stile onely accordeth and concurreth with the Meridian line, in such as are voyd of declination, but in all such playnes as are declinatorie, the line of the stile varieth from the Meridian line, and the same angle of variation also altereth as well in respect of inclination as declination: so I suppose this va∣riation of the compasse to be nothing els but the angle comprehen∣ded betweene the Meridian line, and the common section of the magneticall Meridian and the Horizon in the Horizontall plaine, and this Angle to bee alwayes exactly equall to the Angle contay∣ned of the Meridian line, and line of the stile: The Longitude of the place proponed accounted from the Magneticall Meridian, bing equall to the declination of the Dyals playne superficies, making computation from South to East Cyrcularly, and the Latitude of the place equall to the complement of the inclination of the same superficies Hoologiall. Of the veritie of this sup∣position I could easily determine, if there were any trust to the obseruation of Mariners: but hauing found by experience their grosse vsage and homely instruments, where halfe a poynt com∣monly
breaketh no square: and also their repugnant tales that haue trauayled the very selfe same Uoyages, I cannot yet re∣solue. VPon due examination of this Hypothesis there may happily fall out a strange Paradox, not thought of hitherto, that these vulgare maryne Chartes desynate with Parallele Meridians, and right lined Rumbie, being of themselues apparantly false and er∣rnious: yet vsed without rectification of the compasse, may bring foorth true effects, and so two errours concurring produce a veritie. Errors in the Arte of Nauigation com∣monly practised. FIrst, all their Chartes are described with straight Meridian lines running equidistant or Parallele, which errour is most manifest to any that haue tasted but the first principles of Cosmo∣graphie, considering they are all great circles, and concurre in the Poles. SEcondly, they suppose that running vpon any of their poynts of their Compasse, they should passe in the Circumference of a great circle, and therefore in the plaine Charte describe those winds with straight lines: but therein are they greatly abused, for the Shippe stenning the North and the South, onely maketh her course in a great Circle: East or West she describeth a Paralle, and being stirred on any other meane poynt, (the Compasse be∣ing truly rectified) shee delinateth in her course a Curue or He∣licall line, neither straight nor Circular, but mixt of both: and therefore to set foorth these windes in the Chartes with straight lines is most erronious, THirdly, their rule to know Latitude by the Pole starre, ad∣ding or substracting from his Altitude according to the situa∣tion of the grades, is all false, and that worst i, cannot be amen∣ded:
but be it neuer so wel rectified to one climate, yet is it false in all other. FOurthly, their taing of the Sunne with their Balisile (as they terme it) is most false: and whereas some finding the er∣rour thereof, haue gone about to remedie the same by cutting off a part at the ende, thinking thereby it might approch to the Centre of the eye, they encrease thereby the errour▪ and make it more false. For visus non fit à puncto, as they suppose. And this errour is much like the other of the Pole star and situation of the guards: for be it neuer so well corrected by section to any one Altitude, then shall it bee false for all other, as to any skilfull in Perspectiue it is easily demonstrate. This errour I hue alreadie reformed, Demonstratiè, & Practicè in my booke lately published, entituled Alae seu Scalae Mathematicae. Also the rules they haue to know how many leagues they shal runne vpon euery poynt to raise one degree in Latitude, are also meere false. For they search that Arcke Itinerall as though it were the Hypothenusa to a right angled triangle, whose sides are circles of contrary nature, the one a Parallele, the other a great circle, and therefore without all sence seeke they by proportion of right lines to deliuer their quantitie. But besides these errours, they haue one great imperfection yet in their arte, and hitherto by no man suppli, and that is the want of exact Rules to knowe the Longitude or Arckes Iinerall, East and West, without the which they can neither truly gue the place or situation of any coast, Harborough, Roade or Town, ne yet in sayling, discerne how the place they sayle vnto beareth from them, or how farre it is distant, whereby they are inforced long before they come at any Coast, all night to strike sayle, no o∣ther wayes then if they were vpon it, thereby loosing the benefite of prosperous winds, in such sort sometime, that whereas keeping a true course they might haue been quietly at Roade, they are
by contrarie and aduerse tempests carried farre off, and so not without great charge to the owner, paine to the companie, and perill to the vessell, are enforced to wast their time, which grow∣eth of their ignorance, that they neither haue true Rules to direct themselues the nighest course, ne yet treading their beaten paths can assuredly decide of their certaine place. For reformation of these errors and imperfections, new Chartes, new Instruments, and new Rules must be prescribed. Wherein I haue prepared in a peculiar volume for that purpose to entreate, wishing in in the meane time that such as are not able to reforme these faults, will abstaine to teach our Coun∣triemen moe errours. FINIS.
