l2985 12965021 96115
A VINDICATION OF THE Primitive Christians, In point of Obedience to their Prince, AGAINST The Calumnies of a Book intituled THE Life of Iulian, Written by ECEBOLIUS the Sophist. As also the Doctrine of Passive Obedience Cleared, in Defence of Dr. HICKS. Together with an APPENDIX: Being a more full and distinct Answer to Mr. Tho. Hunt's Preface and Postscript. Unto all which is added The Life of Julian enlarg'd. LONDON: Printed by J. C. and Freeman Collins, and are to be sold by Robert Kettlewell, at the Hand and Scepter over against St. Dunstan's Church. 1683.
TO THE Most Reverend Father in God, WILLIAM, By Divine Providence Lord Archbp of Canterbury, Primate of all England, and Metropo∣litan, And one of his Majesties most Honourable Privy-Council, &c. May it please your Grace, ALthough (as Solomon says) Every thing is beautiful in his season; and there was a time when a Cup of cold Water was an ac∣ceptable Present to an Emperour: yet should I not have presumed to offer so mean a Present to so Great a Per∣son, as a little Water in a homely Ves∣sel, taken up in haste and disorder, (as
men are wont to do when the Neigh∣bourhood is on fire) had it not been that the Fire-brands which I endea∣vour to extinguish, have not onely been scattered up and down among combustible matter through the Nati∣on, but that the Boutefeus have been so desperately bold, as to throw some of their Fire-balls into the August As∣sembly of his Majesties most Honourable Privy-Council. Such was the Barba∣rous Celeusma, the Answers to Dr. Stillingfleet, &c. and now a Traiterous Preface and Postscript dedicated by one Tho. Hunt to the Right Honourable John Earl of Radnor, &c. Lord Presi∣dent of his Majesties most Honourable Privy-Council. I am well assured, that that Judi∣cious and Noble Lord hath either so contemned those seditious and treason∣able Libels, as not to vouchsafe them the Reading; or if he hath read them,
that they kindled a just indignation in his loyal breast, and condemned them to the fire, as designed to set the Na∣tion in a flame. The Author tells us truly, that the reason of his Dedication was to create a Prejudice: and the thing is self-evident, that the greatest Adversaries which that Noble Lord hath (if at least he hath any: for I know he can have none, but among the factious and seditious Rabble that are acted by such Seducers) could not have offered a greater Affront to a Person of his known Wisdom and Inte∣grity, than such a Dedication amounts unto; and therefore I doubt not but those fiery Darts which that Author hath shot against so firm a Fortress of Religion and Loyalty, will recoil on his own head. If men of such fiery tempers have presumed of favour from so Great Persons, I cannot but hope for your
Graces pardon, who have endeavoured, though in a hasty and rude manner, to extinguish those Wilde-fires which they have kindled: for God onely knows how great a matter a little such fire, blown (as it is) with popular breath, may kindle, if not timely preven∣ted. The Devil was wont to carry on his designes formerly as an Angel of Light; and then the deluded Instru∣ments deserved some pity: But now that he appears in his proper Colours, a Noon-day-Devil, breathing our flames of fire and a horrible stench, none but such as are by his Sorceries and Witch∣crafs become his covenanted Servants, would seek to bring others under the same sins and condemnation with themselves, as being already self-con∣demned, and having sinned away all hopes of mercy from God or man.
All those Coals of Sedition and Re∣bellion which were raked up under the Ashes of this ruined Nation, and which we might in reason hope, had been quite extinguished by the enjoyment of Peace and Truth, Prosperity and Plen∣ty, for twenty years together, have been secretly fomented, and are now publickly scattered, to cause a New Con∣flagration. I humbly beg your Graces patience to mind the present Age, how ready they are to be led over the same Preci∣pices, by the same Impostures, and by some of the same men by whom the former Age was ruined: onely, they were led on by degrees, and coloura∣ble pretences; the Snare was not spread in their sight, as it is now in ours, who are perswaded with open eyes, and a dreadful prospect of Rebellion and Dam∣nation before us, to cast our selves head∣long into them both.
It was after a long Progress and un∣happy success of the former War, that John Goodwin (and others) publi∣shed his Evangelium Armatum, his new Gospel-liberty, affirming, That the law∣fulness of Resistance is now discovered to Gods Church, as the necessary means to ruine Antichrist: for the Kings of the Earth (saith he) will never be perswaded to effect this great and holy work, and therefore the People must. He in the 30, 31, 32 pages of his Anti-Cavalierism, among many other Passa∣ges, hath these words, which every Christian that reads them must abhor. Amongst many other Truths which were of necessity to be laid a∣sleep, for the passing of this Beast (Antichrist) unto his great power and authority, and for the maintai∣ning and safe guarding of him in the possession thereof, this is one of spe∣cial
consideration, That Christians may lawfully in a lawful way stand up to defend themselves, in case they be able, against any unlawful As∣saults, by what Assailants, or by what pretended Authority soever made upon them: for had this Opinion been timeously enough, and sub∣stantially taught in the Church, it would certainly have caused an A∣bortion in Antichrists birth, and so have disappointed the Devil of his first-born, had not the Spirits, and Judgments, and Consciences of men been as it were cowed and marvel∣lously embased and kept under, and so prepared for Antichrists Lure, by Doctrines and Tenets excessively ad∣vancing the power of Superiours o∣ver Inferiours, and binding Iron yokes and heavie burdens on those that were in subjection; doubtless they would never have bowed down their backs so low, as to let such a
Be rule over them; they would ne have resigned up their Judge∣ments and Consciences into the hands of such a Spiritual Tyrant as he. So that you see there was a special necessity, for the letting of Antichrist into the world; yea and for the continuance of him in his Throne, that no such Opinion as this which we speak of, whether truth or untruth, should be taught and believed; I mean, which vin∣dicateth and maintaineth the just Rights, and Liberties, and Priviledges of those that live under authority and subjection to others. Whereas now on the contrary, that time of Gods preordination and purpose for the downfal of Antichrist drawing neer, there is a kind of necessity that those truths, which have slept for many years, should now be awakened; and particularly, That God should re∣veal and discover unto his faithful
Ministers and other his servants, the just bounds and limits of Authority and Power, and consequently the just and full extent of the lawful Liberties of those that live in subjection. —E∣vident it is, that they are the Commo∣nalty of Christians, I mean Christians of ordinary Rank and Quality, that shall be most active, and have the principal hand in executing the Judg∣ments of God upon the Whore. Con∣sider that place, Rev. 18.4, 5, 6. Now that this service shall be per∣formed unto God by them, (Chri∣stians I mean of under Rank and Quality) contrary to the will, de∣sires, or commands of those Kings and Princes under whom they live, it appears by that which immediately followeth, v. 9. And whereas the Text saith expresly that the ten Kings shall hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and eat her flesh, and burn her with fire; for God hath
put it in their hearts to fulfil his will, and to agree and give their Kingdom unto the Beast until the Words of God shall be fulfilled: To prevent this Ob∣jection, because God in his good time will arm the Kings to fight joyntly the Lords battel against the Beast; he thus interprets that place; I con∣ceive (saith he) this is not meant of the persons of Kings, but of their States and Kingdoms, (i. e.) of the generality of the people under them, p. 32. As if the meaning of— The Kings shall hate the Beast, were, The People shall hate their Kings, and rebel against them, in order to the de∣struction of Antichrist. Nothing is more evident, than that this Doctrine which he would pro∣mote for the pulling down of Anti∣christ, was that by which Antichrist was advanced to that sublimity of Pow∣er which he now hath, and by which
he is still supported in it; unless they will deny the Pope to be Antichrist: for this Resistance of lawful Authority is still practised and defended by that Church. And how can they blame that Church, who teach and practise the same things? If ever the Pope be pulled down by the Doctrine and Pra∣ctice of Resistance of lawful Prin∣ces, it will be to set up Another in his room. Now that the Doctrine which was taught by this wretched man and John Milton, the onely two persons that publickly defended the Parricide com∣mitted on that incomparable King, when he was cast out of his Throne, and an Ʋsurper placed in it, is the same which is now revived by these two Authors whom I have under con∣sideration; I submit to your Graces judgment, and the Consciences of all impartial Readers. And to what a
prodigious height of Impiety are they come, who in such times of Peace, un∣der a most gracious and religious Prince, and after such experiences of the mi∣serable effects of them, shall openly plead for the same Antiscriptural and Antichristian Doctrines and Practices, by which these men endeavour at one leap, (as the Devil did the herd of Swine) to plunge the Multitude over head and ears in Rebellion and Confu∣sion! And yet to court the People, Mr. Hunt tells them in the close of his Preface, That Loyalty, Religion, and the Prosperity and Peace of his Country, have entirely conducted his thoughts and guided his hand in this Work, (whereas if he were not the same person, yet he useth the same Arguments as an anonymous Author did in a Tract concerning Mixt and Limited Monarchy): That he hath affirmed nothing but what is publick∣ly known for truth: That Justice it
self will acquit him from having done any thing amiss: That he hath encir∣cled himself (in his own considera∣tions) as in a brazen wall (when it is but a brazen face). And as for the fears of Rage and Injustice, they shall never affect him: but I fear the hand∣writing of the Laws, and the sentence of Justice may one day shake his con∣fidence. I joyn Issues with him in his Appeal concerning his Writings, and the Re∣ply now made to them: and though he have provoked me to say something that may balance the Reputation of Religion and Loyalty, &c. which he as∣sumes to himself, I shall onely say, That I am one who have served in the Ministry of the Established Reli∣gion for forty years together; I have kept my Station, and defended my Post against all Assaults: I have seen those deplorable times, wherein it was coun∣ted
a daring thing to assert the use of the Lords Prayer in the Publick As∣semblies, against the Blasphemies of J. O. I have withstood the attempts of Mr. Baxter, Humfries, Lob, and others, for the disturbance of our publick Peace. And though by age and other infirmities I might claim the priviledge of a Miles Emeritus, yet have I enga∣ged once more against these two Incen∣diaries; and having the same cause of Religion and Loyalty to defend, I can∣not doubt of success against such Ag∣gressors, of whom your Grace will find a far different Character from that which they give of themselves: for, These two Authors, like Simeon and Levi, are so confederate, that they strive who shall exceed the other in doing mischief. The one undermines the foundation of the Church in her Ministry: The other, that of the
State in the Royal Authority. Again, The one plays with the Crown, as if it were a Tennis-ball: The other de∣rides the Doctrine of the Cross, com∣paring it with that of the Great Turks Bow-string. The one encourageth Resistance, and very modestly insinu∣ates a Reward due to such as shall kill those (be they Princes or others) who oppose the Religion which they ap∣prove of: The other more confidently asserts the excluding (not of a single Monarch, but) even Monarchy it self, though it be in the glorious Family of the STƲARTS, as he Ironically calls them. Yet so great is the Re∣volt of our People both from God and the King, that these two (like Jero∣boam's Calves which he set up as well to alter the established Worship, as to translate the Kingdom from the Fami∣ly of David) are worshipped by the Rabble from Dan to Beersheba.
And now I beseech your Grace not to be offended with this Confident Ad∣dress of an obscure Person, who after various tossings, having through the great mercy of God escaped Ship∣wreck in that great Hurricane wherein many thousands more worthy persons perished, is still imbarked in that an∣cient Vessel wherein he hopes to end his days in peace; nothing doubting, but that God, who stilled the raging of that Sea, and the madness of that Peo∣ple, will also lead us without any harm through those Fires which so many busie-bodies are now kindling against us; and that he will preserve us even in the flames; at which though we be affrighted, as Moses was at the burning Bush, yet we shall not be consumed by them: Especially while we have such a CAESAR, who all his life-time hath been a Favourite of Heaven; being born, preserved, restored, gui∣ded,
and supported by a Chain of Mi∣racles: And such a principal Member of that Church of Christ embarked with us, against which the gates of Hell shall never prevail; and having also such a pious and experienced Pilot as your Grace, who hath both his Eyes and his Heart to Heaven for his own direction, and both his hands to the Helm, for the conduct of the People committed to his Charge. There remains nothing to the per∣fecting our Establishment, but the ca∣sting out those Jonahs which lie a∣sleep in the bottom of the Ship; I mean our sins, which have caused the wrath of God to kindle those fires in the midst of us, which may justly make us as desolate as Sodom or Gomorrha. That with penitent Tears, fervent and unanimous Prayers, seasonable and se∣rious reformation of our Lives, we would deprecate Gods displeasure,
and that yet he would make us of one heart and mind in considering and do∣ing the things that belong to our peace, before they are hid from our eyes: That in these things I may do some accep∣table service to the Church of Christ on Earth, and with it have my Re∣ward in Heaven, is the hearty Prayers and great Ambition of Your Graces most humble and most dutiful Servant, Tho. Long.
L. Cook's third part of Institutes, p. 36. PEruse over all Books, Records, and Histo∣ries, and you shall find a Principle in Law, a Rule in Reason, and a Tryal in Experi∣ence, That Treason doth ever produce fatal and final destruction to the Offender; and never attains to the desired end (two incidents in∣separable thereunto). And therefore let all men abandon it, as the poysonous Bait of the Devil; and follow the Precept in Holy Scri∣pture: Serve God, and honour the King; and have no company with the Seditious. Mr. Hunt's Preface to the Argument for Bishops. OUr Adversaries were treated too kindly, and deserve sharper reflections than are made upon them for their false and perverse Reasonings; and ought to lose that Reputation which they abuse to the hurt of the Govern∣ment.—Nor is it for the honour of our Faculty, that never fails to supply the worst Cause with Advocates. ERRATA. PAge 17. line 4. r. Or. In the Preface, for Cyril, r. Gregory in four places. p. 46. l. 1. r. contradictious Zeal. p. 49. r. Justitia. p. 50. r. templa. p. 90. r. Constantium. p. 91. r. . p. 96. dele And Basil. p. 107. r. Annum. ibid. for Curtis r. Curtius. p. 124. after patience, add of. p. 129. r. confirmed. p. 152. r. though. p. 185. r. atrocia. p. 189. r. paries. p. 205. r. Sumus. p. 224. r. . p. 226. r. foretold. p. 233. r. Reges. ibid. r. Depravari. p. 242. l. 25. r. Or. ibid. r. suppose. p. 262. dele after the fifth line four lines which are doubled.
TO THE READER. AS often as I consider the nume∣rous Pamphlets which the Scrib∣blers of this Age have brought forth, it calls to my mind what I have read of a sort of Indian Rats, which are said to be preg∣nant whilst they are in the belly of their Dams. Every Libel propagates such a numberless Issue, that, as one observed of the increase of Faction, the first Separation might say to its Off-spring, Arise, Separation, and go to thy Separation; for thy Separation's Separation hath a Sepa∣ration. But of all the Libels that have been lately written, none are more fruitful (as it is mostly with Venomous Creatures) than those which have been written against the Established Go∣vernment. There was a Swarm of such in the Late Ʋnhappie Times; and some of the Authors,
(as well as that sort of Writings) are yet alive, or revived, to create new Disturbances: And as Horace observes, Aetas parentum pejor avis Tulit progeniem vitiosiorem. Every Pamphlet hath more of venome, than that from whence it had its birth. Prynne, Burton, and Bastwick, were the Great Grandsires of this monstrous Progenie: The Covenanters, Nye, Marshal, and the Smectymnuans, were their genuine Off-spring. To these succeed (notwithstanding the perem∣ptory Vote for Exclusion) John Goodwin, Owen, Harington, and Baxter; all right Com∣monwealths-men; with Milton, and May, and many others, whose Writings have by men of like Principles been reviewed, reprinted, and re∣commended to the present Age. I shall onely instance in the Treatise now un∣der consideration, which hath contracted and im∣proved the Antimonarchical principles which lay scattered in the Authors last mentioned, and in the Character of the Popish Successor, Plato Redivivus, and other seditious Pamphlets; but especially from Mr. Hunt's Postscript: for cer∣tainly our Author's teeth were set on edge by Mr. Hunt's sowre Grapes; and he makes it his business to blow up the Coals which he had kin∣led.
The great Notion on which all his Discourse is builded, is from Mr. Hunt, p. 46, & 47. (And facile est inventis addere). Let no man (says Mr. Hunt) betray his Countrie and Religi∣on, by pretending the example of the patience and sufferings of the Primitive Christians for our Rule. The Reformed Religion hath ac∣quired a Civil right, and the protection of Laws. If we ought not to lose our Lives, Liberties, and Estates, but where forfeited by Law; we ought much rather not to lose them for the profession of the best Religion, which by Law is made the Publick National Reli∣gion, &c. This gave occasion to the greatest part of his Book, which is a loud and notorious Calumny against the Primitive Christians, viz. their patient submission to their unjust and cruel Persecutors. From Mr. Hunt he took his instance of Mary Queen of Scots, of whom he speaks, p. 48. and says, Scarce a Child but hath heard what was done, said, and maintained by the Clergie of England in the case of Mary Queen of Scots, a Popish Successor, in the earliest time of our Reformation. Ʋpon this our Author paraphra∣seth at large, from p. 12. to the 18th of his Pre∣face. His deriding of the Succession in the right Line, is taken from Mr. Hunt, p. 47. If any be so vain as to say that a lawful course of Suc∣cession
is established among us by Divine Right, he is a man fitted to believe Tran∣substantiation, and the Infallibility of the Pope. And our Authors Comments on this, fill many pages. Concerning Arbitrary Power, com∣pare Mr. Hunt, p. 42. and 52. with the 78. of our Author's: and p. 241. Mr. Hunt minded him of the Doctrine of Sibthorpe and Manwa∣ring, of which in p. 77. P. 47. Mr. Hunt's Comparison between Po∣pery and Paganism, gave him a Text for ano∣ther part of his book; and from a hint in p. 49. That we must not suspend all the legal secu∣rity we have for our preservation upon the life of our present King; there are a hundred hints for that one, to prepare people for actual Resistance and Rebellion. Thus the Leprosie of Naaman cleaves to this covetous Gehazi, and spreads it self through the whole book, so as it becomes a continued Scab. And I pray God it may creep no farther. But for this one thing our Author is very cul∣pable, that having got these and many other Ma∣terials for his Babel, he never mentions his Founder: Onely, p. 88. he says, A worthy per∣son hath lately observed, That one single Arm unresisted, may go a great way in murdering a Nation. But works of darkness hate the light, and therefore he thought fit to conceal both their names.
The Author of the Life of Julian seemeth very fit to describe an Apostate, having himself apostati∣zed from the Doctrine of the Church whereof he hath long professed himself to be a Member, as also from the judgment and practice of the Primitive Christians, against whom his book is a very no∣torious Libel; and by which (if it should be credited) he would wound the Reputation of those Primitive Christians more than Julian hath done. For he says himself, That (but for their name) Julian had better have fallen among so many Barbarians than among them, p. 66. These two things are what I designe: first, to wipe off the dirty Aspersions cast by the Author on the Christians in Julian's time, which have more of an Invective against them, than any thing that St. Cyril wrote against Julian him∣self. And secondly, to prevent the infection of those false and dangerous Opinions in the case of Obedience to Magistrates, which this distempered Generation are too much disposed to receive, and (as is usual with infected persons) to propagate, and make them epidemical. I intend not a Vin∣dication of the Papists, nor of Julian, though (as the Proverb says) The Devil is not so black as he's painted, (let Baal plead for himself) I onely designe a short Apologie for the Primitive Christians, whom our Author represents as so many Apostates from their Predecessors in the days of Dioclesian, when by their patient suf∣ferings
they more honoured the Gospel, than the Christian Emperours did by all the Priviledges and Largesses wherewith they endowed the Church. And he might with equal truth have objected the same things against the Christians in the time of Constantius, as he doth against Julan: for he being an Arian, and violently persecuting many Orthodox Bishops, setting the Arians in their places, some of them did speak far otherwise of him than St. Cyril doth; yet none attempted to resist him, but pray'd for him, and patiently submitted to his unjust Chastise∣ments, as being their lawful Governour. Of which hereafter.
AN ANSWER TO THE PREFACE OF OUR Author's Life of JƲLIAN. OUr Author seems better read in the Alcaron than the Scriptures; that hath found out a Compa∣rison for his Majesties Subjects from a Vision of Mahomet, when he might have found more suitable represen∣tations of them from the holy Scriptures, as in David's Subjects, who were careful not onely of his safety, but all his house, 2 Sam. 19.14. Christ himself and his Apostles have delivered for the good of all succeeding Ages, such Pre∣cepts and Examples of Christian obedience and subjection, as the most loyal Addressers
(even the men of Rippon themselves) come short of. It was their bounden duty at such a time to make their Profession to adhere to his Majestie, his Heirs and Successors; it was no more than what the Law of God and the Nation hath obliged them to; so that they are neither Guelphs, nor Gibelines, nor Papists, nor Phanaticks, but such as are ready to render unto Caesar the things which are Caesar, and unto God the things which are Gods: nor could they sufficiently express their thankfulness to his Majestie, (when too many began to exercise an arbitrary way of vexing their fellow-sub∣jects, and supersede the established Laws) for his gracious Declaration to govern according to the established Laws, and (which is that which gives offence to too many) to cause others to do so too. They know best how to reconcile Contra∣dictions, that could swallow Covenants and Engagements after the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, and all their Obligations to God and his Church, and knew how to make a glorious King by bringing him to the Block, and to establish Religion by dividing it, which our Saviour says is the readie way to destroy it: for a Kingdom or house divided cannot stand. If the men of Rippon had a apprehension of the mischiefs that in all probability would follow upon a Bill of Exclusion, I cannot see
but their Fears were more reasonable than the groundless Jealousie of such as trouble them∣selves with what may never be; or if it should, is but a just judgment of God to punish those by some Rehoboam, who were so malecon∣tent with the pious and peaceable Govern∣ments of a David and Solomon. And I have often thought, that one reason why God set a Julian over the Christians of that Age, was, because in the times of Constantine and Con∣stantius they degenerated into Heresies and Schisms, (such as the Arians and Donatists) and began to bite and devour one another. The Shepherds have generally observed, that when Sheep push and chase each other, it betoken∣eth an approaching Storm. As to what you mind us of, p. 4, 5. That a Popish Successor will be an heavie judgment of of God, and ought to be deprecated by all good men: As far as Prayers and Tears and other lawful endeavours may be employed, all good men will readily joyn with you: but if it shall please God for our wantonness and un∣governableness to lay that heavie Yoke upon us, it is in vain to resist, lest we be found to fight against God. I shall at present onely send you to a Heathen to learn better behaviour; Quomodo sterilitatem aut nimios imbres, & cae∣tera naturae mala; it à luxum vel avaritiam do∣minantium tolerate, vitia erunt donec homines▪
sed neque haec continua, & meliorum interventu pensantur, i. e. As we endure scarcity or im∣moderate rain, and other natural evils; so ought we to bear with the luxury or avarice of our Rulers, for there will be faults as long as there are men: but neither are these still continued; the interchange of what is good, will make compensation for that which is e∣vil: as Tacitus says. Our Saviour would have us to live with∣out distracting fear of those events which are not in our power to prevent, especially when our groundless fears may be the chief cause of drawing those evils on our selves. Few Re∣bellions were ever hatcht, but by the warmth of a pretended zeal for Religion and Reforma∣tion; and Fears and Jealousies (how ground∣less soever) have animated it, and given it growth and strength. The panick fear of a change of Government, (he means Arbitrary Government) was the principal cause of the late War, saith Mr. Hunt in his Postscript, p. 52. The noise of Popery to be brought in by the King and Archbishop Land, who were the Heads of the Grotian Papists, (as Mr. Baxter says) was another: yet I hope neither Mr. Hunt nor our Author will warrant that Re∣bellion under their hands, upon such false and ungodly pretences, when they shall consider to what real evils these feigned Bugbears and Fancies did precipitate us.
It is true, a Popish Successor will be an affli∣ction to sincere Protestants, in respect of tem∣poral accommodations, and spiritual advan∣tages also; yet that evil may be improved to our eternal advantages, our Saviour having promised, that great shall be their reward in heaven, that are reviled, persecuted, and slan∣dered, for his sake, Matth. 5.11, 12. And St. Peter tells us, If we suffer for well-doing, and take it patiently, this is acceptable with God, 1 Pet. 2.20. And if it be the Will of God if shall be so, we must learn of David, though in another case, Psal. 39.8. I was dumb and opened not my mouth, for it was thy doing. P. 5. You seem not satisfied with Hippo∣crates Receipt of Citò, longè, tardè, which pre∣served many Confessors in the days of Queen Mary, and is prescribed by a greater than Hippocrates, in this very case; If they persecute you in one City, flee to another, Matth. 10.23. You are for Fires and Fumes of Pitch and Tar, &c. for Imprisonment and close Confinement even of innocent persons. The Papists indeed ap∣ply such Causticks in cases of Heresie, Aposta∣cy, and Tyranny; but I never read that the Primitive Christians used them against their Princes, not against Dioclesian a Tyrant, Con∣stantius an Arian, or Julian an Apostate. Nay even the Doctors of Rome forbid such Medi∣cines,
even in the case of Tyranny, without which the other two may not much hurt a sound Christian, till the Disease be universalis manifesta, & cum obstinatione, (i. e.) till af∣ter they find all other means ineffectual, and he is resolved to make a total overthrow of his People. Concerning which we are yet in the dark as to our own Case; and you give us some light to comfort us, when you say, p. 65. of Julian's Persecution, That it was but a flea-biting, a short and weak assault of the De∣vil; and that he was rather a Tempter than a Persecutor: which makes their behaviour to∣wards him (if it were so barbarous as you represent it) the less excusable. Until a Plague be epidemical and wasting, it is not charitable nor just to confine suspected persons; much less them that are sound, and to deal with them as persons destined to destruction, to bury them alive; and to make their own Relations in∣struments of these severities, who may justly fear the like are intended for themselves. Though some intend onely to lop off a de∣generate Branch, yet having got the Ax in their hand, others may make use of it to strike a blow at the Root; and (to answer your Parenthesis) plain English is as well un∣derstood on this side Trent as the other; so that there is more fear lest we should lose a Prote∣stant King (as we have once already) than
a Popish Successor: for though such an one may be deprecated as a Judgment, and may prove as a Plague to the Nation, yet may we not presently cut Throats to prevent what may never come, or if it should, make use of a Remedy worse than the Disease: for, Re∣bellion is as the sin of Witchcraft, 1 Sam. 15.23. That Remedy which you suppose may be effectual to prevent this mischief, will prove to be of that nature; which is a Compound of belying the Primitive Christians, and betray∣ing Modern ones into a sin of Rebellion, which may do more hurt (as Experience hath shewn us) than all the Arts and Witchcrafts of Julian: In writing of whose Life, you have not, I confess, impoverished the Subject (p. 6.), for you have onely weeded it, as Mr. Baxter hath done the Ecclesiastical History, in his Pro∣fane one of the Bishops and Councils▪ P. 7. You say, you wrote this discourse onely to render that of Julian's Succession intelligible. It is a strange course you take to make his Succession intelligible, which you your self con∣fess was from God by a legal descent, and most agreeable to the Laws of the Roman Empire, and yet seek to overthrow it: you had done more to your purpose, if you had shewn what party of Christians they were, and on what grounds of Religion or Law they went, what Sedition or Armies the Christians
had raised to oppose his Succession; of all which you give us not the least notice; you onely suppose, that if Constantius had known Julian's Religion before he was Emperour, he would have gotten a Bill of Exclusion; or if not, the Christians would have resisted him. And from their behaviour towards him af∣ter he was Emperour, (which is scandalous∣ly represented, as is also the carriage of for∣mer Christians) you would reconcile the Chri∣stian Religion and Rebellion. This you have done intelligibly enough: but that the Chri∣stians did or would have resisted his Successi∣on, I find no shew of Argument or Historie; onely you give us some Rhetorical expressions out of St. Cyril's Invectives, from which you infer more than the Premises will bear. And you do not report, as it becomes an Histori∣an, but onely suggest, adde, and invent what may insnare your Readers. I ingenuously confess, I do not believe all that St. Cyril speaks in praise of Constantius, nor against Julian. Panegyricks, and Stelliteuticks, have not the authoritie of true Histories, with discerning men. P. 7. You say your business is to shew how wide a difference there was betwixt the Case of Christians in Julian's time, and that of the first Christians; and make it as great as Laws for men and against men could possibly make it: yet
you confess that what you have written is con∣trary to what is commonly reported of them, and to the carriage of former Christians. It is then some such New Light as Jo. Goodwin's Doctrine of Resistance, that is your Guide: but you take no notice of the unalterable Laws of God, which bind all men in all Ages to be subject to the Higher Powers without distinction, not onely for fear of Wrath, but for Conscience sake. There are few men that intend a Rebellion, but will pretend to have the Laws on their side; and if they may be Judges in their own Case, will as certainly condemn the Legislator, as dispute his Laws. It were well if you would keep close to your Principle, That the Laws of your Country are the Measures of your civil Obedience. I am sure you want none to require your active O∣bedience to the just Laws of your Prince; nor your passive Obedience, if at any time you suffer wrongfully: And this is not injoyn'd by Mahomet, but by Christ himself; it is the Do∣ctrine of the Cross, and not of the Bow-string. The violation of the Law on the Princes side, doth not discharge the Obligation of the Sub∣jects; they are under a higher Law than that of the Land. The chief Magistrate's obliging himself to certain Rules for administration of his Government, is not the just Measure or chiefest Tye of the Subjects Obedience. The
eternal Laws of God and our Saviour, that require Obedience and Submission even to wicked Princes, and that for Conscience sake, and threatning Resistance with Damnation, is a safer Rule for the saving of our Souls, though not for the preservation of our Lives and Estates. When St. Peter drew a Sword to defend his Master, in a way of resisting, and revenging him against the Officers of a lawful Magi∣strate, he was commanded to put up his Sword, and threatned, that they that use the Sword should perish by the Sword, Matth. 26.52. And when some other Disciples would have his consent to call for fire from heaven to con∣sume the Samaritans, he tells them, they knew not what Spirit they were of. The contrary Doctrines are not from the blessed Jesus, but the accursed Jesuits, and to be abhorred of all good Christians: and yet it is that which you chiefly track, and seek to bring into pra∣ctice. St. Aug. speaking of St. Peter's using the Sword, and of Moses slaying the Egyptian, says, lib. 22. chap. 7. Contra Faustum Maniche∣um; Ʋterque Justitiae regulam excessit; & hie fraterno, ille Dominico amore peccavit. P. 8. You say, It is impossible in so short a Treatise as yours is to say the tenth part of what is to be said, to shew how intolerable that Do∣ctrine (of Passive Obedience) is, and how
contrary to the Gospel, and the Law of the Land. If you had not said the tenth part of what you have, to shew how intolerable the Doctrine of Passive Obedience is, and that it is contrary to the Gospel and the Law of the Land; you had said too much, as will appear hereafter. Chri∣stianity indeed doth not enslave us, or devest us of the Rights and Priviledges that we have; but it teacheth us to exchange them for better. Terrestria non eripit,Sedulius. qui regna dat Caele∣stia. And it assures us, that he that loseth his life for Christs sake, shall save it, Matth. 16.25. P. 8. To prove your Assertion from the Gospel, you commend your Reader to Dr. Hammond's Paraphrase on 1 Cor. 7.21, 22, 23. which speaks little to your purpose; it con∣cerns onely such Christians as were in bon∣dage to heathen Masters. —That if they could by any fair and regular means attain their free∣dom, they might make use of them, and prefer Liberty before Servitude; which they might have done if they had never been Christians: And that they who have obtained Liberty, and were formerly Servants to Heathen, should not sell themselves again, and revert to that condi∣tion of slavery, but prefer Liberty rather. But what is this to that Exposition which he gives us of Rom. 13. in these words? —Then for the Judicial Laws, that great supreme one ought to
be taken into special care of all Christians, that of Obedience to the Supreme Powers rightly esta∣blished and constituted, although they be not Jews but Romans. Nothing in Christianity ought to be pretended or made use of to give any man immunity from Obedience, which from all Subjects, of what quality soever, Apostles, Tea∣chers, &c. is due to those to whom Allegiance be∣longs (contrary to the Gnosticks Doctrine and Practice, Jude 8.) but on the contrary, every person under government, of what Rank soever, is to yield subjection to his Supreme Governour legally placed in that Kingdom, as to him that hath commission from God, as every Supreme Ma∣gistrate must be resolved to have, though he be a Heathen. Vers. 2. From which Divine Com∣mission it is directly consequent, that he that makes any violent resistance or opposition to the Supreme. Magistrate, opposeth that violence to Gods Commission, and shall accordingly receive that punishment which belongs to so sacrilegious a Contumacie; the wrath and judgment of God belongs to it. With more to that purpose. As to St. Paul's dealing with the Centuri∣on, Acts 22.25. the Apostle neither spake nor acted any thing that tended to resistance; he onely asked the Centurion, Is it lawful for you to scourge a man that is a Roman, and uncon∣demned? In like manner, Acts 16.39. Paul and Silas onely made the Officers sensible of
their wrongful imprisonment. It is strange that any man that pretends to Sense or Reli∣gion, should wrest these places to the counte∣nancing of Resistance, when the Doctrine which Christ and his Apostles taught and practised, and which we have received from this great Apostle of the Gentiles, is so oppo∣site to it. Maledicta Glossa quae corrumpit Te∣xtum. What consequence is this? St. Paul and Silas got their liberty by pleading their Priviledges; Therefore it is lawful to resist. It is against the yielding of Passive Obedience to the Supreme Magistrate, that you urge it. P. 9. As for the Laws of the Land, that Do∣ctrine (you say) overthrows Magna Charta, Chap. 29. That Chapter says thus: No Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or disseized of his Freehold and Liberties, &c. but by lawful Iudgment of his Peers, or by the Law of the Land. But if any or all these should happen to some particular man, will that justifie a Rebellion? When a Roman Emperour gave a Senator a Sword, saying, If I rule well, use it for me; if otherwise, against me; was it intended think you by him that gave, or him that received it, that an Act of Violence, or a High Court of Justice should be employed against that Emperour upon every Transgression? (the Apostles rule of Submis∣sion
non obstante). It is a sad return of Gra∣titude, when Christian Princes have granted the greatest Priviledges and Immunities to their Subjects, that they should on all occa∣sions be requited with Affronts and Severi∣ties. P. 9. and 10. You propose the Case of a Pursevant slain in the execution of a Warrant out of the High-Commission-Court; and then adde, Any man may see that my Discourse doth not descend to such petty matters as false Arrests. True: it is evident enough you flie at a more noble Game, the resisting of Princes and their lawful Successors. I pray speak out: When King CHARLES of blessed memory came to the House of Commons to demand Justice against the five Members, against whom he had Articles of Treason prepared, was it lawful for the Parliament to make re∣sistance, and to raise that War that cost so ma∣ny thousand lives, and millions of money, on pretence of a breach of their Priviledges, ra∣ther than to deliver them up to a legal Trial? I doubt the man that killed the Pursevant did not well know whether his Authority were lawful or not; if he did, he might more safe∣ly have submitted, than drawn the bloud of an unadvised man. But however, Currat Lex, let the Law have its course; and if by acci∣dent it be interrupted, or overflow its just
bounds, we may not for that cause dam up the Fountain. P. 11. You say you have honestly pursued the end of our Saviours coming into the world, Luke 9.56. Not to destroy mens lives, but to save them. But doubtless, whereas the Meek∣ness, Obedience, and Patience, which the Go∣spel teacheth, hath destroyed one mans life, (and that our Saviour assures us is not lost, but exchanged for a better) the Doctrine of Resistance and Rebellion hath destroyed thou∣sands. And you may see plainly by the Context, our Saviour commends Passive Obe∣dience, and not Resistance, as the means to pre∣serve mens lives. You rather pursue another end, which our Saviour mentions, not as a proper effect of his Gospel, but of the malice of men against it, Matth. 10.24. I came not to send peace, but a sword. You say, p. 11. That the Laws of the Land have taken particular care of those who are put on an inevitable necessity of defending themselves, &c. How far a man that is assaulted, and put on an inevitable necessity of defending himself against the injuries of private men, is one thing; and what he may do against his Prince, (of whom you seem to discourse) is another: In this case we may apply that in Rev. 13.10. He that killeth with the sword, shall be killed with the sword. This is the pa∣tience
and faith of the Saints. P. 11. This Doctrine (of Passive Obedience) you say, quite alters the Oath of Allegiance, which requires you to be obedient to all the Kings Majesties Laws, Precepts, and Process pro∣ceeding from the same. I do not find those words in that Oath, as set forth by King James; but I find what you overlook (viz.) I will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Majestie, his Heirs and Successors, and him and them will defend to the utmost of my power, a∣gainst all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoe∣ver. And thus I find more particularly in a Declaration (which I believe our Author hath subscribed) thus amplified: I do de∣clare, that it is not lawful upon any pretence what∣soever to take Arms against the King: And that I do abhor that traiterous Position of ta∣king Arms by his Authority against his Person, or against those that are commissionated by him. P. 11. After a large Preface little to your purpose, telling us, That the Church of Eng∣land reserves her Faith entire for the Canonical books of Scripture (which I hope you also do,) and that she divides her Reverence between the Fathers and the first Reformers of this Church, who partly were Martyrs that died for the Pro∣testant Religion, and partly Confessors that after∣ward setled it. (And now to the business.)
How much the Fathers would have been for a Bill of Exclusion (you say) we have seen al∣ready. No, not one word of it from the be∣ginning, nor I believe any mention of it from one Argument tending to it to the end of the Book, from any of the Fathers, as will shortly appear. But what say our Martyrs, Confessors, and Reformers? First he tells us what some men would have perswaded King Edward to do, if they could have had their wills confirmed by Act of Parliament: They shewed what they would have done if they could, saith our Author: They never spake such bad English as our Author doth in his Taun∣ton-Dean Proverb, Chud eat more Cheese an chad it; which being interpreted, is, We would rebel if we had power. The Duke of Northum∣berland indeed did cause the Lady Jane Gray's Title to be proclaimed, but here the Bishops must be the men that were chiefly engaged in that designe of Exclusion: whereas I read not that any of them were ever consulted with, nor ever declared any thing to that purpose; but in their joynt and most solemn Writings enjoyn the clean contrary, as shall now ap∣pear. P. 12. The Bishops in Queen Elizabeth's time, to whom, under God and that Queen, we owe the settlement of our Church, concurred to the making of that Statute which makes it High-Treason
in her Reign, and forfeiture of Goods and Chattels ever after, in any wise to hold or affirm, That an Act of Parliament is not of suf∣ficient force and validity to limit and bind the Crown of this Realm, and the descent, limitation, inheritance, and government thereof, 13 Eliz. chap. 1. But our Author never considered the grounds and reasons of that Act; Ex ma∣lis moribus bonae Leges; it was the iniquity of those times, and the traiterous practices of the Queen of Scots, which gave occasion to that Statute: for there were many Pamph∣lets written by Saunders and the Author of Doleman, which deni'd the Title of Queen E∣lizabeth, and proclaim'd her an Usurper; and the Queen of Scots made actual claim to the Crown of England; she assumed the Arms of England and other Regalia; and by her Con∣federates endeavoured to raise a Rebellion, and conspired against the life of the Queen; for which causes she was condemned, as may appear by her Sentence which was passed up∣on her, viz. That divers things were compassed and imagined within this Kingdom of England with the privity of the said Queen, who preten∣ded a Title to the Crown of this Kingdom, and which tended to the hurt, death, and destruction of the Royal Person of our Soveraign Queen. Cambdens Eliz. p. 464. (Leiden 1625.) Such practices gave occasion to that Statute, to
prevent the Mischiefs that might befal Queen Elizabeth and the Nation, And that Statute consists of many heads: As first, Whoever should compass, imagine, devise, or intend the death or destruction, or any bodily harm tending to death, destruction, or wounding of the Royal person of the Queen, or deprive or depose her of or from the Stile, Honour, or Kingly name of the Imperial Crown of this Realm, &c. or leavy War against her Majesty within this Kingdom or without, or move any Strangers to invade this Kingdom or Ireland, &c. or shall maliciously publish and declare, by any printing, writing, word, or sayings, that our Soveraign Lady during her life is not, or ought not to be Queen of this Realm, &c. or that any other per∣son or persons ought of right to be King or Queen of the same; or that our said Queen is a Heretick or Schismatick, Ty∣rant, Infidel, or an Vsurper of the said Crown, &c. these shall he guilty of High-Treason. Also if any after thirty days from the Session of this Parliament, and in the life of our said Queen, shall claim, pretend, declare, or publish themselves or any other besides our said Queen to have Right or Title to have and enjoy the Crown of England, or shall usurp the same. or the Royal Stile, Title, or Dignity of the Crown, or shall affirm that our said Queen hath not right to hold and enjoy the same; such shall be utterly disabled du∣ring
their natural lives onely, to have or enjoy the Crown or Realm of England in Succession, Inheritance, or otherwise. Then follows the Case of Succession: That if any person shall hold or affirm, that the Common Laws of this Realm, not al∣tered by Parliament, ought not to direct the Right of this Crown, or that our said Queen by the Authority of Parliament is not able to make Laws and Statutes of sufficient force, &c. as above. Yet was not the Queen of Scots condem∣ned upon the Statute of the 13 of Eliz. but on that made in the 27 of her Reign; wherein it was provided, That twenty four persons at least, part being of the Privy Council, and the rest Peers of the Realm, should by the Queens Commission examine such as should make any open Rebellion or Inva∣sion of this Realm, or attempt to hurt the Queens person, by or for any pretended Title to the Crown. In which Commis∣sion I find no Bishop save the Archbishop, who at first refused to act: nor when the whole Parliament petitioned for the Execu∣tion, do we find that the Bishops (who were denied to vote in case of Bloud) did joyn or were consulted with. And Cambden observes, that the same day when the Sentence was pronounc'd against the Queen of Scots, it was declared by the Delegates and Judges of the Kingdom, That that Sentence should derogate
nothing from the Right or Honour of James King of Scots; but that he should be in the same E∣state, Order, and Right, as if that Sentence had never been given, p. 465. So that the whole matter being considered, here was no Exclu∣sion of a Popish Successour, but rather a tacit confirmation of one that was a Protestant; and consequently, it must be a great slander on those worthy Bishops by him named, that they were zealous for such Acts of Exclusion: for the business of the Queen of Scots did concern matters of Treason, such as you say might exclude her out of the world; as also the Reasons of Sir Simon d'Ewes tended to the taking away of her life; and therefore come not home to the Case of Succession: nor does Sir Simon tell us whose Reasons they were; and I suspect them to be the Opinions of some private person, who having spoken all-along in the plural number, he discovereth himself at the end in these words; God I trust in time shall open her Majesties eyes to see their cruel purposes, &c. P. 18. You say (what another hath said before you) That a Bill of Exclusion is a per∣fect Courtship to these Reasons. True, if the Heir apparent or presumptive were under the same circumstance with that Queen: but 'tis perfect Cruelty to endeavour the like Exclu∣sion of a Popish Successour, as such onely, not
onely from his Right, but out of his Life. And now no man else needs turn his fury or reproa∣ches upon those Bishops; you have done that sufficiently. As for your Protestation, p. 19. that if but one Reason can be given to prove a Bill of Ex∣clusion to be unlawful, which will be owned to be a Reason a week after, and the owners not be a∣shamed, you do solemnly promise to joyn in re∣nouncing those Old Reformers, and readily fol∣low their New Guides and Lights. The Apo∣stle gives you a Reason which is of eternal ve∣rity, viz. We may not do evil that good may come of it: And he assures you, that the con∣demnation of such as affirm the contrary is just, Rom. 3.8. And to any but an Ignoramus, that of Dan. 4.25. may serve as another Reason; The most High ruleth in the Kingdom of men, and giveth it to whom he will. To which adde, If it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest ye be found to fight against God, Acts 4.39. And for your renouncing the Old Reformers, you have done that with the utmost spite and re∣proach that all the Wit of a Julian or the Ma∣lice of a Colledge of Jesuits could invent, as if they had been the Judges and Executioners of the Queen of Scots under the Notion of a Popish Successor. Wherefore I would advise our Author to consider what occasion he hath given to the Enemies of that Church (where∣of
I suppose him a Member, if not a Priest) to reproach her: for from this Story of his, no doubt it was, that the scurrilous and Bed∣lam-Author of the Pamphlet called Crape-Gownorum hath thus commented: It is plain that the Church of England-men did hold King-killing, or Queen-killing Doctrine, (which is the same thing); so that if Knox, Buchanan, or Calvin first taught the Speculative part, the o∣ther (meaning those Bishops named by our Author) first put it in practice, and set the fa∣tal president that others followed, (that is), in the murder of King Charles the first; for at that he aims, when he threatneth us to let 641 sleep in Oblivion, lest we awake 587. inti∣mating, that what was done in the process of that War, (viz. that barbarous Murther per∣petrated on the Royal Person of Charles the First) may be justified on the Principles of our Reformers. Whatever may be told in Gath, and published in the streets of Askalon, to make those Philistims rejoyce; I cannot permit this diabolical Slander to pass without a brand on the Author of it here at home; and to vindi∣cate those Worthies, and silence our Adversa∣ries the Jesuits, and to prevent the ill conse∣quents of this Forgery, which may stir up the Phanaticks of this Nation to act over our for∣mer Tragedies. I shall first relate the matter of fact, and
the grounds of that Severity which was used against that Queen; and shew you the most deliberate Judgment of those Reverend Bishops in the Case of Resisting lawful Authority. First, As to the matter of fact, it is beyond denial, that the Queen of Scots married the Lord Darly a Subject to the Crown of Eng∣land, who being slain, (whether by her con∣sent, or not, I will not determine, but) she was questioned by her Subjects for incontinent living, the death of her Husband, and for Ty∣ranny; and was forced to resigne her Crown to her Son, then about thirteen months old; so that she was no longer a Crowned head. After which, she raiseth an Army, and is de∣feated by Murray; and being imprisoned, makes an escape into England, where a Coun∣cil was called to consult how to dispose of her. It was resolved, that to let her pass into France, might prove dangerous; and worse to send her back to Scotland: And to prevent farther mischief, she should not be dismissed from England till she had made satisfaction for the death of her Husband a Subject and Peer of England, and for usurping the Arms of England, and pretending a Title to the Crown. During her restraint here, she con∣trives many Plots against the Peace of the Na∣tion; both with France by the Duke of Guise, and D'Alva Governour of the Netherlands;
and at home, by the Dukes of Northumberland (to whom she promised marriage) and West∣moreland, who raised a Rebellion in the North for her Rescue: both which suffered, the first was beheaded, the last died in Exile. By her instigation a Bull was sent from Rome, dischar∣ging the Subjects of England from their Obe∣dience to the Queen. Then follows the Con∣spiracy of Tho. and Edw. Stanly, Sons to the Earl of Darby. Several Invasions were also made in Ireland, to disturb that Kingdom, by the joynt Counsels of the King of Spain and Pope Gregory the 13th, and a swarm of Jesuits are sent into England, and contrive with Throgmorton, Paget, and others, for another Insurrection; which was prevented. The Nobles and Gentry seeing no hopes of Peace through such daily practices, entered into an Association to prosecute all those even to death that should attempt any thing against the Queen; and prevailed for a closer restraint of her: which notwithstanding, one Babington conveyed Letters between Her and France, and engaged divers to murther the Queen; which was discovered to Secretary Walsing∣ham, as also the manner how the Queen of Scots conveyed Letters to the Spanish Embas∣sador, and other Confederates: whereupon fourteen of them were executed; and in the Parliament convened about that time, Throg∣morton,
the two Pagets, Englefield, Babington, Salisbury, &c. were proscribed. So that the Nation being continually alarmed with the news of Invasions, Insurrections, and Conspira∣cies, during the life of that unfortunate Queen, who can blame the Parliament for solliciting the execution of a Just Sentence? Of all men living, our Author ought not to object it, much less to charge the Bishops with that (if they had been guilty) for which they are ready now to pronounce them Papists, as not consenting to the Exclusion of a Popish Successor. But secondly, what the Judgment of those Reformers was concerning the Doctrine of Re∣sisting lawful Princes on any pretence, I shall now demonstrate. P. 103, 104. of his Book, our Author is pleased to recommend the Homilies of our Church to every bodies reading, as one of the best Books that he knows in the world, next to the Bible, (as Mr. Hunt had done before him). I shall therefore intreat him to judge of the Opinion of our Reformers and Confessors in point of O∣bedience, out of the publick Doctrines set forth by them in that excellent Book. In the first Homily against Disobedience and wilful Rebel∣lion, they say, p 277. If Servants ought to obey their Masters not onely being gentle, but such as be froward, much more
ought Subjects to be obedient not onely to their good and courteous, but also to their sharp and rigorous Princes, 1 Pet. 2.18. And p. 278. It cometh not of Chance or Fortune, nor of the Ambition of Mor∣tal men climbing up of their own accord to Dominion, that there be Kings, Queens, Princes, and other Governours over men being their Subjects; but all Kings, Queens, and other Governours, are specially appointed by the Ordinance of God. P. 279. A Rebel is worse than the worst Prince, and Rebellion worse than the worst Government of the worst Prince that hitherto hath been.—Whatsoever the Prince be, or his Government, it is evident that for the most part those Prin∣ces whom some Subjects do think to be very godly, and under whose Government they rejoyce to live, some other Subjects do take the same to be evil and ungodly, and do wish for a Change. If therefore all Subjects that mislike of their Prince should revel, no Realm should ever be without Rebellion. P. 280. But what if a Prince be evil indeed, and undiscreet, and it is evident to all mens eyes that he is so? I ask again, What if it be long of the wickedness of his Subjects that he is so, shall the Subjects by their wickedness both provoke God for their deserved pu∣nishment to give them an evil and indis∣creet Prince, and also rebel against him, and withal against God, who for the pu∣nishment
of their sins did give them such a Prince? Will you hear the Scripture in this point? God maketh a wicked man to raign, for the sins of the people. Again, God giveth a Prince in his anger, meaning an evil one, and taketh away a Prince in his displeasure, meaning when he taketh away a good Prince for the sins of the people: as in our memory he took away our good Josias King Edward, for our wickedness. A∣gain, God maketh a wise and good King to raign over that people whom he loveth, and who love him. And again, If the people o∣bey God, both they and their King shall pro∣sper.—And for Subjects to deserve through their sins to have an evil Prince, and then to rebel against him, were double and tre∣ble evil, by provoking God more to plague them, let us either deserve to have a good Prince, or let us patiently suffer and obey such as we deserve: and whether the Prince be good or evil, let us according to the Scriptures pray for him for his conti∣nuance and increase in goodness if he be good, and for his amendment if he be e∣vil. The Bishops that were their Predecessors, and our first Reformers in the days of King Henry the Eighth and King Edward the Sixth, were of the same judgment, as appears in a Book called The Institution of a Christian man, whereof Cranmer, Ridly, and other Martyrs
were the Compilers. On the Fifth Com∣mandment they say, Subjects be bound not to withdraw their Fealty, Truth, Love, and Obe∣dience towards their Prince, FOR ANY CAƲSE WHATSOEVER; ne for any Cause may they conspire against his Person, ne do any thing towards the hindrance or hurt thereof, nor of his Estate. And by this Com∣mandment they be bound to obey all the Laws, Proclamations, Precepts, and Commandments made by their Princes, except they be contrary to the Commandments of God: With much more to that purpose. And on the Sixth Commandment, No Subjects may draw their Swords against their Princes, FOR ANY CAƲSE WHATSOEVER IT BE. — And though Princes, which be the Supreme Heads of their Realms, do otherwise than they ought; yet God hath assigned no Judges over them in this world. The contrary to this is a Popish Do∣ctrine, who think it cause enough to depose a King, because he is a Protestant: and it is a Lesson which some sorts of Protestants have learnt from them, to depose any that is a Pa∣pist. A Doctrine which all the Reformed Churches have hitherto condemned: and yet this is the Sophistry which our Author hath detected, to his own shame, and the honour of those Worthies whom he hath reproached: and if our Author's Politicks should be em∣braced
Kings would be of all men most mi∣serable: for if they be Protestants, the Papists may depose them; and if they be Papists, Protestants may resist them; which is tanta∣mount. P. 19. Is a discourse against the Oath of Allegiance, which he forms in an Objection and Answer. The Objection is this: You are pre∣engaged, and cannot consent to a Bill of Exclu∣sion; if you do, you are forsworn, having long since sworn Allegiance to the King, his lawful Heirs and Successors. His Answer: Now though the Lawyers tell us an hundred times, no man can have an Heir as long as he liveth, yet this will not overcome that deceitful preju∣dice which is occasioned by our common speech. Reply. Yet our Author presently adds, That a man and his Heirs may live at once in the some house, and eat and drink together every day. I pretend not to the knowledge of Law∣terms; yet I am confident those Lawyers which penned that Oath did not put it in in vain; nor would they make it Treason to con∣spire the death of the Heir of the Crown of England, if there could be no such person in being. One clause of that Oath is this: I will bear Faith and true Allegiance to his Maje∣stie, his Heirs and Successors, and him and them will defend to the utmost of my power, against all Conspiracies and Attempts whatsoever which
shall be made against his or their persons, their Crown or Dignity, by reason or colour of any such Sentence or Declaration, or otherwise: and will do my best endeavour to disclose and make known to his Majestie, his Heirs and Successors, all Treasons and treacherous Conspiracies which I shall know or hear of to be against him or any of them. And I do farther swear, That I do from my heart abhor, detest, and abjure, as impious and heretical, this damnable Doctrine and Posi∣tion, that Princes which be excommunicated or deprived by the Pope, may be deposed or mur∣thered by their Subjects or any other whatsoever. —And all these things I plainly and sincerely acknowledge and swear, according to these ex∣press words by me spoken, and according to the plain and common sence and understanding of the same words, without any Equivocation, or mental Evasion, or secret Reservation whatsoever, &c. Now let any man judge whether you have not taught the Jesuits themselves how to e∣quivocate, and to make void that solemn Oath, by affirming that there can be no such person as an Heir to the Crown while the King is living. Your own distinction of an Heir Apparent and Presumptive, seems a sufficient Confuta∣tion of your sensless Assertion. Besides, though it may be true of a Testamentary Heir, that he is not actually so till the death of the Testator; yet a Legal Heir, upon whom an
Estate is intailed, as the Royal Crown of Eng∣land is upon the next in Bloud, is truly an Heir, and ought to inherit. And in this O∣pinion I am confirmed by the Apostle, Gal. 4.1. who says, That though the Heir as long as he is a child, (i.e. as long as his Father liveth) differeth nothing from a servant, yet he is Lord of all: and if he be a Son, or next in Bloud to a Prince whose Kingdom is heredi∣tary, then is he his Heir, v. 7. as St. Paul ar∣gues. You seem to grant, that this is the Law-sence of the words Heirs and Successors in an Act of Parliament, as in the Duty of Excise granted to the King, his Heirs, and Successors; But an Oath of Allegiance (you say) ought to be conceived in plain words, and in the common sence of those words. Which I should think to be that which the Lawyers that penned that Oath, and the Lawgivers that enjoyned it, did intend; and unless you will justifie Pa∣pists in their Equivocations, and absolve them from the obligation of that Oath, it cannot be taken in any other but the Law-sence. Well, (say you) if it be so, (and so it must be) let them be sure to keep it in that sence in which they have or should take it at sixteen years of age in the Court-Leet; viz. I will be true Liegeman, and true faith and troth bear to our Soveraign Lord the King that now is, and to
his Highness Heirs and lawful Successours. Kings and Queens of this Realm of England. To which you add this pitiful and worse than Jesuitical Evasion: It is plain to every body, that no one certain or known person in the world hath any interest at present in the Oath of Alle∣giance besides his Majesty that now is. For which you give this as a Reason, which is none at all: For who shall be King or Queen of England hereafter, none but God himself knows. And if God, by whom Kings reign, had not wonderful∣ly restored his Majesty, we should have had none at this time. But God by a Miracle hath restored the right Heir against all oppe∣sition. Pag. 21. He brings in another Objection against the Bill of Exclusion, fetched from the Common-Prayer (to which I perceive he is no great Friend): viz. No Church of-England-man can be for it with a good Conscience, being to the prejudice of his R. H. because we there pray that God would prosper him with all hap∣piness here and hereafter. Now by the way, no such words (as here and hereafter) are ex∣pressed, though we grant they are implied un∣der the word All. But we especially (though not onely) intend it to that happiness which flows from the Spirit and grace of God, and may bring him and all the Royal Family to Gods everlasting Kingdom; and as a means
thereunto, that he would endue them with his holy Spirit, and enrich them with his heavenly Grace. You say, No man in the Communion of the Church of England prays that Prayer more heartily than you do. But if you do indeed think him to be a Julian, and your self such as those Christians that sayd their Prayers back∣ward, that prayed him to death, and would not so much as desire his conversion, this would cer∣tainly be a Curse in the mouth or heart of a∣ny Protestant. And I hope there are no such in the Communion of our Church, though you intimate that they were all such in the Primitive Church, and that we should be such also: for p. 96. you say, You find not one single wish among the Antients for Julian's con∣version, but all for his down-right destruction. It is a good Rule that, Pro quibus orandum, pro iis laborandum. We should by a meek and Christian behaviour, inforce our Devo∣tions: for 'tis the Prayer of the Righteous man that availeth much. If we could thorowly in∣spect the Arguments that prevailed for the reputed defection of that Prince, I believe the unchristian behaviour of those who oppose his Succession, was most cogent. And who knows but our amendment, moderation, and meekness, might yet reclaim him? But to pray coldly without faith, for what you say (p. 22.) there is no hope, and to act contrary to
your Prayers, is to beg a denial. And I hope many others pray more heartily than you do: For when we pray God to indue him with his Holy Spirit, &c. we pray that he may re∣turn to the Protestant Religion, and not that he may be exposed to an invincible Temptation, and a kind of necessity to extirpate it, as you maliciously accuse us. Nor are we to di∣strust the power of divine Grace either to restrain or sanctifie those whom we pray for; and so to limit the Holy One of Israel, as if he had not the hearts of Kings in his hand, or had no rule over the Governours of the world. Cambden, p. 5. of his Remains, re∣ports, that when Brithwald the Monk was troubled about the Succession, the Bloud Roy∣al being almost extinguished, he heard a voice saying, The Kingdom of England is Gods King∣dom, and God will provide for it. And why should not we acquiesce in the same Divine Providence? P. 79. You argue against a Popish Succes∣sour à possibili, because he may be a Persecutor. Some have accounted both our present Sove∣raign and his Father of blessed memory such: they sent the One out of the world with an Exit Tyrannus, though the meekest and most gracious Prince in the world; and what the effects of a Bill of Exclusion, as some men would manage it, may be, is dreadful to con∣sider.
But as you suppose the Popish Succes∣sessour may be; so I suppose he may not be a Persecutor. And for the proof of this, I ap∣peal to your Friend Plato Redivivus, who in p. 207. gives an instance in the Prince of Ha∣nover, who was perverted to the Roman Church, went to Rome to abjure Heresie; and returning home, lived and governed as he did before, without the least animosity of his Sub∣jects for his change, or any endeavour to in∣troduce any to his Government or People; and dying the last Spring, left the peaceable and undisturbed Rule of his Subjects to the next Successour his Brother the Bishop of Osnaburg, who is a Protestant. Now (as Solomon says) there is no new thing under the Sun, but what hath been may be; and if we do our duties, we may be the more confident of the success of our Prayers, That God will endue the Roy∣al Family with his Holy Spirit, &c.. You do very naughtily therefore to represent the case as impossible and desperate, as if God himself could not or would not order this great affair for the good of his People. I am almost per∣swaded, that the sins of the Nation to which this clamour against Succession hath given occasion, by planting in the hearts of too many, malice, bitter enmity, revilings, and even abhorrence of one another, is a greater evil than we are yet like to suffer from a Popish Successor.
And did we think he might prove to be such a one as he is (too boldly) represented, we do very ill to exasperate and imbitter his Spirit, by such Libels, Slanders, and such un∣lawful Contrivances as in all probability made Julian worse than he would have been. I therefore heartily wish that you had spared that Grinning Complement (to use your term, which you borrowed from Dr. Howel in his life of Julian) That if it stand with his H.'s good liking, he would enjoy that Religion to the greatest advantage, and take his fill of it at the Fountain-head. I shall rather pray he may never go thither: There are too many Crowned heads at the devotion of his Holi∣ness already. Such Complementers I am sure do not pray heartily that God would prosper him with all happiness here and hereafter. What? to perswade him to cast himself down over some precipice, as Curtis did, p. 19. of the Character of a Popish Successour? or like that mentioned by our Author to be presented to Cromwel, p. 87. that to kill himself is no Mur∣ther? If it be out of the abundance of the heart that the mouth speaketh, none but men of mur∣therous intentions will so speak. P. 23. You are throughly satisfied (you say) that the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy are Protestant Oaths (as a great Assertor▪ of our Religion and Laws (now with God) thought
fit to term them). Sir W.J. I confess, was a good Lawyer, but how he could call them Prote∣stant Oaths I know not.See L. Cooks Re∣ports N. 7. fol. 6. and fol. 7. in Cal∣vins Case. And his Institutes Sect. 94. and 259. The Oath of Allegiance was long before the name of Protestants came up; King James onely enlarged it, and appointed it to be taken of all in Court-Leets at Sixteen Years of age, as you have observed. Nor is there any new thing at all in that Oath, more than what all Prote∣stant Princes do generally require of their Subjects. And as for that of Supremacie, it is one of the ancient Regalia of the Kings of England, which our Parliaments still defen∣ded against the encroachments of the Pope; so that the thing was in being long before King Henry the Eighth brought it into a form: and he was yet a Popish Prince when he did it. And I have read, that Queen Mary her self would hardly part with the acknowledge∣ment of her Supremacie. It is not peculiar then to Protestants; or if it were, I am a∣fraid that some who term themselves the true Protestants would be found no great Friends to it: For there are many other Sects, as well as the Anabaptists, who are now called sound Protestants, refuse it: And the late Sanctions were intended equally against them all. I agree with you, that we are all bound by
them to endeavour in our place to keep out Poperie; but not by Rebellion, and the bring∣ing in of Confusion. As to what you say of twisting a Popish In∣terest with these Oaths, as Julian endeavoured to entangle the Christians. There are matters more pertinent, and more fully related by St. Gre∣gory Nazianzene than by you— There was (saith he) an Anniversarie-day where∣in the Emperour bestowed Donatives of Gold on his Souldiers, when at the same time he had provided Fire, Frankincense, and several persons to perswade the Soul∣diers to kindle the Incense, as an ancient Rite, and more becoming the Imperial Dignity. By such arts and perswasions, many of the inconsiderate Souldiers were circumvented, and kindled the Frankincense: but, at their return and feasting together, they drank to each other, and with Eyes lifted up, and using the Sign of the Cross, they made men∣tion of Christ. Whereupon one of their Companie said, What strange thing is this! Do ye call on Christ after you have denied him? At which they being astonished, said, How have we denied him? what is your mea∣ning? He answered, By throwing Frankin∣cense into the Fire, which is a denial of Christ. Whereat leaping up speedily from their Feast, they ran forth as so many distracted
men into the Market-place, proclaiming, We are Christians, we are Christians in our hearts. Let all men hear us, and God above all, to whom we live, and to whom we will die. We have not broken our Covenant with thee, O Christ our Sa∣viour, nor abjured our blessed Profession. If our Hands have offended, our Minds are not guilty, It was not the Gold, but the Emperour's fraud that circumvented us: We have put off im∣piety, having been purged in bloud. Then hasting to the Emperour, and with great resolution casting their Gold at his Feet, said, We have not receiv'd a Donary, O Empe∣rour, but a Condemnation: You called us not to receive marks of Honour, but a brand of Igno∣miny: Let your Souldiers receive such Lar∣gesses; slay and sacrifice us to Christ, to whose Empire onely we submit our selves. Revenge one fire with another, and reduce us to dust for the dust that we have cast into the fire: Cut off those hands which we have unhappily stretched out, and those Feet that carried us to it. Give your Gold to such as may not re∣pent the receiving it: Christ alone sufficeth us, whom we value above all things. Having said thus, and informing others of the fraud, and exhorted them to recover themselves out of this snare, and satisfie Christ even with their Bloud: The Emperour, though highly provoked, would not make a pub∣lick
slaughter of them, who as much as in them lay were desirous of it; he comman∣ded them to be banished. Methinks here is much of the resolution of the Thebaean Legion, who voluntarily offered themselves to death, rather than have the guilt of kind∣ling Incense, though without any evil inten∣tion, at the command of the Emperour. From whence I gather, that these Heroick Chri∣stians thought themselves under the same ob∣ligation in Julian's time, as the Thebaeans did in that of Maximian. Which is your , such an errour in your foundation, as we shall see to enfeeble the whole Fabrick. And here you may be instructed what you ought to say and do, when a Prince (as you phrase it) shall put a border of Popery about his Picture, which you would fain honour; namely, as these noble Confessors did; We reverence your Per∣son and Authoritie; we will fight your Battles, and follow your Commands; but if you will draw us to Idolatry, (though by the Laws we might resist) we will rather die at your Feet than do either. This is the Faith and Pati∣ence of those exemplarie Souldiers: and this may serve also to free you from those affli∣cting thoughts which had almost made you to forget a passage of great consequence which riseth up against all that you have said, deliver∣ed by St. Augustine on Psal. 124. to this effect:
That the Christian Souldiers served under this Heathen Emperour; and where their Religion was not concerned, made conscience of obeying him; but where it came to the Cause of Christ, there they made as much conscience of disobey∣ing him. True, they would not obey him, but neither would they rise up against him, though (as you take for granted) they had the Law on their side. They would lose their Lives rather than offend God, or rebel a∣gainst their Emperour: which is the very thing that St. Augustin perswades, having shewn that Servants must obey their froward Masters: Quod de domino ac servo dixi, hoc de Regibus intelligite; commending Julians Souldiers, who for the sake of their Ma∣ster in Heaven, did serve their Earthly ma∣ster. P. 26. You would have the Reader take notice, that the whole Contest between Julian and those Christians was purely on the score of Religion, and not from any lawless and ungover∣nable humour. And certainly such lawless and un∣governable humours as you mention, did no way become the Christian Religion: for that in∣structs us to practice meekness and forbearance; not to avenge our selves, but to give place to wrath; not to speak evil of Dignities, or curse the Ru∣lers of the people. Whereas you present them under such a black Character, as would make
some believe that they were the Apostates and Persecutors, and not Julian. They are al∣most your own words, p. 66. For how do they treat the Emperour, reproaching him, ruffling him, vexing every Vein in his Roy∣al Heart, saying all their Prayers backward, and calling down vengeance upon his head— dancing and leaping for joy at his death, and insulting over his Memory; and but for the name of Christians, he had better fallen among Barbarians: and when he of∣ten put them in mind of their Christia∣nitie— they call him by the bloudiest names of the Devil, for telling them they must not avenge themselves, nor render evil for evil, but pray for and wish well to those that injure and persecute them: and tell him he must not think to drive all men up to the top and Pinacle of Virtue; for there are several Commands in the Gospel which are no more than Counsels of perfection, which bring Honour and Reward to them that keep them; but to those that do not keep them, no manner of danger at all. Pu∣det haec Opprobria, &c. I am sorry to hear that distinction applied to the practice of those Vertues which do more especially discrimi∣nate Christians, and shew them to be of a more excellent spirit than other men: For we need such graces as these in our daily con∣versation;
and what do we more than others, if we onely be kind and loving to them that are so to us? Yet this distinction of Counsels and Precepts will be but a sorry excuse for such as neglect those Duties enjoyned Matth. 5.44. &c. If these and such-like are Counsels, and we may do as the Julian Christians are said to do, the design of the Gospel is quite another thing than what all the learned and serious professors of it in all Ages have believed and practised: Non tali auxilio aut defensoribus istis Christus egit. I have heard of some that have turned the Gospel into Burlesque; but it is more strange, that one whom I suppose a Minister of the Gospel should make the grand design of it Ridicule. P. 26. As for the Souldiers fighting under Julian against the Persians or any common enemy, and obeying the word of Command, when they re∣ceived his Pay; it is such a low part of Honesty, that our Author would have done it himself, for his Pay. But he that would have fought for Julian, will scarce sit down quiet under a Popish Prince, which he thinks to be ten times worse than a Julian; and probably would re∣joyce as much at such a slippery trick as was shewed to Julian in Persia, as (he saies) those Christians did that lived under him. For why are these things propounded and applau∣ded, but to commend them as examples to the
present Generation? But I hope we shall not have many such Reformado's. You say, p. 26. Every body knows how the Church was rent in sunder by Arianism; And there might be too much stiffness and rigidness on the other hand about words, for ought I know: but miserably rent it was; which gave great advantage to Julian against the Christian Reli∣gion. I know not what our Author means in excusing the Arians, and charging the Or∣thodox with too much stiffness. What more dangerous Errour could there be, than to op∣pose the Deity of Christ, and deny the Lord that bought them? In such a Case, and when almost the whole world was turned Arian, the Orthodox could not be too stout and reso∣lute: and if there were so good an Effect of a bad Cause, as the Ʋnion of Christians, un∣der Julian; I wish our fears of what you call a greater evil might have the like effect on us, whose Divisions have not so great a cause as abjuring the Deity of our Saviour was. And he that shall extenuate that cause of dissenti∣on, as if inconsiderable, and but a mistake a∣bout words, as our Author (after Mr. Baxter) hath done, and yet aggravate the grounds of Division among our selves, as if the Scrupulosi∣ty which the Dissenters so pertinaciously de∣fend, were (as Mr. Hunt saies) from God, hath quite out-run the Men of Rippon for Contra∣dictions
Zeal like another Satyr, he can blow hot and cold; he is extremely hot in Puncti∣lio's, and as cold in Fundamentals; he serves some other Interest than that of Peace, Truth, or Piety. P. 27. Now what did the Christians do? Did the Orthodox go and side with Julian, to revenge the injuries which they received from the Arians in Constantius's time? or make use of Julians favour which he shewed in restoring them, to crush their brethren which dissented from them? No, there was no seeking to him by either side: One∣ly the Donastists of Africk complemented him, and received some small favour from him. The design of Julian's recalling the Orthodox Bi∣shops was, as Ecclesiastical Historians affirm, either to cast an Odium on Constantius, who had banished them; or to dash them and the Arians and Donatists against each other, thereby toEo modo nomen Christi de terris perire putavit, si Sacrilegas dissentiones liberas esse permisit. St. Aug. Epist. 166. ruine both; or at least that they might not find any opportunity of di∣sturbing him, being wholly imployed in the destruction of one another. 'Two or three things I shall briefly demonstrate, on occasion of this Para∣graph. 1. That the Donatists and Arians were u∣nited among themselves against the Ortho∣dox. 2. That they courted Julian's favour
to strengthen their Faction against the Or∣thodox. And 3. They did commit greater outrages where they had power, than Julian himself. As to the first, Donatus himself wrote a book de Spiritu Sancto, agreeable to the Do∣ctrine of Arius, as St. Hierome hath obser∣ved: the Macedonians also, who, as St. Am∣brose observes, blotted out of their books that of St. John, God is a Spirit, joyned with them. See St. Ambrose de Spiritu Sancto, lib. 3. cap. 11. Secondly, They courted Julian's favour, and got a Toleration, by their flattering Pe∣titions, applauding him as a man with whom alone Justice did reside. And in truth, all that hath been said in favour of a Popish Successour, comes short of what they said in favour of Julian. And whereas the Orthodox lookt on this Indulgence of the Emperour as a designe that would prove fatal to Christianity; for as St. Augustine says, Quae pejor mors animae, quam libertas erroris? There is no death so evil as the licensing of error, which is the destruction of the Soul: Yet the Donatists on the contrary are loud in their Acclamations to Julian as a most gracious Prince; and when he was dead, would, if it had been possible, have prayed him alive again. And to ingratiate themselves yet more, they pull down the
Cross which Constantius had set up in publick places to the honour of Christ, and set up Ju∣lians Image in its place. And by how much he was more severe against the Catholicks, so much the more they applauded him: nor would he have done so much Mischief as he did, had not they sollicited him by their fre∣quent and fawning Petitions. Such Ortho∣dox Bishops as were famous for Learning, were all silenced: Athanasius indeed returned to Alexandria, but was presently banished a∣gain by their means, who informed the Em∣perour that Athanasius had baptized many Noble Persons, to the great disgrace of Julian's Empire and Religion. See Baronius's Annals, Anno Christi 362. p. 115. Tom. 4. Mogunt. So that Athanasius, St. Basil, and St. Gregorie, Fugerius Antiochenus, and both the Apollina∣res, were banished and persecuted by means of the Arians. St. Augustine calls Julian, De∣sertor Christi & inimicus, an Apostate from Christ, and enemy to his Church: but vester Julianus, so great a friend to the Donatists, that he was wholly theirs. Julian's affection to George an Arian Bishop, whose Writings he earnestly desired, inten∣ding probably to make use of them against the Orthodox, is recorded by himself in his Epistles, and was made known by setting up him in the place of Athanasius, as he
generally did Arians in the room of the Orthodox. And Baronius, p. 117. speak∣ing of the Catholicks, saies, In quos conversus est furor Gentilium, Arianorum, pariter & Judaeo∣rum: they agreed with the most opposite parties against the Catholicks; Jews, Gentiles, and Arians. Perhaps you may give some credit to what is said by Mr. Baxter's History of Councils enlarged. The Arians possest Con∣stantine with hard thoughts of Athanasius: And it could not be expected that Julian should countenance the best, when Constantius had done so much against them, and got most of the Churches headed with Arian Bishops. So that Julian maintained divers of the Leaders of the Facti∣ons as his Favourites and Pensioners, to balance the Orthodox, that they might be in a continu∣al hurry, and find no establishment, but suffer as evil doers, and the causers of Division, when they onely asserted the Evangelical Doctrine, as well against the Arians as Pagans. Rogatianus and Pontius, two Donatists, in a Petition of theirs to Julian, stile him the onely Assertor of publick libertie, from whom alone Justice and Clemencie could be hoped for. Than which flatteries. St. Augustine says, Nil inju∣stius, nil pernitiosius? Their words were, Quod apud eum sola justitiam haberet locum, Epist. 166. that he would do nothing but what was just. The Catholicks wondered (as well they
might) that the Donatists should be so short-sighted, as not to perceive that Julian was striking at the very root of Christianity; of which they often minded them, and gave them this plain Demonstration: That by the same Edict by which they were indulged, the Worship of Idols was injoyned; and the Devil and they were let loose together, to compass the Earth, and make Proselytes to their Party. Tunc reddidit (Julianus) Basilicas Donatistis, quando Templae Daemoniis, Aug. Epist. 166. Optatus, l. 2. p. 54. Eo modo putans Christia∣num nomen de terris posse perire, si unitati Eccle∣siae de quâ lapsus fuerat, invideret, &c. haec erat ejus praedicanda justitia. Yet when Julian was dead, and Jovian a Catholick Emperour succeeded, the Donatists bewailed his death, and often wished that their good Protector were alive again: Julianum ab inferis excita∣retis. St. Aug. ubi supra. As to the third particular, it would fill a Volume to acquaint you that Outrages were committed by the Donatists upon the Ortho∣dox during Julian's Reign: I shall onely name one or two, that may parallel those which were committed by the Pagans. The first shall be from Optatus, p. 55. Felix and Janu∣arius, two Donatist Bishops came to the Castle of Lemelle, where the Catholicks had a Church; which being shut against them, they com∣manded
the Rabble that followed them to pull it down: who presently got upon the roof and uncovered it; and perceiving the Deacons defending the Altar, they threw down the Tile-stones, and slew two of the Deacons in the place. In Thypasia a Citie of Mauritania, Albanius Formensis and Felix Idicrensis, with their bloudy Companions, as∣saulted an Assembly of the Catholicks while they were at their Devotions; and driving them out of the Church, slew and wounded a great part of them, without respect of Sex or Age: The Bread of the Consecrated Eucha∣rist they threw to their Dogs; which having eaten it, by the Judgment of God grew mad, and fell on their Masters, renting some of them in pieces: They sold the Consecrated Chalices to Women for vile uses, or to the Heathen for the service of their Gods; pul∣ling down the Altars; and burnt the books of the Holy Scriptures. Felix one of their Leaders deflowered a Virgin that had a little before owned him for her Spiritual Father. None of the Heathen committed greater Out∣rages than some of their Bishops. And by their instigation, Julian shut up their Church-doors. Honorius the Emperour posted them for it, and caused an Edict to be set up in pub∣lick places as a Memorial, Quo omnibus inno∣tescat, & Catholicae confidentiae constantia, &
Donatistarum desperatio & fucata perfidia; of the constancie of the Catholicks, and the base∣ness of the Donatists in making use of Julian's power to oppress them. These practices gave occasion to Ammianus Marcellinus to say, No Beasts were more cruel to Christians, than they were to one another. And they who shall close with Usurpers and Persecutors to favour and support their Faction against a true Church, deserve to be stigmatized as those Donatists were, In perpetuam rei memoriam. P. 27. of the Alexandrian Synod, Zozomen (lib. 5. cap. 11.) gives us a better account. You are ready to catch at every thing that may make for a Toleration of Schism and Heresie, and therefore mention their Agree∣ment not to use those terms which might puzzle ordinary understandings, and not on every occasion in Popular Orations, but in disputes against the Hereticks that denied the Consubstantiality of the Son and Holy Ghost. But you omit their confirmation of the Nicene Council, which Zozomen there names, (viz.) That Athanasius and Eusebius having assem∣bled the Bishops of divers Cities, did confirm the Decrees of that Council, and confessed that the Son and the Holy Ghost were consubstantial with the Father; and these they named the Trinity; and that they desired onely that the wordsandmight not be used at that
time, , unseasonably to disturb the Church, and continue strife and disputes: but when the errours of Sabellius came in their way, they ought to refute them. However, it were well if the Dissenters would make the same use which you say the Christians did, (espe∣cially having once been inslaved by one as bad as Julian already) i.e. to be united with the Orthodox: this might be a means not onely to secure us from our fears of a Popish Successor, but also what may prove as destru∣ctive, those dangerous Heresies which when our Succession was interrupted did over-run the Land, and brought all things Sacred and Civil into Confusion. You conclude your Preface thus: I have been as careful in the Citations as ever I was in telling Money; and can onely say as they usually do in that case, I hope it is all right: and if it should chance in any one particular to prove o∣therwise, am ready to make it good. I have not yet time to account over your Money; I fear it will fall short of the value you pretend it to be▪ for at first view, I perceive the me∣tal is base and counterfeit, and intended to put a Cheat on the common sort of Christi∣stians, who are not well acquainted with such Brimigems. Besides, a great part of it is un∣reasonably clipt; and though you profess your self ready (as to particular Quotations) I
fear you will never be able to make just satis∣faction as to the Summa Totalis, i. e. you can never make good your designe, That it is law∣ful for Christians to resist their Princes on pre∣tence of Religion. But to ease you of your af∣flicting thoughts, at present I shall take my leave of you, desiring you well to meditate on the following story. — Rodolphus Duke of Suevia swore Allegiance to Henry the Fourth: Pope Hildebrand absolves him of his Oath, being perswaded by some of the Popes Clergie to a Revolt. After which, he never prospered; and by Gods just judgment, his right hand, with which he swore, gangren'd, and was cut off. Whereupon, he told some of those Bi∣shops that had disswaded him from his Alle∣giance, This is the hand that was lifted up when I swore Fidelity to my Emperour, which is now justly cut off for my Perjury and Rebellion; for which you are to answer who perswaded me to those perfidious practices. Should I that have taken the Oaths of Supremacie and Allegiance, and made such a Declaration as is above-men∣tioned, by any Writing renounce the same, and teach others so to do; I should think the loss of that hand which was instrumental in it, a very gentle and easie punishment.
THE CHAPTERS ANSWERED. An Answer to our Author's CHAP. I. A short Account of Julian's Life. I Shall not interrupt my Discourse, which is designed as a Vindication of the Loy∣alty of the Primitive Christians, against the false, impudent, and impious Ca∣lumnies of this Author, with a Histo∣ry of Julian's Life, which I intend in a more full and impartial Relation by it self. It shall therefore suffice to observe here with our Au∣thor, p. 9. That Julian charged the people that they should injure none of the Christians, nor reproach them, nor draw them to sacrifice a∣gainst
their wills. So that the violencies of∣fered to the Christians, were more from the insolencie of the Heathen, than any Law made by Julian, as our Author observes. And in∣deed the Heathen, even in Julian's time, ne∣ver acted such Cruelties upon the Christians, as the Arians and Donatists did; which made Ammianus Marcellinus a Heathen, to say, that no Beasts were so cruel to one another as the Christians were. And, in a word, if we should  all that our Author says of Julian's per∣ting the Christians in this Chapter, and all that he says of the Christians persecuting Ju∣lian in all the rest, to be true, we might be tempted to think that the Christians were the greatest Persecutors.
An Answer to our Author's CHAP. II. THis Chapter you say contains the sense of the Primitive Christians about his Succession; of which you speak, p. 19. under these two heads: 1. how the Succession stood, and 2. what Right and Title Julian had to suc∣ceed to the Empire. This first, I confess, you have (but against your will) clearly stated; and it will be enough to discredit all that you suggest concerning the second; which is, That the Christians would have been willing to set aside his Title, and to have excluded him purely for his Religion; which upon your Reasons I suppose the generalitie of Chri∣stians would never have attempted, though some few might have been willing enough. As to the first, the reason you mention from Eusebius is, That the Throne of the Empire de∣scended to Constantine from his Father, and by the Law of Nature (which is a divine Law) was reserved for his Sons and their Posteritie, and was to descend for ever, as another Paternal Inheritance doth. And that this is the Law of Nature, you confirm from Eumenius a Hea∣then
then, (and others) who says, It was not the ca∣sual consent of men, or any sudden effect of their favour, which made (Julian) a Prince; he gai∣ned it by being born into the world: which seems to me the first and greatest Gift of the Gods. Now if by the Law of Nature, as well as of the Empire, Julian was to succeed; I cannot see how the Christians could by their Principles resist him in the administration of it, without resisting the Ordinance of God. For this, I have quoted Dr. Hammond's Paraphrase on Rom. 13.1, 2. &c. and that Saying of Tacitus, That we ought to endure wicked Prin∣ces as we do Inundations or Scarcitie, which are of Gods sending. These, you say, p. 20. are full and pregnant proofs; and I think, ad hominem cogent: for if, as you observe from Eusebius, the Empire was to descend as other Paternal Inheritances, then it must be more unlawful to resist or ex∣clude a Prince from enjoying his Inheritance, than any private person. And then surely no sound Christian could have joyned in an Ad∣dress to Constantius to exclude a person ap∣pointed as it were by the Voice of God, as you say of Constantine that he was declared absolute Emperour by the  and long before that, by God himself the great King of all, p. 21. And St. Augustine says the same, viz. God that gave the Empire to Constantine, gave it to Julian.
Onely by the way, I do not think that your , nor  neither, will, in the sence of the Greek Fathers, bear your interpreta∣tion of the Law of Nature: for  is often used by Greek Authors for Custom. And I believe that Father whom you mention, in∣tended no more than a Right of Succession for two or three Generations; which carried the name of a Law, as it doth also in our Common Law, where Consuetudo Lex est. And it is well known, that when the Heirs of the Emperors have been living, the Roman Souldiers have created their Emperours out of Obscure Fa∣milies: but these are no Patterns for us Chri∣stians to follow, nor for us in this Nation a∣bove others. For William the Conqueror claimed the Crown not so much by his Sword, as by Right of Succession, (if you will believe the Author of that Fanatical book called The Rights of the Kingdom) to King Edward, whose Kinsman he was, and his Heir by Will, as appears by the Laws of St. Edward and William, p. 197. So that in this respect the Descent of the Crown of England is much more firm and established than that of the Empire, having been continued through more Generations, and confirmed by many Laws, which whoever shall infringe, takes off the Government from its Hinges, and leaves all to Confusion. For when a private Estate is
intailed on a man and his Heirs, it is necessary that to bar the Heir, and alienate the Estate, the original Intail must be cut off, and then he that is in possession may dispose of the Inhe∣ritance to one or more. And perhaps this was the intent of the Bill for Exclusion, to make it an Act for the Dissolution of Monarchy, and reduce us to a Commonwealth again. And it were better we should suffer some Inconve∣niencies (if the Will of God be so) which yet are uncertain, than against the Will of God to do things unjust, and draw more cer∣tain troubles on our own heads. For in the Contest between the Houses of York and Lan∣caster, when the first alway pleaded the Right of Descent, the other alleadged the Acts of Parliaments; there were infinite troubles, which cost the lives of above 200000 men, whereof eight were Kings and Princes, forty Dukes, Marquesses and Earls, besides Barons and Gentlemen; and after all, the Kingdom fixed on this Maxime, Jus Sanguinis nullo Jure dirimi possit, i. e. The Right of Bloud cannot be abrogated by any Law. And the Author of the Rights of the Kingdom says, that in the days of Henry the Third and Richard the First, when was a motion of some great men that a Bastard might inherit, the Parliament at Merton cried out, Nolumus leges Angliae mu∣tare, p. 264. Therefore I wonder that the
same Author, p. 98. making a Supposition. That if any one man of all the Commons in Par∣liament should usurp the Crown with all its dues: (He mentions not the whole House, for that hath been done already) What should I? what may I do? (saith he) and answers, Nothing, but mind my Calling, and at∣tend the Judgment of the highest Court that I know, that may command my Body and Judge∣ment much. It is a Maxime in our Law, That the King never dies: The King and his Heirs are looked on in the eye of the Law as an In∣dividual; and to prevent Tumults and Dis∣putes, they are joyned in most of those Acts that concern the Dignity of the Crown and publick Peace; and the Son hath sometime been Crowned in his Fathers life-time. Yet we plead not Providence in the long continu∣ance of the Succession, nor the Law of the Land, upon which for other matters you lay the stress of your whole Discourse; but upon the Law of God, Deut. 17.8. where it was ordain∣ed as a Statute of Judgment, (i. e. say Fagius and Munster, a firm and immutable Law, and as the Vulgar, Sanctum Lege perpetua) That IF A MAN DYE WITHOƲT CHILDREN, THE INHERITANCE MƲST BE GIVEN TO HIS BRETHREN. And Ainsworth from Solomon Jarchi, says, The Brother of him that was dead, or his Brothers seed, shall inherit. All
this hath been observed by the Law of Nations where Kingdoms are hereditary, That as it is unjust, so it hath been always unhappie to alter the Succession; and even in private e∣states, the disinheriting the right Heir hath been very much condemned and unfortu∣nate. And yet, (p. 22. you say) the Fathers had the Conscience to set aside such a Title. They could not do it with a good Conscience, the thing being in it self evil: for as the Law of God forbids to countenance a poor man in his Cause, so doth it also to defraud the rich, or follow a multitude to do evil, neither to speak in a cause to decline after many to wrest judg∣ment. None of us would judge it reasonable to be deprived of his right contrary to Law; and why then should we think it lawful to deprive another of that right to which we owe the preservation of our own? Athenago∣ras more clearly shews what was the consent of the Fathers in this case: We pray for your Empire, and that the Son, as it is just, may succeed in his Fathers Throne. And yet they both were Pagans. But what would the Consent of Fathers, and the sense of the primitive Chri∣stians signifie against the Decree and Laws of Heaven? who cannot more plainly declare his will to us, than by the voice of Nature, by his written Word, by pointing out, as by his
finger, in his Providence, in making Heirs to Kingdoms as well as other Estates by a long and legal discent: and, as St. Augustine said, God that gave the Empire to good Constantine, gave it also to Julian. So Tertullian: Inde est Impe∣rator, unde & Homo antequam Imperator.—And Irenoeus: By whose command they were born Men, by his they are ordained Kings. And yet all this Crack of the Fathers and Primitive Christians, and (p. 31.) the whole Christian world, produceth nothing but a flash of Rhetorick from an Invective in Gregory Na∣zianzen against Julian; from which if we ap∣peal to the same Author in a more temperate and Christian Zeal, when he delivered him∣self dogmatically to the people committed to his charge, we shall find him teaching and exhorting a different Doctrine and Pra∣ctice from what is here delivered by him: of which I shall speak at large hereafter; and onely note by the way, That the Oration was made long after Julian's death: which savou∣red not very much of humanity; and if it were upon occasion of some disappointment, as is reported, it had as little of Christianity. And this will appear a truth, that he did ex∣ceed as well in the praise of Constantius the first Arian Emperiour, as in the dispraise of Julian, and the misrepresentation of the Chri∣stians in his time. All which circumstances
considered, and no other proof produced, our Authour deserves to do publick Penance for a∣busing the Fathers and Primitive Christians, and, as he saies, the whole Christian world. And yet what can Gregory blame in Constantius, but that which he calls his Ignorance or Mi∣stake? not being aware of his Apostacie. And it was too unchristian to blame the Emperour not onely for making him a King, but keeping him alive. This (you say, p. 24.) is enough to shew that Constantius would never have made Julian Caesar if he had known him to have been such. And, in my judgment, here is as much said to prove that Constantius ought to have slain him when his Brother Gallus was slain; Although this was a thing which he repented of in his Death-bed, and would undoubtedly be more unworthy of a Christian Emperour to exclude him out of the life, than to leave him to a Succession that descended by inheritance to him. And if it be such a Bill of Exclusion that you contend for, I am sure none of the Fathers nor any good Christian would ever consent to it. P. 24. Is an Exclamation against the Empe∣rour, having first said that Constantius did far ex∣cel all other Kings in Wisdom and Ʋnderstanding, p. 25. and that he was led by the Hand of God into every Counsel and Enterprize (what, in tur∣ning Arian, and persecuting Athanasius and o∣ther
Orthodox Bishops, and putting Arians in their seats?) your wisdom was admired above your power, and again your power more than your wisdom: but your Piety was valued above them both. Then he comes to blame the Emperour as the onely ignorant and inconsiderate per∣son — and which of the Devils stole in along with you at that Consult? And yet again, p. 26. he saies of this first Arian Emperour, That he would have parted not onely with his Em∣pire, and all that he had in this world, even his Life it self, for the securitie and safetie of the Christian Religion, &c. And our Author saies, that at his death he shewed with much ear∣nestness the concernment he had for the true Reli∣gion, p. 28, 29. But for ought I yet see, Julian's Apostacie was not yet known, but he was generally ac∣counted both a pious and a stout man; and therefore his repenting of making Julian Cae∣sar was not on the account of Religion, but for some other respect, Julian having been declared Augustus by his Souldiers, who often disposed of the Empire, and being then on his march to dispute the Title with Constan∣tius; (for hitherto Julian kept to the Chri∣stian Assemblies, and was not known to be a Pagan, as you shew from Ammianus Marcelli∣nus, p. 28.) After that Julian was declared Emperour, he still feigned himself a Christian;
and though in private he performed his Heathen∣ish Rites, trusting some few with the secret, yet he publickly went to Church on Twelfth-day; and after he had been devout at the Service, he came away again. This was done at Vienna, not quite Ten Moneths before the Emperour's death. This is all that our Author produceth for the sense of the Fathers and primitive Chri∣stians for the Exclusion of Julian; his Title was divine, his Religion at most onely suspected, not know. Yet saies our Author, p. 30. If this Doctrine (concerning the alteration of Succession) shall displease any, which is contra∣ry to what these Fathers (which will not a∣mount to one single person) assert with so much vehemencie: He thinks it reasonable that first they confute this Doctrine (of Exclusion) which they dislike. And secondly, That they would never fetch their Mountebank-Receipts of Prayers and Tears▪ and suchlike encouragements to Arbitrarie Government, out of the Writings of these very Fathers. This our Author knew could easily be done, and therefore he thought to prejudice his Readers against it, by calling them Mountebank-Receipts, and Antimonarchi∣cal Authors, and encouragements to Arbitrarie Government. Than which I scarce know a∣ny thing more profane, but the down-right Blasphemie of the Doctrine of Christ, and the
practice of the best Christians, who counted not their lives dear unto them, that the Doctrine of the Gospel might not be evil spoken of, as if Christianity were an utter Enemie to Caesar, or as another Mahomet to establish his King∣dom by the Sword. What an easie matter doth our Author think it, to impose any false∣hood on the Vulgar, when he tells them of Fathers and primitive Christians with so much vehemencie asserting the lawfulness of exclu∣ding Julian; and instead of all other proofs, produceth onely a Rhetorical Expression of a person in some passion; from which it might be proved as lawful to Murder Julian, as to Exclude him from the Succession? Hercules tuam fidem! But to answer our Author's de∣mand. I shall endeavour to confute his Doctrine, (viz.) That the Fathers and Primitive Chri∣stians of the whole World were for the Exclu∣sion of Julian from the Empire. Iraeneus, Ter∣tullian, and St. Augustin, you have seen to be of a contrarie Judgment. 1. The true Christians could not be for it, upon your Position, That he had a right to it by the Law of Nature, and the Hand of God gave it him: which you seem to assert. 2. It is certain the Arian Fathers were not, as hath been alreadie shewn; they congratulated Julian's advent to the Kingdom: Much less
could the Orthodox be for it upon Gregories surmise that Constantius would have excluded him out of the Life as well as the Empire. 3. From their behaviour towards Constan∣tius a vehement Arian, the Orthodox Fathers shew they were not for Exclusion. Constans his Brother was joyned with him in the Em∣pire, and he defended Athanasius and the Or∣thodox Bishops against Constantius; yet these Christians never sided with Constans against Constantius: they never resisted or sought to depose or exclude him, although his Heresie was extreamly dangerous, and propagated by Force and Persecution of more eminent Divines than any that suffered under Julian. And as our Author says that Poperie is ten times worse than Paganism; so I have heard as wise and good men as himself say, that Socinianism is as bad as Poperie; and the Ari∣ans, who denied the Deity of the Son and the Holy Ghost, were much like our Socinians. Mr. Baxter hath so much Charitie as to think that some that died in the Communion of the Church of Rome are Saints in Heaven; though he will scarce grant it to such as die in the Communion of the Church of England, and therefore much less to those that die in the belief of the Socinians, who renounce the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, and the use and efficacie of the Holy Sacraments.
4. Constantius himself would never have consented to the Murder of Julian, upon due consideration; the Murder of others being repented of upon his Death-bed: and here is but one Argument for both his Exclusion and his Murder. Now although our Author hath sufficient∣ly refuted himself in what hath been said, yet because the Calumnie against the Chri∣stians of that Age, though asserted onely with noise and confidence, (and, as the say∣ing is, Fortiter Calumniare aliquid adhaerebit) may beget a false opinion both of those Pri∣mitive Christians, and the Doctrine of Chri∣stianitie it self, and also infect the present Generation, in which too many are glad to hear what power they may exercise on such Governours as are not of their own Judg∣ment; I shall in due time enquire strictly in∣to this Authors Opinion concerning Resistance, and shew, that his whole Fabrick will be crush'd by the authoritie and reason of those very Authors upon whose bare names he seeks to raise it. But for this I must desire the Readers patience.
An Answer to our Author's CHAP. III. Their Behaviour towards him in Words. THe Reader may understand that our Author hath done with Julian as a Successor, and now shews how the Christians treated him when he was in full possession of the Empire, and that by Divine Appointment (as he grants). And therefore I hope it will be considered, that the following Reflections do shew, from the practice of the Christians of that Age, how the Christians of this may behave themselves towards their lawful Go∣vernours. And he begins, p. 32. with a great varietie of Instances, as he calls them, of the hatred and contempt of those Christians towards Julian. And I shall also desire that the Rea∣der will consider not onely the matters of fact, but the lawfulness of such Words and A∣ctions as were spoken and done against Julian. A facto ad jus non valet argumentum. And then by what number of Christians, and of what condition they were that spoke and acted such things as were spoken and acted: For we have known in our Age such things spoken
and done, by no small companie of men, a∣gainst a Prince of known Integrity, as will make all sober Christians to be ashamed and confounded at the report of them. And if such behaviour of our present Christians shall be a hundred years hence read in our Annals, it will be a grand Calumnie against such as were more Loyal and Pious, for any Reader to conclude that such was the general pra∣ctice of the Christians in that Age; or that because one discontented Bishop turn'd Apo∣state, and fought against his Prince, that all the Bishops and Christians then alive were Re∣bels. P. 33. Of their behaviour you inform us under these three Heads. 1. Of their Words. 2. Their Actions. 3. Their Devotions. Of their Words. You say they were quit with him for calling them Galilaeans, in calling him Idolianus. This, I confess, savours of the Wit of that Age: So the Arians called Athanasius Sathanasius; so the Pharisees cal∣led our Saviour Beelzebub. But did they re∣turn railing for railing? I am sure they taught us to return Blessing and Prayers even to our Persecutors. What if the Antiochians libel∣led him, and plaid with his Beard, and twit∣ted him with some natural Blemishes and Im∣perfections, whereof he himself gives the world an account in his Misopogon? Is that
sufficient authority for us to libel our Gover∣nours? Is it becoming a Christian to deride the bodily Infirmities, as the Shape of the Bo∣dy, the Gate, the Beard, and, as you say, p. 33. every thing that belonged to him? Julian him∣self shewed more wisdom and humanity in scorning these impotent Reproaches, than they did Christianity in seeking by such boyish language to vex every Vein in his Royal Heart, p. 66. It is a sign that he had more of mo∣deration than they; for had they had his Power, (by your description of them) they wanted no Will utterly to ruine him. But I think it more agreeable to Truth, though some few over-zealous persons might Lampoon his sorrie Beard as fit to make Ropes of, &c. that yet the generality were better princi∣pled, and neither used their Tongues nor their Swords against that Heathen Emperour. As for those that did so reproach him, Julian tells them truly they had renounced the Laws, and him that had the keeping of them, (i. e. They dealt with him, as you say, like Barbari∣ans). And if the Christians were first in the Transgression, it was not like Julian would be long behind them, or be less barbarous than they. And yet though he could have re∣venged himself with the Sword, he did it one∣ly with the Pen: And when he was put into a fit of anger, he onely told them as a
punishment that he would see them no more. Nondum ira quam ex compellationibus & probris conceperat emolitâ loquebatur, aspe∣riùs se eos asserens postea non visurum, Am. Marcell. l. 23. I think in this particular one would take them to be the Apostates, and not Julian (as you say, p. 66.) P. 36. You give a particular instance of a single man in Berea, whose Son warping to the false Religion, his Father turned him out of doors and disinherited him; who related this whole matter to the Emperour, then coming to Berea. The Emperour being arrived, invited among other Magistrates and Chief men, this young man and his Father, and set these two next himself; and tells the Father, that in his mind it was not just to force a mans Judgment otherwise inclined, to reduce it to the other side: Therefore don't you (saies Julian) force your Son against his mind to follow your Opinion; for nei∣ther do I force you to follow mine, though I could easily compel you. The Father sharpning his Dis∣course, with a Divine Faith, answered, O King, do you speak of this Villain, who is hated by God, and hath preferred a Lye, before the true Religion? But saies Julian, putting on a vizard of Meekness again, Friend, leave railing; and turning to the young man, said, I will take care of you my self, since I have not prevailed with your Father to do it. This Berean deserves
the Title of Noble for his Zeal; but it reach∣eth not to a demonstration of what you pro∣duce it for, p. 35. that the Christians took the freedom to reproach him and his Religion to his face: for though he despised his Religion, yet for ought that appears, he owned his Authori∣ty, and reverenced his Person, bespeaking him by the Title of O King. And here is no ex∣ample for railing words, neither from that No∣ble Berean against Julian, nor from Julian a∣gainst him. P. 38. you give another instance of Maris Bishop of Chalcedon, who being blind, was led to the Emperour as he was Sacrificing to Fortune, for which he called him Impious Apostate, and Atheist; and Julian reproached him again with his blindness, saying, his Galilaean God would not cure him. Maris replied, I thank God for stri∣king me with blindness, that I may not see thy face. This was bold and well; for he refle∣cted not on his Person, but his Paganism. The sayings of Juventinus and Maximus you think fit to omit; but I shall shortly mind you of them. It is strange that our Author could find no instances more pertinent to his purpose than these two, wherein (as he says, p. 45.) they shewed themselves to be men of like passions with other men: though neither of them shewed themselves to be men of a capricious humour, but declaring their just indignation against his
Apostacie, yet spared his Person and his Office; as knowing that they ought not to speak evil of the Ruler of the People, though they were such as had been Ʋsurpers, and caused them to be smitten contrary to the Law, as St. Paul informs us; much less when they onely smite us with their tongues, as Julian did in the case alledged. And if it were done in passion, as you intimate, you know how our Saviour condemned that in his own Disciples that would call for fire from Heaven on the Samaritans. Now against the speaking evil of Dignities, which Jude, vers. 8. sharply reproves in the Gnosticks of his time, I shall produce the pra∣ctices of other eminent Christians, even in Ju∣lians Reign. Athanasius was a great Pillar of the Church at that time, and a great example of passive Obedience under the severe Persecu∣tions both of Constantius and Julian; yet he gave his Oath that he never spake evil of him, as you shall hear anon. St. Ambrose spake of the same times, The Christian Ledentibus non irascitur, Spoliantibus non resistit, caedentibus non repugnat, &c. Lactantins lived somewhat sooner, but shews the practice of Christians in his time, which was under Dioclesian and Ma∣ximian, the two greatest Tyrants: Cum tam nefanda perpetimur, NE VERBO quidem reluctamur, sed Deo remittimus ultionem, Instit. l. 5. c. 21. and the same patience he says was
practised every where; That though they en∣dured unspeakable miseries, yet none of the Chri∣stians did resist, so much as in a word. P. 38. It would be endless (you say; that is, it would not be to your end and intent) to reckon up the Sayings of Juventinus and Ma∣ximus; which you name again, p. 39. but wisely pass by. For they being accused for speaking against Julian, by some such Witnes∣ses as your self, do without any maledictions thus plead for themselves: We, O Emperour, who were brought up in the true Religion, and have lived in obedience to those excellent Laws made by Constantine and his Sons, cannot but greatly lament to see all things defiled with im∣pietie—our Meats and Drink are polluted. (The Emperour had caused some of the Water, or the Sacrifices offered to his Gods, to be mixt or sprinkled with their Meat; which did not hinder the most Christians from using them, according to what the Apostle allowed, 1 Cor. 10.): But do they rail or rebel? No: they are Lachrymists; Those things (say they) cause us to shed many tears at home, and they con∣strain us to make our sorrowful complaint before thee. We are offended at nothing else in your Government. This you wisely omitted; u∣sing onely their names, to make up a number. Ad populum has Phaleras.
An Answer to our Author's CHAP. IV. Of their Actions. FRom their Words you come to speak of Blows; yet none that I perceive fell up∣on Julian's person: for you give us but two Instances of this; and neither of them reached his person, and but one an Officer that was in∣feriour to him that struck him: and that was Valentinian, a Colonel of the Houshold-guards, who as he was going before the Em∣perour to the Temple of Fortune, was sprin∣kled with Holy Water by one of the Chaplains (as our Author calls him): which coming nigh to Valentinian's Clothes, he strook the Sacrist, saying, It would rather defile than cleanse him. I am at a loss how to reconcile this History with another more generally re∣ported by Gregory Nazianzen, as well as o∣thers, That Valentinian voluntarily stript himself of his Military Girdle (that is, laid down his Commission) upon an Edict of Juli∣an's, That no Christian should bear Office in his Army; for which noble act St. Augustine (De civit. Dei, lib. 18. cap. 52.) calls him a Con∣fessor.
But if it be true that he was Colonel of the Guards when he made this Assault, and that Julian ipso facto sent him away to a Garison lying by a Desart to spend his days there, then the other History must be false; and I think it more safe to believe that History which Gregory Nazianzen delivers, attested by many others, than that which comes on the single report of Theodoret. But if the Colonel of the Guards had struck a Sprinkler of Holy Water, what was this to the striking of Julian? The next Instance is from a passage of Gre∣gory Nazianzen, of which this is a brief account. Who is there to be found that more despised the Emperour, or had a greater hand in destroying him, than my Father? Of his contempt, amongst many others, both those Archers and THEIR COMMANDER are a proof, whom HE BROƲGHT against our Church, as either to take possession of it, or to destroy it: for ha∣ving assaulted many others; he came hither like∣wise with the same intent, and imperiously de∣manded the Temple. He so far failed of accom∣plishing any thing of what he desired, that if he had not presently got out of my Fathers way (be∣ing aware of it, either of himself, or by some bo∣dies advice) he might have gone away kicked; the Bishop boyling with Anger against him, and with Zeal for the Temple. A very hot fit of Anger and Zeal together, it must needs be, that
did animate so ancient a Bishop (being ninety years old) to lift up his heel against a young Emperour of thirty two, in the head of an Ar∣my, who having assaulted many other Chur∣ches, came resolved to seize this also. Who can think Julian would be diverted with the notice of the old Bishops lying in wait for him; or that he who had read what David said concerning Saul, (after that he also had apostatized from God, as I suppose that old Bishop had done) viz. Who can lift up his hand against the Lords Anointed & be guiltless, 1 Sam. 26.9. should think of lifting up his heels against Julian in the head of his Army? Either there∣fore this must be such an  as is not to be parallel'd in all Longinus, or such an heroick intention as never entered into the heart of a∣ny Zealot among the Jews. But to come more close to the matter; you say, p. 43. You have often tried to make this beating intended for the Captain of the Archers, and have been ready to make Solaecisms in the Greek, to avoid the grea∣ter Soloecism of an Emperour of the world awed and terrified with the fear of a kicking. But it will not do. No; the Proverb hinders it, None so blind as he that will not see. It might have been done easily enough, if you had not committed a Soloecism your self, in transla∣ting the word , he Brought, but had kept the righter sence of that word, which Billius,
the learned Interpreter of Gregory Nazianzen translates immiserat, he sent; or, which your Elias Cretensis useth, concitabat, he stirred up, or compelled to go against that Church; which if the Emperour had been in person, he need not to have done. And therefore I suppose Gregory Nazianzen meant it of the Captain of the Archers, that demanded the Church , not pro imperio, by virtue of a Mandamus or Commission from the Empe∣rour: for sure the Emperour himself needed no such Commission. Nor is it probable that the Emperour himself would in his March a∣gainst Persia trot up and down from one Church to another: for you say, he had as∣saulted many others to make a seizure of them. Nor is it a Soloecism to say the Emperour seized those Churches which another did seize by his command. Our Author I suppose was led in∣to this errour by taking the word  from , which signifieth induco, to lead or intro∣duce: whereas the Interpreters that render it immitto, or concito, being better Grecians than himself, understand it to be from the Verb , of which every Lexicon will give him such a sence, as that, without a wresting of it, it must refer to the Captain of the Archers. But we are come to the end of this Tragi-co∣medy: The Emperour kept himself in a whole skin; the Bishops Anger vented it self some
other way, and all was husht and calmed. But certainly our Author, who hath first be∣gun this Quarrel between the Emperour and the Bishop, is much to be blamed, whether he did it ignorantly (which is the best constru∣ction that his Friends can make) or else ma∣liciously, which appears by forsaking the Translations of Billius and Cretensis, and pre∣ferring another that might favour his designe. And I challenge him to be as big as his word, and make satisfaction for this base Coinage. And that you may not be guilty of such a wilful mistake for the future, I shall give you this Token to be worn as a Frontlet on your brow, That from  is derived , an Insti∣gator. P. 44. Here you have a description of one of the Lachrymists of old, &c. How far this Bi∣shop was a Lachrymist, we shall see hereafter. It were fitter for the Wit of a Julian, than the Piety of a Christian, to deride the Prayers and Tears of those ancient Christians. Whatever Garlands and Trophies Nazianzen or Basil ere∣cted for that old Bishop, are now pulled down by the hands of a young P— who represents him as a Hector, and a Striker, expresly con∣trary to our Saviour's Example, and St. Paul's Injunction. You adde, p. 44. And now I know no more than the Pope of Rome, what to make of all this;
what they meant by it, or on what Principles they proceeded. I question not the Principles of those in whom you have instanced; it suf∣ficeth me that you say it was done in a fit of boiling anger. But when, speaking of the Principles of such as offer violence to their lawful Emperours, you say you know nò more than the Pope of Rome: I say, it is pity that you should know or divulge half so much: For what you have suggested concerning these pretended Violences offered by Primi∣tive Christians to their lawful Emperours, hath a very malign influence on the present Age; and for this and other such Reasons, (as I said) I would rather lose my right hand than be the Author of them. But if you know their Principles as well as the Pope of Rome, you know he holds it lawful to depose or kill any Prince whom he shall judge and Excommunicate as a Heretick or Tyrant; and he can teach you to distinguish between resisting Julian, and resisting the Devil that was in him: That the King is Ʋni∣versis minor, and that the people who gave him his power may resume it, &c. You say, p. 45. none of those Bishops had e∣ver been in Scotland, nor had learnt to fawn upon an Apostate, and a mortal Enemie to Reli∣gion. Parcius ista: For though some may think you are reflecting only on a Popish Suc∣cessor;
yet others, considering you speak of Julian, who was now a lawful Emperour, may stretch this line too far. Scotland in∣deed hath been glutted with the bloud of their Kings; whereof about Thirtie have sussered violent Deaths. I acquit those Bishops from confederacie with Scotland; they never con∣tributed to the destruction of any: I wish I could do so by the Presbyterians. Yet I per∣ceive you know how to yoak the Popes Bull and the Scotish Heifer together, and with them to make large Furrows on the backs of Kings. There was, I remember, for a∣bove Forty years since, a great Correspondence between Rome and Scotland, who then com∣municated their Principles to each other; and though none of the old Bishops were ac∣quainted with them, yet some late Presbyters have espoused them, and can on all occasi∣ons (for the disturbance of our English Na∣tion) talk as Whiggishly as ever Knox or Bu∣chanan did. But they are so disingenuous as to conceal the names of their good Teachers, from whom they learned to distinguish not onely between Julian and the Devil in him, but between Charles Stuart and the King, that they might destroy him in a double capacity; first, as a King, and then as a Man. And if, as you say, the Laws of our Land do not al∣low any one to imagine violence to their lawful
Emperour: And if, as Bracton says, fama apud graves & bonos viros, is a proof of Treason, I fear an Indictment may lie against the Au∣thor of Julian's Life; for that— Not having the fear of God before his Eyes, but being mo∣ved, &c. It is therefore a most profane and Reproachful inference, with which you con∣clude Chap. 6. That in that Age the best Prayers and Tears were those that contributed most to Julian's destruction.
An Answer to our Author's CHAP. V. Of their Devotions: And first of their Psalms. THis was indeed the Devotion of our late Times, to begin with a Psalm, not regarding the Scriptures, or as much as the Commandments, Creed, or Lords Prayer; and then to preach in their Prayers, and pray in their Preaching; or, if you will, in our Au∣thors Language, to say their Prayers back∣ward. In their Devotions, you say, p. 45. It might be expected we should see the flights of their self-denying and suffering Religion; and one may expect they should lay aside their annimositie against Julian, though he were their Ememie, and for that reason pray the harder for him.— This certainly was their duty, where∣in they might have shewn themselves Chri∣stians indeed: But this, our Author thinks, was fit onely for the Christians in Dioclesians time, and those that lived in the most Primi∣tive times. I am as sure that they used the right method of Devotion in praying for their Heathen Persecutors, as our Author can be of what he seems to glorie in, that these in Ju∣lian's
time prayed the wrong way, p. 46. They cannot sing a Psalm (saies he) but they make his Confusion the burden of it. Such Psalms as these, are none of the Songs of Sion, which should make for Peace; nor had he the Wis∣dom of Solomon that composed them, or they the Spirit of Christ that sung them. Our Saviour (as we read) sung a Hymn a little be∣fore his Passion; but it was not for confusion of those that came to apprehend and crucified him; he prayed for them: Father, forgive them, &c. Now though the Brethren of Scot∣land bave been silent of late, yet among the Sisters there are many such sweet Singers still, who in their Rhapsodies dart up Arrows, Fire∣brands, and Death against Heaven it self; which have deservedly recoiled on their own heads, and spoiled their singing. And if such be their running Verses, and the Burden of their Songs, sing Quicunque vult for me; I will be none of that black Quire: St. Stephens example is fitter for a Christian, who prayed for his Persecutors while they were stoning of him, Lord, lay not this sin to their charge, Acts 7. v. 60. And all sober Christians will rather take St. James his advice than the Au∣thor of Julian, who tells us, if we use our Tongues to bless God even the Father, and to curse men which are made after the similitude of God, (and Princes have a double Image of
God; as they are Men, and as they are Prin∣ces) if we are double-tongued, and out of the same mouth proceeds blessing and cursing: my brethren (saies he) these things ought not so to be, James 3.9, 10. And now let us con∣sider his Proofs. And first, as to the instance of those who removed the Bones of Babilas; it was ill done to set David's Psalms to the tune of Sheba's Trumpet, We have no portion in David, neither have we any inheritance in the Son of Jesse: Every man to his Tents, O Is∣rael. Doubtless, they should rather have prayed for his Conversion than his Confusion. How unsuitable was this to the Funeral-So∣lemnitie of a Martyr, when they should have rather blessed God for the example of the Faith and Patience of Babilas, than have provoked the Emperour to have made it their own Fu∣neral-dirge! Our Saviour advised his Disci∣ples to flee from persecution, not to draw it on their own heads. The second instance, is of Publia and her Maidens, who sung to the same tune, and contra∣ry to what St. James prescribes; having praised God her Creator, by and by, in a fit of Rage, whereof (you say, p. 50.) there seemed to be some quantitie, she turned her Devotion into Curses plainly levell'd at the head of Ju∣lian: And it is a wonder, that having to do with such an Emperour, that they had not like
Swans ended their Lives with their Songs. But did any companie of Christians at that time meet solemnly together, and make use of such a Directorie for their publick Devo∣tions? No; they were but the passionate acts of a few private persons, contrary to the gene∣ral practice of the Fathers and serious Chri∣stians, as shall most undeniably appear anon. But this calls to my mind a more rude and barbarous behaviour of some (who accounted themselves the best Christians) towards the Royal Martyr, who honouring one of their Congregations with his presence, when they came to sing a Psalm, by whose instigation it was I know not, the 52 Psalm was named, and begun to be read: Why dost thou Tyrant boast abroad Thy wicked works to praise? Whereat the good King lifting up himself, saies, I pray you to sing the 56 Psalm, Have mercy, Lord, on me, I pray, For man would me devour. And the Congregation cheerfully sung with his Majestie. This was one great fault (saith he) of the Common-prayer, that it taught them to pray so often for me; to which prayers they
had not loyaltie enough to say Amen. It is a most profane Custom, though it hath of late years been too much in use, to turn our Prayers into Satyrs, and our Psalms into Pasquils and Libels; and to vomit forth our Spleen, when we should pour out our Hearts before God. I shall conclude this Chapter with Atha∣nasius his answer to Constantius, when he had been accused for stirring up Constans against his Brother Constantius to restore him by Arms. I am not so mad, O Emperour, that you should suspect me to have had any such thought. I call God to witness against my Soul, and I swear, the Lord can bear me witness, and his Anointed your Brother, I never mentioned you for any evil before your Brother; neither ever stirred him up against you, as these (Arians) slander me: but whenever I had access to him, he himself mentioned your gracious inclination; And God knows what mention I made of your godly disposition. —I am not so mad, neither have I forgotten the voice of God, which saith, Curse not the King in thine heart, nor the mighty in the secret of thy chamber; for the birds of the air shall reveal it, &c. If the things spoken in secret touching you Princes cannot be hid, is it likely that I in the presence of a Prince, and many standing by, would say any thing of you otherwise than what was good? —I beseech your Highness call to mind my be∣haviour
when you admitted me to your presence at Vimimachum, at Caesaria, and Antioch; whether I did so much as offer an evil word of Eusebius my bitter Enemy, or of any my perse∣cutors: And if I refrained my tongue when I was to plead against them in my own defence, what madness had it been to traduce an Empe∣rour before an Emperour, and to stir up one Brother against another? Athanasii Apol. ad Imperatorem Constantius. Yet was this Bi∣shop turn'd out of his Church without kick∣ing the Emperour, or any Officer of his, as may be there read: he departed peaceably; and though the Citizens were ready to take Arms on Ambrose his behalf, he pacified them and departed.
An Answer to our Author's CHAP. VI. Their Prayers and Tears. WHereof, he says, Gregory gives a large account. So large indeed, that our Author onely pickt and chose what might make most for his purpose, omitting what was most material: for in that second Oration against Julian, p. 127. he says, How great provision of Armour and inventions of Engines; how many myriads of men and armed Souldiers could effect those things which we by our Prayers onely, and God by his Will hath done? Nor is it probable that the Christians at that time did want force to restrain the violence of the Emperour, seeing our Author confesseth, that he who though it a small business to conquer the Persians, thought it a great work to reduce the Christians. And doubtless that Pagan wanted not malice to root them out, but he distrusted his Power: for even of that Army which he led into Per∣sia, the far greatest part, if not all, were Christi∣ans; which appears not onely by their chu∣sing
Jovian to be their EmperourGreg. p. 117. immediately after his death) who had renounced all his Honour, & suffered exile for Christianity; but by their unani∣mousSee Russ. l. 2. c. 1. Socr. l. 3. c. 22. Theod. l. 4. c. 1. Acclamation, when Jovian told them he was unwilling to undertake the Government of a Pagan Army, We are all Christians! we are all Christians! This consideration, drew from the Learned Mountague upon the relation of St. Gregory () this Note; It was not because they could not, but because they would not resist: for they had strength sufficient to have sup∣pressed the Tyrant, as St. Augustine and Gregory declare: The Christian interest was so largely propagated, and had taken such deep roots, that it could not be destroyed, unless the Em∣pire had perished with it. Tertullian says, the Christians were pars pene major cujusque Civita∣tis, & vestra Omnia implevimus; And if they had but deserted the Empire, it would have been as a Wilderness: Yet it appeared to be true, That Christianus nullius est hostis nedum Imperatoris. And St. Cyprian ad Demetr. Ne∣mo nostrum quando apprehenditur reluctatur, nee se adversus injustam violentiam vestram, (quam∣vis nimius & copiosus sit populus noster) ulcisci∣tur.) But those Christians had learn'd pati∣ence in the School of Christ, as well by ex∣ample
as precept; and not to overturn and bring all to confusion, with a Flectere si nequeo superos, Acheronta movebo. So the Learned Mountague. So that when Gregory says, they had no other defence, but all was cut off from them, he may be well under∣stood, concerning the use of any other means, all violence and resistance being forbidden them; for, id possumus quod Jure possumus: they were forbid to use the Sword for revenging themselves upon the Emperour. And St Gregory in his 1. Orat. says, that the enemy of Christianity was defeated by Gods mercy, and the Christians tears, which were many, and shed by many,, having no other remedy against that Persecutor. Besides, as they wanted not Souldiers, so neither valiant and experienced Captains that had the entire affections of the Souldiers, and which were approved Christians. Jovianus, Valentinian, and Valens (which three after the death of Julian were successively chosen Em∣perours) could each of them have engaged Legions to follow them: and how well the Souldiers were affected to them, you have seen already by their choice of Jovian present∣ly on the death of Julian. So that it might be as truly objected that they wanted Souldiers and Commanders, as that they wanted Arms,
Castles and Fortresses. They had not indeed suprized any of the Imperial Forts, or held them out in actual Rebellion against Julian, (as you know who did in the last Age:) but ma∣ny of them were Garisoned with Christian Souldiers, who doubtless would have declared for the Christian Religion, against the Atheism and Persecution of Julian, had not these re∣nowned Confessors been restrained by the Com∣mand of Christ to fear God and honour the King, Besides, I have two other Considerations of great weight with me, that it was not for want of Strength, or doubt of Success, that the Christians did not oppose Julian. As first, it was usual with the Roman Soul∣diers upon any disgust with their Emperours, to kill their Emperours, and set others in their Thrones. Six of the twelve Caesars were slain, pas some Historians account; but never was there such a thing done by the Christian Souldiers: For after such time as the Roman Strength was put into the hands of Chri∣stians, they never deposed any one of their Emperours, though there wanted no Strength on their parts, nor Provocations on their e∣nemies part, many of them being Persecuting Arians. And though Julian by his rashness, against the advice of Sallustius, a man of great experience, and generally beloved of his whole
Army, was resolved on the Persian War, and had foolishly exposed them to great hazards and danger, by his following the directions of a Renegado Persian, who led them into a barren, and almost inaccessible Country, and burning his Ships that might have served for a retreat; yet was there no Associating or ban∣ding against him in his life-time; but as soon as he was dead, they all professed themselves Christians, and chose a Christian Empe∣rour. Secondly, The power which the Clergy had with the People, who could hardly re∣strain then from tumults and fighting in their desence, is another Argument with me: for e∣ven at that time Athanasius convened in the great City of Alexandria, a great number, not onely of the Bishops of the Greek Church, which were near at hand, but from Italy, E∣gypt, Arabia, and Libya; which argues that the affairs of Christianity were in no low or despisable condition. And if it be true that Gregories Father alone thought of braving the Emperour, what might the united Interest of these Bishops and the Souldiery in their Sees have done? But they thought it better to flee as Athanasius did, or betake themselves to their Spiritual Armory of prayers and tears, than to lift up a hand against Julian. And I cannot but think that St. Gregory was of the
same Judgment, when he wrote without any passion to the Citizens of Alexandria, being affrighted with the noise of Persecution, in his 17th Oration, to this effect: (N. B.) this is one of our Laws, and of those laudable ones most ex∣cellently ordained by the Spirit of God, who knew best how to temper his Law with a mixture of what was possible to us, and honest in it self, That as Servants should be obedient to their Masters, and Wives to their Husbands, and the Church to our Lord, and Disciples to their Pastors and Teachers: So should we also be subject to all higher powers, not onely for fear of punish∣ment, but also for. Conscience sake. St. Gre∣gory also in a Funeral-Oration, n. 20. for St. Ba∣sil, records an Answer of his to Modestus Gover∣nour of his Country under Valens an Arian Emperour— Where the Cause of God is in dan∣ger, we neglect other things, and look onely to him: Fire, Sword, and Beasts, are matters of rejoycing to us, rather than terrour: Reproach, threaten, and do to us what thou pleasest, em∣ploy thy Authority, let the Emperour also hear of this; Thou shalt not overcome nor perswade us to consent to Impiety. So that both Gregory and Basil the Divine, and Basil the Great, which were no Mountebanks, but Great Do∣ctors of the Church, were for the prescription of prayers and tears, although you would force them to the contrary.
I have reserved another Testimony of A∣thanasius for this place, being an account of the Publick Prayers made by himself for Con∣stantius the Emperour, though he had reme∣ved him from his Pastoral charge. In his A∣pologie to Constantius. Witness hereof (saith he) is first the Lord, who heard us, and gran∣ted unto you the intire Empire, which was left un∣to you by your Ancestors; then those who at that time were present: for the words I used were these onely; Let us pray for the welfare of the most religious Emperour Constantius; and the whole People with one voice cried presently, O Christ, be favourable to Constantius; and so continued praying a long time. And then he concludes, Let truth take place with you, and leave not the whole Church under a suspition, as though such things (as tended to the death of Constans) should be thought on or written by Christians, and especially by Bishops. Athana∣sius was also accused for celebrating Publick Prayers in the Church of Alexandria; which he confesseth he did, being urged thereto by the importunity of the People; that they might pray for the welfare of the Emperour in that Church which he himself had builded, being ready otherwise to go out of the City, and to assemble themselves in the Desarts. But thus he expostulates with the Emperour: And you, O King, most beloved of God, where
would you have had the People stretch out their hands and pray for you? there where the Pa∣gans did pass by, or in the place which bore your name, and which from the first foundation there∣of all men did call a Church? And then he prays thus for the Emperour—O Lord Christ, who art indeed King of kings, the onely begotten Son of God, the Word and Wisdom of the Father; because the People have implored thy goodness, and by thee called upon thy Father, who is God over all, for the welfare of thy most religious servant Constantius, I am now accused. And then speaking to the Emperour, You do not for∣bid, but are willing that all men should pray, knowing that this is the Prayer of all, that you may live in safetie, and continually reign in peace.—And as for you, O Emperour, beloved of God, many years I pray you may live, and accom∣plish the Dedication of this Church: for those Prayers that are made therein for your welfare, do no way hinder the solemnitie of the Dedica∣tion. And whereas Athanasius was accused also for not obeying the Emperours Com∣mand to depart from Alexandria, he says, I do not oppose the Command of your Majestie; God forbid; I am not such a man as would oppose the very Treasurer of the Citie, much less so great an Emperour.— I was not so mad as to oppose such a Command of yours: I neither did oppose it, nor will enter into Alexandria, until you of
your humanitie be pleased I shall so do. If old Gregory was of another mind, it was but one Doctors Opinion. And I think our Author in the same case is a Dissenter from all Christian Divines, as well as from the Church of Eng∣land; and from Mr. Baxter too, who saies, that hurtful prayers and desires are seldom from God: and he speaks it in the very case of Ju∣lian, p. 17. of his Direct. part 4. I shall here add the example of that Legion which was called , or the Thundring Legion, consisting of 6666 Christians, under marcus Aurelius; of whom Zephiline speaks thus: The Emperours Army being in great di∣stress for want of water, and being compassed a∣bout by their Adversaries, the Praefect of the Praetorians told Marcus, That there was nothing which those Christians could not obtain by their Prayers: Marcus therefore desired the Praefect that he would intreat them to pray unto their God; which they had no sooner done, but the Lord by thunder and lightning discomfited their enemies, and with seasonable showers refreshed the whole Army, which otherwise might have perished. St. Ambrose was another of those Lachry∣mists which our Author derides; he lived un∣der Valentinian the younger, another Arian Emperour; and yet, as Ruffinus says of him, (Hist. Eccless. l. 2. c. 26.) he did not defend him∣self
by his hand or weapon, but with fastings and continual watchings, and remaining under Gods Altar, by his Prayers prevailed with God to be a Defender both of him and his Church. I will give you St Ambrose his own words to his Church at Millain:— I will never forsake you willingly; being constrained, I know not how to make opposition. Dolere potero, potero flere, potero gemere adversus arma Milites Gothos; Lachrymae meae arma sunt; talia enim mu∣nimenta sunt Sacerdotis; aliter NEC DE∣BEO NEC POSSUM RESISTERE. I can sorrow, I can weep, I can sigh against Arms, Souldiers, and Goths; Tears are my weapons; for such is the Munition of a Priest; in any o∣ther manner I OƲGHT NOT, I CANNOT RESIST. And his People were much of the same mind, as he describes it, Epist. 33. or as in some Editions, the 13. Ad Marcellinam, What could have been better spoken by Christian men, than that which the Holy Ghost spake in you this day? Rogamus, Auguste, non pugna∣mus, We entreat, O Emperour, we fight not; we are not afraid, yet we entreat. This (saith St. Ambrose) doth become Christians, that both the tranquillity of peace be desired by them, and their constancie in faith and truth should not be deserted, no not with the peril of death. And in his Tract de Renovatione fidelium: Laude magis scribendum est, non tam male facere non
posse, quam nolle; whereof St. Peter told us the sence long before, 1 Pet. 2.19. This is thank-worthie to God, if a man endure grief, suf∣fering wrongfully: And that man doth cer∣tainly suffer wrongfully, that hath the Laws of God and man on his side. But there is no Law of God for resistance of a lawful Ma∣gistrate. The Apostle did not calculate his Doctrine for the three first Centuries under Heathen, and that it should expire under Christian Magistrates: the Spirit of God foresaw that Kings should be nursing Fathers to his Church, and made good Laws for the se∣curitie thereof; but he never meant that Princes should be resisted, though in some things they should act contrary to those Laws. So that when our Author demands by what Law we must die? p. 81. and answers, Not by the Law of God, for being of that Religion which he approves: I answer, Yes, 1. By the Law of God, rather than make resistance; that we may bear testimony to that Law by suffering of death for our Religion, rather than to violate it by our Rebellion. 2. By the Laws of our Country too: for though by the favour of Christian Princes many good Laws are made for obedient Subjects, which the Prince may not violate without his great sin against God; yet hath the Supreme Autho∣rity
of the Land provided especially for the security of the Prince, who is a Common good. We see how in Nature light things do some∣times descend, and things that are heavie will ascend, against their natural propension, for the preservation of the Universe; and if pri∣vate men do submit themselves to some Vio∣lencies and Injustice for the preservation of the publick Peace, it is but their duty: and if the Prince do invade our Rights, that is no ground for us to invade his, in whom the happiness of the whole Nation doth consist. St. Bernard was another Lachrymist, Epist. 221. speaking to Lewis then King of France; Whatever it pleaseth you to do concerning your Kingdom, Crown, and Soul, we that are the Chil∣dren of the Church, cannot conceal the injuries done to our Mother; we will stand and fight e∣ven to death for our Mother, if need be; but Armis quibus licet; non scutis & gladiis, sed precibus fletibusque ad Deum: with such Arms as are allowed us; not with Sword and Buckler, but with Prayers and Tears to God. I could multiply many Testimonies in this kind; nor can any other than such as our Au∣thor produceth of some private passionate and mistaken Christians, be pretended to the con∣trary, until such time as the Pope erected the Standard of Antichrist against Christian Kings, which was after the time of Gregory the
Great; or, until Presbyterie, as a Reformado, fought under the same Banner. Now to say as you do, in the close of this Chapter, p. 55. That in that Age the best Prayers and Tears were those which did best ex∣ecution upon an Apostate Emperour, and contri∣buted most to his destruction; and again, p. 96. I do not find among the Ancients one single wish for Julian's Conversion, but all for his down-right Destruction, is a very unchristian insinuation, especially for one who pretends to say the Prayer for the Royal Family as heartily as any man (in the Preface.) P. 93. Our Author, by way of Postscript, tells us, he hath many more exceptions against the Artillery of Prayers and Tears, than he can stay to insist on. The first is a great excepti∣on indeed, which makes St. Gregory to over∣throw all that our Author had quoted from him; for St. Gregory, p. 57. of the first In∣vective (Eaton-edition) says thus: Julian was hindered by the goodness of God, and the Tears of Christians, which were shed in great plentie by many who had this onely remedie a∣gainst the Persecutor. Now it is well observed by our Author, here are no Prayers mentioned; none at all for his confusion, no such Prayers as are no better than Treason by our Law, p. 95. Secondly, Gregory doth not tell us here that they had no Arms, or Walls, or that these La∣chrymists
cried, CHƲD EAT CHEESE AN CHAD IT; but that they had this onely Re∣medie against the Persecutor, (i. e.) as our Author says, They had no other way to help themselves: And though here be no Prayers mentioned, yet in other places St. Gregory men∣tions Prayers, and was as great a Lachrymist at Prayer as any. P. 96. Our Author parallels these Prayers with some, which he says were made Treason in Queen Mary's days, of which the Act says, (Anno 1. and 2. of Philip and Mary, lib. 9.) That some prayed that God would turn her heart from Idolatrie to the true Faith, or else to shor∣ten her days, or take her quickly out of the way. Though they had used such Prayers in secret, they should methinks for their own sakes have for born them in their Conventicles, where the Act says they were used, and where (as you would have it) such murdering Prayers are too frequent in our Age. And I doubt whe∣ther God might not have rejected such Pray∣ers with a Quis requisivit? I believe verily it was never in our Saviour's mind, when he bids us to pray for them that persecute us; nor of his Apostle, when he injoyns that Prayers and Supplications, &c. be made for Kings and all that are in Authoritie, 1 Tim 2.1. And whereas that Act saith, Such a Prayer was never heard or read to have been used by any good Christian
man against any Prince, though he were a Pa∣gan; you think you have given presidents for it in the case of Julian, where the Chri∣stians prayed for his Destruction, not his Con∣version. If (as you say) you pray as hearti∣ly for his R. H. as any man, in the Collect for the Royal Family, you cannot but mind his Con∣version. And no president that ever I heard of will warrant any other Prayers, but to this effect: ENDƲE THEM WITH THY HOLY SPIRIT, INRICH THEM WITH THY HEAVENLY GRACE, PROSPER THEM WITH ALL HAPPINESS, AND BRING THEM TO THINE EVERLASTING KINGDOM, &c. Here is nothing at all for Destruction, but all for Conversion. And though I know you are a daring man, yet pray do not think of reforming the English Liturgie by your Julian nor Gregorian Account, and teach us by your example to say our Prayers back∣ward. Gregory himself was so great a Lachrymist, that our Author, if he have any spark of Grace, or intention to repent, must needs weep with him, and (as he did) recant that as publickly, in other more serious Writings, which he delivered in a fit of Passion, or to shew his Rhetorick. Gregory Nazianzen, Orat. 17. p. 267. to the Citizens of Nazian∣zum, that were in great fear by reason of the
displeasure of their Praefect, perswades them to make use of these weapons, , Ps. 34.17. If thou turn to the Lord with mourning, thou shalt be saved: Ye see (saith Gregory) how Salvation is annexed to Mourn∣ing, , nothing can come between your Prayers and the Blessings that you ask. Doth the Spirit of God prescribe Moun∣tebank-Receipts in the opinion of Gregory? or ought not he to repent that calls them Moun∣tebank-Receipts▪ Then minding them of the instability of Humane Affairs, and of the great benefit they may reap by their patience and submis∣sion to Gods Chastisements, he adds, —Let us submit our selves to God, to one another, and to those who have the Government on Earth, (the word is , the same that St. Paul u∣seth Rom. 13.5.) —To God in all things, to each other in brotherly charitie, and to our Go∣vernours for the sake of good order. (He adds) it is a hainous and dangerous thing to exhaust the Clemencie (of the Ruler) by needing daily pardon. Among other Laws of our Religion, we have this given us by the Spirit of God; who hath joyned that which we are able to do, to that which is just and honest, and hath establi∣shed it by a most laudable Law; That as Ser∣vants obey their Masters and Wives their Hus∣bands, and the Church Christ, and Disciples
their Pastors; so we also are commanded to o∣bey the higher Powers, not onely for Wrath, but for Conscience-sake, as being bound to yield them Tribute; nor let us give occasion by our wickedness to bring the Law into contempt, and to provoke the revenging Sword, but rather be∣ing made better through our fears, endeavour to obtain praise from the higher Powers. Decies repetite placebit. I wish I could say of our Author, Et hinc illae Lacrymae; but our Au∣thor hath other thoughts: he thinks he hath much obliged the whole Nation, turning their Mourning into Mirth, and instructing them, after the new fashions of Rome and France, to exchange their Prayers and Tears for Fire and Sword, for Gun-powder, Pistols, Poniards? and therefore he first saies it was a Christian that killed Julian; and from Zozomen, that he was to be commended for the fact, p. 60, 61. Sigebert, in his Chron. ad Anno 1088. tells us, That this noveltie, that I say not Heresie, was not yet risen up in the world, that the Priests of God (who saith to a King Remove, and maketh an Hypocrite to reign for the sins of a people) should teach the people that they owe no subje∣ction to wicked Kings; and though they have gi∣ven an Oath of Fidelity to them, yet they owe no Fidelity to them; nor are to be accounted perjured, though they fight against them; and that he that obeyeth the King shall be excom∣municated,
and he that opposeth him shall be ab∣solved from the guilt of Injustice and Perjurie. So that although these Ancient Bishops were never in Scotland, yet a man may think our Scotizing Presbyters have been at Rome; whose Principles and Practices run such paral∣lels, as would sill a bigger Volume than I in∣tend. I shall onely shew, that the Fathers give us a better Form of praying for Kings than your Directorie doth; and the Law of God and Man enjoyns us Ʋniformitie in the use of it. Tertul. Apol. c. 31, &c. You that say we re∣gard not the welfare of Caesar, look into our Scriptures, which command us to pray for our Enemies and Persecutors, especially that we pray for Kings, and all in authoritie: For with them the whole Empire is shaken, and we our selves as Members thereof are in hazard: therefore we sacrifice for the safetie of the Emperour, but to God; and as God hath commanded, with pure Prayer we pray for them and their Officers and Magistrates, for faithful Armies, seasonable Times, and a quiet Age, &c. Having our arms spread to God, let Hooks tear us, Crosses hang us, &c. a praying Christian is prepared for any torment: Come then, you Praefects, and force out our Souls praying for the Emperour.
Athenagoras in his Apologie to M. Aurelius: We pray for your Empire, that the Son () as it is most just, may succeed the Fa∣ther in the Kingdom, and that your Empire may increase and flourish; all being subject to you: which would be much for our good, that we lea∣ding a quiet and peaceable life, may readily o∣bey you in all your commands. St. Cyprian to Demetrian: We pray day and night, propitiating and appeasing God for your peace and safetie, and that the Reign of Valerian and Galien may continue unshaken. So Eusebius observes, l. 6. c. 11. Eccl. Hist. of Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria, That he prayed for the same Emperours, that their Kingdom might continue. St. Sebastian lived under Di∣oclesian and Maximian, and fought for them, and prayed; and assures us, the rest of the Souldiers did the like. The Priests of the Temples do possess your Majesties minds (saith he) with unjust surmises, as if we (the Chri∣stians) were Enemies to the Commonwealth; whereas by our Prayers the Commonwealth is bet∣tered and increased: for we cease not to pray for your Empire, and the safetie of the Roman Armie. See Surius on Jan. 20. Optatus, l. 3. contra Parmen. The Apostle teacheth us to pray for Kings and those that are in Authoritie, etiamsi talis eslet Imperator qui Gentiliter viveret, though he were a Pa∣gan.
The Council of Paris 6th, p. 534. of the Second Tome of the French Councils: If Jeremy the Prophet admonished to pray for the Life of Nebuchadonozor that Idolatrous King, how much more ought Supplications to be made for all Christian Kings? Aphraates a zealous Christian, being demanded by Va∣lens an Arian Emperour, whither he went; I am going (saith he) to pray for your Em∣pire. Theophilus Bishop of Antioch: I will honour the King, not adoring him, but praying for him. So likewise in the Preamble of the Coun∣cil of Agatha, where the Catholick Bishops pray for an Arian King after this manner: With Knees bended on the ground, we pray for the continuance of your Kingdom and People; that as you have granted us libertie to assemble our selves, so God would extend your Kingdom with Happiness, govern it with Justice, and pro∣tect it with Virtue. Prooemium Synodi Aga∣thensis. When by the instigation of Pope Paschal the Second, the Emperour was unjustly de∣prived, the Church of Liege blame the Pope for it, saying, If he were such as you describe him, yet should we suffer him to reign over us, because our Sins have deserved it; and such a Prince ought not to be repelled by taking Arms against him, but by pouring out our Prayers.
Resp. Eccles. Leoardensis ad Epistolam Pasch. 2d. So that whether our Author will or no, it will still be owned as a Maxime among Chri∣stians, Preces & lachrymae sunt Arma Ecclesiae. Prayers and Tears are the Churches Artille∣ry; and your new MILITIA will never prevail against this COMMISSION OF AR∣RAY.
An Answer to our Author's CHAP. VII. Julian's Death. THis Chapter is mostly the relation of two wonderful discoveries of Julian's Death; the one of a Christian Schoolmaster, (for it seems the Christians at Antioch, though it were the place that Julian most hated, had Christian Masters to instruct their Children) who being askt by Libanius the Sophister what the Carpenters Son was doing, answered, He is making a Coffin. And yet perhaps he thought no more of Julian's death than Libanius, whose expression of a Carpenters Son might give occasion to such a Reply. Then for his other story of his double St. Julian Sabba, (for our Author hath Sainted him before and behind); That he whilst he was praying should be in a Trance, and cry out, The wild Boar, the Enemie of the Lords Vineyard, hath suffered the punishment of his faults, and lies dead: I cannot admit such Miracles into my Creed  but look on them no otherwise than such conjectures as Julian himself made, when at the fall of the man that lifted him up
to his horse, he cried out, He that raised me up is fallen; and as the Historian says, Con∣stantius died at that very time. But the mer∣riest Scene is behind, p. 58. That as soon as the Christians at Antioch heard of it, they had publick joyful meetings, and had not onely Dances in the Churches and Chappels of their Martyrs, (and then likely they had the musick of Or∣gans, or some other instruments too) but likewise in the Theatre they proclaimed the Vi∣ctorie of the Cross. Such Thanksgivings we had in this Nation at the Butchery of the Roy∣al Martyr. But though they brought their Horse-guards into St. Pauls, I do not find they danced in the Churches. The manner of his death our Author re∣ports, p. 59. as an uncertainty, but jumps in his Opinion with the Heathen Libanius, that he who killed him was a Christian, although I have quoted two Authors who aver that it was done by the hand of an Enemie: Yet to serve his Hypothesis, that it is lawful for a Christian to kill a Heathen Emperour, he will needs cast it on the Christians. Yet our Author, p. 60. says, Truly this is a strange concession: but that which we may more wonder at, is, that Zozomen should justifie such a traiterous Assassination, as he doth (in these words, p. 60.) It is not improbable that some one of the Souldiers might take into consideration
how the Heathens and all men to this day do still praise those who long since have killed Ty∣rants, as men that were willing to die for the Common Libertie, and defended in that manner their Country men, Kinsmen, and Friends: and you can hardly blame him who shews himself so courageous for God, and for that Religion which he approves; in Zozomen's words, , (i. e.) quam colebat, referring not to God, but the Votarie. And then at this rate, the Murder of the two Henries of France, and that of our Royal Soveraign may be justified, by our Au∣thor's Rule, because they were slain as Ene∣mies to that Religion which their Assassinates professed: A very dangerous insinuation this, and not fit to be presented to such a Prince as Theodosius was. Yet that Author speaks of the Opinion of the Heathen Greeks, and of slaying Tyrants in the days of old (not after Christianitie prevailed, that teacheth a contra∣ry behaviour.) They were the , and they were Heathens that commended them: for the ancient Greek Cities had wholly rejected the Government of Kings, and set up Aristo∣cracie or Democracie, so that in time the word Tyrannus, which in a good old sence signified a King, was by them generally used for a Ty∣rant or Oppressor; and if any such attempted the reducing their Popular Government into
Monarchie, they thought it lawful to kill them. But will this warrant a Clement or Ravilliack to assassinate their Prince; or a High Court of Justice to murder their King? If Zozomen or our Author mean this, I look on them as Heathen Greeks still, of whom it hath been observed, Inter Regem & Tyrannum non discernunt Graii. Lampridius wondered that no man slew Heli∣ogabalus the Tyrant, Cum Neroni, Vitellio, Ca∣ligulae, caeterisque hujusmodi nunquam Tyranni∣cida defuerit. But no such thing was attem∣pted by good Christians.
An Answer to our Author's CHAP. VIII. How they used his Memory. DE mortuis nil nisi bonum: That we ought to speak well of the dead, or no∣thing, is a Rule commonly received by all men. To trample on a dead Lion is no point of valour, much less to rail at them that have received the just punishment of their sins. Such language therefore as Gregory useth, and our Author would have inscribed on Julian's Pillars long after his death, was as unseason∣able, as it would have been offensive in his life∣time, viz. p. 63. Thou Persecutor next to He∣rod, thou Traitor next to Judas, (onely thou hast not testified thy Repentance by hanging thy self) thou killer of Christ after Pilate, and next to the Jews thou hater of God. These are ve∣ry hard names in the mouth of a Divine, con∣cerning a dead Emperour. Well may our Author say he is wearie of such reproachful and ignominious Titles which the Christian Tongues lavishly bestowed on him. Doubtless you cannot find in all the rest of the Ecclesiastical Historians such as these: and
if an Index expurgatorius had past onely on such Sentences, it would have been less culpa∣ble than it is. But what Protestants (say you) ever trea∣ted their worst Persecutors at this rate? Shall I tell you again what sort of Protestants treated not a Persecutor, but a meek and gracious Prince, at a far worse rate? And who ever called Queen Mary Mad Bitch? Sir, you do very ill to prepare such expressions for the Vulgar: Children are too apt to learn naughty things of their Teachers. Some have called a Queen of England by the names of Proserpine, and Lupam Anglicanam; which I forbear to Eng∣lish. But what little reason there was for all these passionate Expressions, you shew us in the next.
An Answer to our Author's CHAP. IX. Reflections on the Behaviour of those Christians. JUlian's Persecution was but a Flea-biting to what the Christians formerly felt; a short and weak assault of the Devil; so that if any fell from Christianitie, they were ridiculously o∣vercome; and if they persevered, it was no great matter to lose a Trade or Profession for their Re∣ligion; — and this was the greatest severitie (says our Author) of all Julian's Edicts.— To speak properly, he was rather a Tempter than a Persecutor; seducing some with Money, others with Places of Trust and Honours of all sorts; others by the witchcraft of his words, and by his own example.—And as for what he designed a∣gainst Christianitie, it was far short of what o∣ther Emperours had executed. So far our Au∣thor, whom I must name, lest you should not think it his: For how could the man of such a Character deserve all those virulent expres∣sions of Gregory (of which before) or those rudenesses of some Christians which follow in our Author? p. 66. How do the Christians treat this Emperour, reproaching him, ruffling
with him, vexing every vein in his royal Heart, saying all their Prayers backwards, calling down vengeance upon his head, dancing and leaping for joy at his death, and insulting over his memory; calling him by the bloudiest names of the Devil! P. 67. and (pray mark them, they are our Authors words) But for he name of Christians, he had better fallen among Barbarians. And would our Author have these to be examples for true Protestants? But doth not our Author also say his les∣son backward, and write a Panegyrick for Ju∣lian, and Invectives against Christians? Or is it his meaning, that if a Prince incline (though but a little) to Tyranny or Irreligion, it is law∣ful to use him as those Christians did Julian? He doth plainly at once Calumniate the whole body of Christians and their Teachers in that Age, from the mis-behaviours of a few; and seeks to debauch the present Generation, which are too bad already. Julian taught better Doctrine to them that were his Christian Subjects, (though he did it spightfully— Not to avenge themselves, not to go to Law, nor render evil for evil, but pray for and wish well to their persecutors) than you do for their behaviour towards their Princes, and that spightfully enough: for this (as you ac∣knowledge) is a right course to gloss away all their duty, and to break all the measures by which
all the Ancient and Suffering Christians have gone in all former persecutions. And doth it become a Christian, or a Divine, one that would be numbred among the more peaceable and stricter sort of his Brethren, to vent such things? What? to deride the prayers and tears, the faith and patience of Martyrs and Confessors, and to applaud the insolencies and extravagancies of the seditious Rabble? Let me whisper it softly in your ear: I think Ju∣lian the Apostate did less prejudice the Chri∣stian Religion, than such a one as Lucian the Scoffer. Mr. Baxter, Christian Direct. p. 20. I do not think Nero or Dioclesian martyred near so many, as the People turned loose would have done. Much more was Julian a Prote∣ctor of the Church from popular rage, &c. And you shall sooner wash a Black-more white, than cleanse your self from that Contagious Leprosie which over-runs your whole Book: (and I pray God it hath not seized on your Heart), which you do in vain endeavour by the fol∣lowing Discourse; which I now consider. P. 68. you say, The truth of the Matter is this: Their case differed very much, and they were in quite other circumstances than the first Christians were. When Julian came to the Crown, he found them in full and quiet possession of their Religion, which they had enjoyed with∣out interruption for almost fifty years, and which
was such an inestimable blessing, that they had plainly undervalued it, if they had not done their utmost to keep it: and then to have this treasure wrested out of their hands by one bred up in the bosom of the Church, who professed himself a Chri∣stian, and never pull'd off his Masque till it was too late for them to help themselves; this was e∣nough to raise not onely all their Zeal, but all their Indignation too. Your almost saves your computation of fifty years wherein the Chri∣stians enjoyed a full and quiet possession of their Religion without interruption, from a great Untruth: for it was a good while after Constantine came to the Empire, that he did or could shew any great favour to the Chri∣stians, he being brought up under Dioclesian, and not being baptized himself until towards the end of his Reign. That he banished Atha∣nasius the great Pillar of the Christian Religi∣on, is not to be denyed; nor that Constantius was himself an Arian, and promoted those destructive errours in such a manner, as that the Orthodox Bishops whom Constantius had banished, and were recalled by Julian, seemed to be in a better condition under him than under Constantius; many Bishops being ba∣nished for refusing to subscribe against A∣thanasius and his Creed in the Council of Mil∣lain: And Athanasius, with many others of his perswasion, lived in desart places until the
death of Constantius. So that though the fifty years did run out at length; yet in all Constantius his time, which was reckoned a∣bove twenty years, the Orthodox were migh∣tily afflicted by the Arians, Donatists, and Cir∣cumcellians. And you may as well say the Church of England had a full and quiet posses∣sion of their Religion without interruption in the times of our late Confusion, when e∣very Mushrome-Sect sprung up above it, as that it was so with the Primitive Christians during the time of Constantius. I might add much more; but desire the Reader to be satisfied with that one instance of the Arians dealing with old Hosius a Bishop of a hundred years old; whom in a Council of theirs at Sirmium they so tormented, that they forced him to subscribe to them to save his life. And how ill it was with others, even in the days of Constantine, see the History of the Donatists lately printed. But then for the poor Primitive Christians of all, they were born to Persecution; they nei∣ther knew better, nor expected it— The Laws of the Empire were alwaies in force against them— their Religion at best was in the world but upon sufferance, as Abraham in the Land of Canaan, where he had no Inheritance, no not so much as to set his foot on. But as his afflicted Posteritie were afterward Lords of that Country, so after a∣nother
Egyptian Bondage, Christianitie was ad∣vanced to be the established Religion of the Em∣pire. All this, and much more, is but Mr. Hunts Argument in other words: for p. 46. he says, The Reformed Religion hath acquired a civil Right, and the protection of Laws: if we ought not to lose our Lives, Liberties and E∣states, but where forfeited by Law, we ought much rather not to lose them for the profession of the best Religion, which by Law is made the publick National Religion. And it is strange that some men of the same Religion in profession, can think (that notwithstanding) it makes no matter what is done to a man if he be Religious; but if he be not so, the least publick injuries and injustice may be resisted, vindicated, remedied, and by right defended by old Laws, or new ones to be made for that purpose. The Christian Religion was publisht when the whole world was Pagan, and therefore it was submitted to such usage as the Governours would give it. But when the Chri∣stian Faith had by Miracles of patience declared it self to be of Heaven, according to the Prophe∣cies on that behalf, it took possession of the Em∣pire, and Crowns and Scepters became submitted to the Cross; and the Christians acquired a civil Right of protection and immunity, which they ought not, they cannot relinquish and aban∣don, no more than they can destroy themselves. Such as thus perish, shall never wear a Martyrs
Crown, but perish in the next world for perishin in this. This will be interpretatively Crucifying Christ afresh, after that he is received up into Glory, (i. e.) after his Religion is exalted into Dignity, Honour, and civil Authority, &c. Thus far Simeon and Levi are agreed; and these were precious hints to our Julian; for till he hit on this new Notion, there was nothing in the whole Book, that favoured of Common sence, or had any shew of Reason; but his Pa∣ges, as the Builders of Babel, misunderstand one another; and what one builds up, the other throws down; and after a long evapo∣ration of smoak and ashes, and sometimes fire, (as ancient Historians relate of Aetna) our modern Historian makes the same Mountain to pour out such a deluge of Water as drowns all the Faith and Patience Christian men, and leaves onely Julian to triumph at the over∣throw of Christianity. If these men be not in too great haste, and their Guilt and Fears drive them not into Corners, I would expostulate with them a while: Can the Laws of men make void the Law of God? and have you Authoritie to distinguish where the Law of God makes no distinction? Doth not that speak plain, that we must submit not onely to Masters that are good and gentle, but also to the froward, 1 Pet. 2.18. and to Parents that correct us according
to their pleasure: and the believing Wife is to sub∣mit her self to her unbelieving Husband in every thing, Eph. 5.24. not contrary to Gods Word? and is it not true, that what is said of the sub∣mission of Servants, Children, and Wives, the same may be said of Subjects? as St. Augustine affirms, after Gregory Nazianzen. Was a Hea∣then Emperour to be submitted to in all things, and not a Christian? Shall the Pri∣viledges which Christian Princes grant us, be used as Weapons to fight and rebel against them? Was it lawful for the Catholicks to rebel against Constantius when he was a de∣clared Heretick, and by great violence pro∣moted that damnable Heresie, as Bishop Ʋsher calls it, suppressing and banishing the Ortho∣dox, and setting up the Arian? Is it not said, that if we suffer wrongfully, (i. e. against Law and Equity) and take it patiently, this is thank∣worthy with God? Can you without Sacriledge take away the Crowns from all the Martyrs that died ever since Julians time, and tell us they died like Fools or mad men, and were felo's de se, for not selling their Lives at a dearer rate, and like Sampson, pull down the Pillars of the Empire, with an , If I must perish, let the whole world perish with me! Or can you think that they perished in the next world for perishing in this, when Christ tells them,
he that loseth his life shall save it? If it be unjust in the Prince to deprive us of our Rights a∣gainst the Law of the Land, is it not much more so, for us to deprive him of his against the Law of God, as well as that of the Land too? And have we not generally (I mean the Clergie at least) Subscribed, That it is not lawful, upon any pretence whatsoever, (not of Religion, nor of the Laws) to take up Arms? &c. Non debet minor potestas ira∣sci, si major praelata sit: The Laws of the Land must give place to the Law of God. The contrary to all these, are the mon∣strous Consequences of your new distinction, that allows of Rebellion when we suppose the Laws of the Land to be on our side: I say, suppose them; for Wars have been raised and maintained on such a false Supposition. And if when the Prince declares that he doth and will govern by the known Laws, we shall Re∣monstrate that he doth not, and suggest our groundless and unreasonable Fears and Jea∣lousies that he will not; who shall be Judge in this Case? Shall the people take the Sword in their hands to cut this Gordian-knot, and cut us all in pieces? We have (God be thanked) many good Laws for our securi∣ty, and a gracious Prince that hitherto hath and will govern by them: but we have one great Law of God, and another of the Land,
that though he should not, yet we may not rebel. That excessive commendation which our Author gives of Constantius, makes me think he hath exceeded also in the dispraise of Ju∣lian, p. 70. Never any man in this world set his heart so much upon any other thing, as he did to see the Christians flourish, and to have all the advantages of glorie and power: And neither conquered Nations, nor a well-govern'd Empire, nor great Treasures, nor excessive Glorie, nor being King of Kings, nor all other things which make up other mens notions of Happiness, did delight him so much, as to have the honour of bringing honour to the Christians, and of lea∣ving them established for ever in the possession of Power and Authoritie. And yet as it was said of Naaman that mightie man of Valour, But he was a Leper: so it is recorded of Constan∣tius, he was an Arian, and persecuted the Church of God. I think I have said enough already to con∣fute the insignificant Instances produced by our Author, when I gave you the more sober sence of St. Gregorie himself, of St. Basil, Am∣brose, and Bernard, all which lived when they had the Laws on their side, and the best Reli∣gion in the world to defend; and yet they durst not do it by the Sword, if they could have done it; for I shall not now question
their power; Tertullian did assert that of old, and the Learned Hammond hath put the truth of it out of question, in his Answer to Mr. Stephen Marshal. But says our Author, p. 70. For Julian, who by his Baptism first, and entring into Or∣ders after, and going to Church after that, suf∣ficiently engaged himself to maintain Christia∣nitie; to endeavour on the other hand to dis∣possess them of their Freehold, is an insuppor∣table injurie. It was so indeed: and I would have our Author consider, whether for a man that hath been received into the Bosom of the Church, and hath eaten of her Bread, and approved of her Doctrine, to become an A∣postate from that holy Profession, and ex∣pose that Church and Christianity it self to scorn and contempt, be not to out-do Ju∣lian. I shall desire the Reader patiently to look on, while I remove those few Blockadoes which our Author hath laid in my way; and then I shall attack that inchanted Castle, wherein those two Giants think themselves so secure, as to laugh at all opposition that can be made against them. That of Juventinus and Ma∣ximus, mentioned a third time in p. 72. is al∣ready level'd: if there were a Sham-plot a∣gainst them, our Author seems to be one of their accusers for talking too boldly against the
Emperour, which they utterly denied. A second Sham-plot was of Sacriledge, p. 72. but I see no man concerned in that; neither shall I fight with Shadows, as our Author doth. P. 73. Old Bracton is conjured up; and he presently flies in the face of the Conjurers, and tells them, that when Laws are made by. the consent of the people and the Royal Autho∣rity, they cannot be altered or destroyed without the joynt consent of all those by whom they were concerned: And yet the Laws of Queen Elizabeth for keeping her Subjects in due obe∣dience are exploded as some of the Grievan∣ces of the Nation. With what face can they plead the Laws of the Land for their securi∣ty, who daily violate and contemn them, and teach others to do so? And in p. 74. our Author is surprised with the Thebaean Legion, which appeared to him as a Legion of Noon-day Devils; and he wonders who should raise them up: he cries out as that Legion, Matth. 8.22. Art thou come to torment us? What have we to do with thee, O Thebaean Legion! what have we to do with their Example! No, I'll warrant my Au∣thor he shall never die for his Religion as they did, he hath parted with that already for fear of what might come. And this The∣baean Legion is such a terrible immortal Army,
as will defeat all Rebels to the worlds end. Are we (says our Author) to go to Mass to morrow, or else to have our Throats cut? No; nor are we to cut our Princes Throat to day, for fear lest he should compel us to go to Mass to morrow. Such fears were as ground∣less in the daies of Charles the First, as of Charles the Second, yet we see what was then done. Again, Are we under a Sentence of Death according to the Laws of our Country, if we do not presently renounce our Religion? No; but if we presently renounce our Religion, as our Author hath done, and then contrive a Rebel∣lion, we are under a Sentence of a two-fold death; one by the Law of God, and another by the Law of Man. The Thebaean Legion so frighted our Author, that he cannot get them out of his mind: Poor men they were! to sacrifice or be sacrificed! They never heard the Doctrine of Resistance preached to them, but professed another Doctrine which they received according to the commandment of Christ, and practised after his example, suf∣fering patiently for well doing. They never were in Scotland, to learn that there was a reward due to them that should kill tyrannical Princes: They never had the examples of a Christians killing Julian, and being commen∣ded for it in Ecclesiastical History. These glo∣rious
lights and atchievements were reserved for our blessed Age, whereof (notwithstan∣ding) the Scripture foretold, that in the lat∣ter days there should be traitors, heady, high minded, lovers of pleasures more than lovers of God, having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof. And many such who have cal∣led themselves good Protestants, have made a shift to die in Rebellion under the pretence of their Religion. But the comfort is, as our Author says, That can never happen to us, but by our own trea∣cherie to our Religion, in parting with those good Laws which protect it, and in agreeing to those that shall destroy it. What needs then all these Celeusma's and barbarous clamours of Ho-up against a Popish Successor which may never come; or if he should, can never do us hurt without our own consent? Queen Mary her self could not so much as out a Pa∣rish-Priest, till she had procured a Parliament for her turn; and still kept the Church-lands, and by Parliament had the Supremacy set∣led on her as far as any of her Predecessors enjoyed it. And if such things can never hap∣pen but by our treachery in parting with those good Laws as protect our Religion, and agreeing to such as shall destroy it, why are we so wil∣ling to part with those, whereby that other∣wise-impregnable Fortress and Bulwork against
Popery is preserved, and to make new ones for Comprehension, Indulgence, and Toleration, even of Popery it self, as well as other Sects and Factions? which is the ready way cast up by our Adversaries to bring us to confu∣sion. When it is come plainly to this Dilem∣ma, That we must agree to obey our Supe∣riors, or perish; we must agree among our selves as Brethren, or be swallowed up by a common Enemie: Yet no Law of God or man can prevail to keep us in obedience to our Governours, or Charity among our selves; Is not this as neer a way to ruine, as our Adver∣saries can chalk out? P. 76. It is a general Notion among the Fa∣thers, that we ought to spare our persecutors, and not suffer them to be guilty of Murder: Gre∣gory gives that as a very good reason of Marcus his flight from Arethusa. Gregory gives a bet∣ter reason than that, viz. that he was moved by that Precept of our Saviour, Matth. 10.23. When you are persecuted in one City, flee ye to another; and p. 88. he foresaw, that if he had tarried, the people might for his defence have risen against the Officers and Souldiers of the Emperour; and if they had died then, they had been felo's de se. To prevent their de∣struction therefore, as well as the guilt of their Persecutors, he quietly yielded himself into their hands; and though he endured
great torments, yet, as if he had been a felo de se, is he as little pitied by Gregory as by his Persecutors: for Gregory having noted that this Mark was one of them that saved Julian's life when Gallus was slain; for this one thing (saith Gregory) , he suffered those things deservedly, and was worthy to have suffered more. This Passive Obedience is an abominable thing! In the same p. he relates a passage of Chry∣soslom, and infers from it, that David meant no more than onely to prevent the effusion of inno∣cent bloud, as appears by the several opportuni∣ties he had to cut off Saul, but the sense of his duty made him to abhor the least thought of it. This I like so well, that I shall transcribe a little more concerning David's behaviour to∣wards Saul, out of the excellent Book of Ho∣melies. P. 287. Now let David answer to such demands as men desirous of Rebel∣lion do use to make: Shall not we, being so good men as we are, rise and rebel a∣gainst a Prince hated of God, and Gods e∣nemy? and therefore likely not to prosper either in war or peace? but to be hurtful and pernicious to the Commonwealth? No, saith good and godly David, Gods and such a Kings faithful Subject: and so con∣victing such Subjects as attempt any Re∣bellion against such a King, to be neither good subjects nor good men. But say they,
Shall we not rise and rebel against so un∣kind a Prince, nothing considering and regarding our true faith and painful Ser∣vice, nor the safe guard of our posterity? No, saith good David, whom no such un∣kindness could cause to forsake his due O∣bedience to his Soveraign. Shall we not, say they, rise and rebel against our known mortal and deadly enemy that seeks our lives? No, saith good David, who had learned that lesson which our Sa∣viour afterward plainly taught, that we should do no hurt to our fellow-subjects, though they hate us and be our enemies; much less to our Prince, though he were our enemy. Shall not we assemble an Army of such good fellows as we are, and by hazarding our lives, and the lives of such as stand with us, and withal hazard∣ing the State of our Country, remove so naughty a Prince? No, saith godly David; for I when I might, without assembling force, without tumult, or hazard of any mans life, or shedding a drop of blood, have delivered my self and Country of an evil Prince, yet would I not do it. Are not they, say some, lusty and couragious Cap∣tains, that do venture to kill and depose their King, being a naughty Prince, and their mortal enemy? They may be as couragious as they list, yet, saith godly Da∣vid, they can be no good or goodly men that so do; for I not onely have rebuked, but commanded him to be stain as a wicked man, which slew King Saul my enemy,
though he being weary of his life, desired that man to slay him. What shall we then do to an evil and unkind Prince, an ene∣my to us, hated of God, hurtful to the Commonwealth? &c. Lay no violent hands upon him, saith good David, but let him live until God appoint and work his end by natural death, or in War by law∣ful enemies, not by traiterous subjects. So far our Homily: and if good and godly men answered No to all these Questions, they are not of the godly party, though they call themselves so, who answer Yea to them; al∣though it be not against a wicked, malicious, and Apostate Prince, as Saul was, but a pious and gracious one. P. 77. We are to suffer persecution  if need be, as St. Peters words are, and not else. Now I humbly conceive, seeing the Writ De Hae∣retico comburendo is taken away in time, and the Laws protect us in our Religion, it is a need∣less thing to go to Smithfield, and there be burnt for an Heretick. It is better, if it pleased God, that we should die as Hereticks, if with St. Paul we truly worship God in a way that is so called, than to go to Tyburn and be hanged as Traitors and Regicides— For, though that Law be taken away, yet the Law of God stands firm, which enjoyns us to submit our selves not onely for fear, but for Conscience sake; and the in St. Peter in the case of our
submission for Conscience sake as well as for fear of wrath, is determined by St. Paul with an ye must needs be subject. P. 77. And so far it is fit to inform the Po∣pish Crew; lest they should be mistaken in the good Protestant Religion of our good Church, as Coleman calls it. I pray let them not be infor∣med that we obey more for fear than for Con∣science sake; No, nor that we are afraid to dye for our Religion of God call us to do it. As to your Parenthesis that we have no apprehension of persecution from any other quarter; I tell you, we have felt a greater persecution in our Age from Geneva, than from Rome; and if the one have since the Reformation in this Nation killed a thousand, the other have slain ten thousand. Your next Reflection is on the Pulpit-law (as you say the Lord Faulkland called it) of Sibthorp and Manwaring, and complained it had almost ruined the Nation. That noble Lord was indeed a great lover of his Religion and Country, and therefore was an enemy to Arbitrary Government. But when he percei∣ved that the outcry against Arbitrarie power in the King, was made with a designe to grasp it into other mens hands; and they began to exercise it not onely on the Gentry, Clergie, and Nobility of the Land, but the Royal Fa∣mily also; he repented, and so faithfully ad∣hered
to the King in defence of his Authority, that he lost his life in the Quarrel. It was the Pulpit-law in 41. and 42. that destroyed us, and brought in Arbitrary Power. But how near doth our Author come to put a border of Treason on his impolitick dis∣course, p. 78. where he says, The Arbitrary Do∣ctrine of those times, (to which both he and Mr. Hunt impute the beginning of the Late War) did not bring any great terrour with it; it was then but a Rake, and served onely to scrape up a little paltrie passive money: But now it is become a Murdering-piece loaden with I know not how many bullets. Who are they, I wonder, that preach up such an Arbitrarie Power? or who are they that make such a Murdering-piece of it? Is it not rather a Fiction of some men, who would find a pretence for a second War? For if, as Mr. Hunt says, p. 52. That the Pa∣nick fear of a change of the Government that this Doctrine (to wit, of Arbitrary Power before 41.) occasioned, and the Divisions it made a∣mong us, was the principal cause of the Late War, is it not evident that the same fears are now made Panick or Popular, to prepare the hearts of the People for another War? What else mean the bleatings of the Sheep, and the lowing of Oxen? the Vulgar Murmurs, and loud Cries of the Multitude, as if it were intended we
should be ruled by a Standing Armie, and That his Majesties Guards are a grievance; That the dissolution of a Parliament gave us cause to fear that the King had no more business for Par∣liaments? Hunt, p. 22. and p. 60. of our Au∣thor, That Parliaments should sit till they have done that for which they were called, (i. e. says our Author in his Marginal Note) till all Grievances are redressed, and Petitions answer∣ed. And then for ought I know, they might sit for ever, and so no more need of a King. What means the denying him a Supply, when Tangier was like to be lost? and not onely with-holding their own, but denying him to dispose of his Credit or Revenues for his just occasions? What mean our new Associations and Bandying into Parties, and advice even to the Clergie, not to suspend all the legal securitie they have upon the life of our present King? Hunt, p. 49. All these strongly argue that they have a suspition of Arbitrary Power; and that, by our Author's confession, was in 41, (and therefore may be suspected to be made use of now as) an incitement to Rebellion. And though our Author (p. 78.) confes∣seth, That the malignitie of this Doctrine can∣not be discovered under his Majesties gracious Reign; yet he thinks fit to put him in mind of the Securitie he hath given the Nation by his Coronation-Oath, which all Protestant Princes
value & look upon as Sacred; and likewise of many gracious Promises that he will govern according to Law. All this caution argueth more than Suspition, it looks like an Accasation; though I know no defect, but the neglect of execu∣ting the Laws against Transgressors. But if it do not fall out in his Majesties Reign, it will appear in its colours, and we may feel the sting of it, if it please God so sharply to punish us for our sins, as to let us fall under a Popish Succes∣sour, p. 78, 79. We have (I confess) deser∣ved such a punishment, for kicking against our Protestant Princes: but by the blessing of God, we may not have such a One: For who shall be King or Queen of this Realm of England hereafter (you tell us) none but God himself knows, p. 21. of the Preface. But you tell us of another may be; the Successor may be a Papist, and then he may persecute: but he may not be; or if he be so, yet I have proved he may not persecute; and our Author hath granted, p. 75. That it can never happen but by our own Treacherie, &c. Such a formidable Persecution as you suggest, is a thing impracticable, and morally impos∣sible: it hath never yet been acted by any Prince, Papist or Heathen: the Marian Tem∣pest did not so destroy Protestants, though it had been but newly planted, but in Queen Elizabeth's Reign it grew up again, and co∣vered
the Land in a few days. Now to di∣sturb our Peace and Settlement with two such may be's as are more likely may not be; to suppose such things as are morally impossible, is unreasonable, and to fear where no fear is, (saith Mr. Hunt, p. 250.) But such suppositions as our Author makes, ought not at all to be supposed: for there is greater hurt to be feared from them, (as Mr. Faukner says, p. 545. of his Christian Loyaltie) than from the thing supposed; since it is much more likely that such designes should be imagined and believed to be true, when they are false (as they were in the unjust Outcries against our late gracious Soveraign) than that they should be certainly true: And every good man, yea every reasonable man, may have as great confidence that no such Case will really happen, as can be had con∣cerning the future state and condition of any thing in this world. For which he there gives many Reasons, to which I refer the Reader, and pro∣ceed. P. 80. In this case (says our Author) all Protestants cannot flie—and many may be per∣swaded not to flie. And men are taught that the Gospel doth prescribe no other remedy but slight, allowing no other means between denying and dying for the Faith. It is cer∣tain this is the special remedy prescribed by our Saviour, though there be other means
which may be as effectual as this; Prayers and Tears, and Fasting and Humiliation have done mighty wonders. When God by Joel (cap. 22.) threatned his People with an Enemie great and strong, there hath not been e∣ver the like, neither ever shall be, even to the years of many Generations; the chief means prescribed by God himself, you may see was this, vers. 12. Therefore now, saith the Lord, turn ye unto me with all your heart, and with fasting, weeping, and mourning: who knoweth if he will return and repent, and leave a blessing behind him? And vers. 17. Let the Priests the Ministers of the Lord weep between the Porch and the Altar, and let them say, Spare thy peo∣ple, O Lord, and give not thy Heritage to re∣proach, that the heathen should rule over them. Wherefore should they say among the heathen, Where is their God? Then will the Lord be jea∣lous over his Land, and spare his people. I hope our Author will not deride such Lachrymists: if he do, Solomon tells him who will laugh at him when calamitie comes on him, Prov. 1. Again, Supplications and Petitions to our Kings may have the desired success: for hi∣therto the Kings of England have been merciful Kings; nor have any of them taken delight in shedding bloud, or designed the general ruine of their people; their own interest being bound up in theirs. Magnanimo, satis est prosasse.
Besides, it is the duty of the Chief Clergie to reprove them with meekness and lowliness, to mind them of a Superiour Potentate who will judge all men without respect of persons; which is excellently done by Gregory, Orat. 17. You govern together with Christ, and reign with him; you are the Image of God, and should imitate him in shewing mercie, and not the Devil in ex∣ercising crueltie; but should remember that he hath a Master in Heaven, who will so judge him as he doth the people committed to his charge. That whole Oration is worthy your perusal. When Theodosius had made a great slaughter among the Thessalonians, to the number of seven thousand, and coming afterward to the Church, St. Ambrose shuts the doors against him, and minds him of his Cruelty; and tells him, That from dust he came, and to dust he shall return: Let not therefore the brightness of thy clothes hide from thee the weakness of thy flesh that is under them. Thy subjects are of the same metal with thee, and serve the same Lord—wilt thou with those hands which yet drop with the bloud of Innocents, receive the bo∣die of the Lord? Depart, and refuse not this sentence which the Lord doth ratifie in Heaven. This wrought so with him, that he repented, and with much ado obtained Absolution. The Church of Liege wrote an Epistle to Pope Paschal, when he perswaded Robert Earl
of Flanders to rebel against the Emperour, and invade his Dominions, wherein they told the Pope, That Princes must be admonished and reproved gently; and if they will not amend, are to be left to the just judgment of God. Omne sub Regno graviore Regnum—Reges in ipsos imperium est Jovis. To the Assertion of an unnamed Doctor, That the Gospel prescribes no other remedy but flight against the Persecutions of a lawful Magistrate, our Author answers, p. 80. It is one thing what the Gospel prescribes; what it al∣lows, another. As if the Gospel did allow any thing contrary to its Precepts: This is that the Author would be at: for none ever que∣stioned but things in their nature indifferent and expedient, are allowed by the Gospel with∣out an express command. But that which this Author contends for, is Resistance of a lawful power in case of persecution; which is against many express Precepts of the Gospel. The Gnosticks held it lawful (for the avoiding of persecution) to deny Christ, and to comply with either Jews or Gentiles. And to resist the Ordinance of God, rather than to suffer persecu∣tion, will be interpreted a denial and betraying of our Religion (i. e. of Christ himself). An Argument of so low a Spirit, as falls beneath the courage of a Heathen, or the hearty pro∣fessors of any Religion. Seneca says of his
wise man, Placebit ei ignis per quem bona fides collucebit; That he will embrace the Fire, rather than betray his Faith. And the Stoick says, Tormenta à me abesse velim, sed si susti∣nenda fuerint, ut me in illis fortiter, animosè, ho∣nestè geram, optabo. How is the valour of a Souldier known, but by following his Com∣mander with a generous contempt of death? and shall the Christian Souldier that hath so good a Captain, be the onely coward, and fol∣low his Master at a distance, and utterly for∣sake him, when any Conflict is at hand? When therefore he demands by what Law we must die; I answer, By the Law of God: rather than resist a lawful Power, we must sub∣mit to the Will of God and our Saviour, who have promised, that he that loseth his life shall preserve it, Luke 17.33. and if we suffer, we shall also reign with him, 2 Tim. 2.12. And herein Christ himself hath given us an example, 1 Pet. 2.21. that we should walk in his steps; who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth: yet when he was reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatned not; but committed himself to him that judgeth righteous∣ly. And to such a Passive Obedience we are called, saith the Apostle. And it is not our calling onely, but an act of Grace and good will,, given to us, as to believe in Christ, so to suffer for Christs sake, Phil. 1.29. which
they that refuse to do, are said to deny Christ. So that there is little difference between resi∣sting the Command and Ordinance of Christ, and denying him: the sin is the same, and the punishment also; which St. Paul says is Dam∣nation. P. 82. As for the Kings Prerogative, I dare not be so bold with that as you are: the Dis∣putes between that and Priviledge have cost us dear already: if it were as well known as other parts of the Law are, you would not make so bold with it, though you set light by some other Laws. But even other parts of the Law, which are very well known and ap∣proved, are yet disobeyed, despised, and opposed, (as well as the Kings Prerogative) and coun∣ted the Grievance of a great Partie. P. 82. Old Bracton appears again, and is made to eat his own words: for whereas he had said of the King, That every one is under him, and he under none but God; and that he can have no equal in his Kingdom; for so he should lose his command, because one equal hath no power over another: now he is made to contradict himself, That Rex est sub lege, quia lex facit Regem, &c. which is utterly false, not onely because the Kings Predecessors came in by Conquest, but also because it is the Royal Assent that passeth all Bills into Laws. Mr. Baxter answers this, p. 14. part 4. of Chri∣stian
Directory: That Lex being taken for the signification of the Soveraigns will to oblige the Subject, the Law doth not make the King, but the King the Law. For which he quoteth Grotius, lib. 8. p. 195. Neminem sibi imperare posse, à quo mutatâ voluntate nequeat recedere. And Grotius quotes S. Augustine, Imperatorem non esse subjectum Legibus suis. And doubtless this is true in every Free Monarchie; as Eng∣land is by Historians and Lawyers granted to be. Now consider that Bracton wrote in the Reign of Henry the Third, when his Earls and Barons often confederated, and rose actual War against him, and made him to capitulate with them, having got the strength of the Nation in their hands; in favour of whom he seems to write, and calls them the Kings higher Court: not (as some) higher than the King, but than other of the Kings Courts. Yet was this no Parliament, for the Commons are not mentioned by Bracton. Now let any judge when Bracton was in the right, and when in the wrong opinion, by what followeth in the same Chapter: for as our Author blames the Doctor for not reading on; so do I much more blame him, because he came nearer to it. And thus Bracton says: Si autem ab eo peccatur, locus erit supplicationi quod factum su∣um corrigat & emendat: quod si non fecerit,
satis sufficit ei ad poenam quod Dominum expe∣ctet Ʋltorem: Nemo quidem de factis suis prae∣sumat disputare, multo fortius contra factum suum venire. (i. e.) If the King do offend, there is libertie of petitioning that he would amend what is amiss: which if he will not do, there is no pu∣nishment for the King, but to expect God to be his Avenger: but let no man presume to dispute of his doings, much less to make opposition against what he doth. And this is agreeable to that Scripture, Eccles. 8.4. Who may say to him, What dost thou? If therefore we should grant it to be true what Bracton says, accor∣ding to practice rather than Law, in those lawless times; yet Now, (as Plowden, as great a Lawyer as Bracton, says) the Case is altered: And the Oath of Supremacie against the Pope, which Bracton would by no means ad∣mit, and the Oath of Allegiance, and Act of Parliament for not taking up Arms on any pre∣tence whatsoever, would have quite overthrown Bracton's Opinion, if he had not done it him∣self. Our Author seems to apply the Premises onely against a Popish Successor; and freely grants, that when he is lawfully possest of the Crown, he is inviolable, and unaccountable as to his own person, and ought by no means to have any violence offered to him, p. 84. To what purpose then hath he given Instances of re∣proach
proachful and provoking Language, Prayers and Devotions that helpt on his death, all for his Destruction, none for his Conversion; threat∣ning to kick him, and (from Zozomen) en∣couraging the Assassination of him, when Julian was in quiet possession of the Empire? P. 94. You quote a Saying of Asterius; How great a resort is there from the Church to the Altars? &c. This is answered by Bishop Bilson, p. 502. of Christian Subjection: You find (saith he) that multitudes ran from Christ to Paganism after Julian, to Arianism after Va∣lens; but do you find that the Godly did rebel against them? What presumption is this in you, to controul the Wisdom and Goodness of God, sifting his Church by the rage and fury of wicked Princes, and crowning those that be his, as pa∣tient in Trial and constant in Truth! Were you throughly perswaded that the hearts of Kings are in the hands of God, and that the hairs of our heads are numbered, so that no persecution can apprehend his, which he disposeth not for the experience of their faith, or recompence of their sins; you would as well honour the Justice of God in erecting Tyrants that our unrighteousness may be punished in this world, as embrace his Mercie in giving rest to his Church by the favour of good Princes. Experto Crede. This good Bishop says, We have these twenty seven years endured all sorts of calamities that may befal men in exile,
therefore charge not us to be worldly minded, p. 501. See Mr. Baxter to this purpose, part 4. of the Christian Directory. What our Author says concerning Passive Obedience, p. 85. &c. shall be considered a∣non. P. 89. He is very angry that the Doctor should reflect on some dangerous Pamphlets, as that of the History of Succession, The Dia∣logue between Tutor and Pupil, and another that affirms, That Parliaments should sit till they have done that for which they were called. And contrariwise, so far commends the treasonable Popish book of Doleman, as that it was impossible to write a Historie of Succession, without borrow∣ing from it. Their Tools are so dull, they must needs be beholding to the Philistines to set an edge on them upon their Whetstones of Lyes and Forgeries. Quam bene conveniunt! P. 91. The Thebaean Legion, like a malus Genius, meets him again; and for their sakes, he is resolved rather to die a Murtherer than a Martyr: for p. 85. he puts the Case, though he confesseth it to be a rare Case: for bad Princes seldom stoop so low as to be Executioners of their own cruelty. But the Question is, if they should, How far, notwithstanding, men may endeavour to save themselves without breach of their Allegiance, and of that true Faith and Loy∣altie which they ought to bear of life and limb,
and terrene honour. If they have a mind to know, they may ask advice, (i. e.) How far, notwith∣standing the Oath of Allegiance, men may resist their Prince. For the Authors part, he is re∣solved already, but will not discover to every one what is in his heart: if he thought it un∣lawful to resist the Kings person, in case he should offer violence to a Subject, he would certainly have published it; but his Silence speaks his Consent. Now if the King be for∣ced for his defence to take an armed Guard, as our Late Soveraign was; And our Author, with other Malecontents that think themselves highly wronged, because they are not rewar∣ded according to their deserts, should meet him with another Armed Company, and fight him; he may kill his person, without break∣ing his Allegiance for bearing true Faith and Loyalty of life and limb, or any way injuring the King: for the King may be at Westminster, when they are fighting against him in the Field; And it is not Julian they resist, but the Devil that is in him. And yet I suppose that our Author, as the Law requires, hath declared his abhorrence of that traiterous Posi∣tion of taking Arms by his authoritie against his person, or against those that are commissionated by him. But where shall we go to be resolved in this weighty Case? shall we go to the Ro∣mish Casuists? they are positively for killing
the King; Mariana, and Bellarmine, and ma∣ny others, own it in divers cases. But we need not go so far; our Author hath, tanquam ex Tripode, determined it, in the Case of Ju∣lian, that such a King is to be pursued, as if he were a Midnight-Thief, or a Highway Robber, p. 73. and 'tis as lawful to destroy him, as for a hungrie Welsh man to eat up his Cheese, and cry, Chud eat meer an chad it, p. 95. To this end Our Author quoteth Gregory cal∣ling on the Angels whose work it was to destroy the Tyrant, who had not killed a Sihon King of the Amorites, nor an Og the King of Basan, but (in so doing) had killed the Dragon, an Apo∣state, the great Designer, the common Enemy and Adversary of all, with an &c. p. 23. And a∣gain, p. 61. If any one had killed Julian, he was not to be blamed (no, but to be rewarded ra∣ther) as one who shewed himself so courageous for God, and for that Religion which he approves. St. Chrysostom in his first Homily of David and Saul, teacheth another Doctrine: If we reverence and fear those Magistrates (saith he) that are elected by the King, although they be wicked, although they be Thieves and Robbers, although they be unjust; and whatever they be, not despising them for their wickedness, but stan∣ding in awe of them for the dignitie of him that did elect them; much more ought we thus to do in the Case of God. And Gregory Nazianzen
speaks home to the Case, in that 27 Oration, p. 171. Continue faithful to your Kings; but first of all to God, and for him to them also, to whom you have been committed by him. And Elias Cretensis gives this Reason for it; Be∣cause if ye fear God, and studiously observe his Commandments, you will be faithful also to your Kings for Gods sake. Now Julian's Souldiers, as our Author says, p. 8. were men principl'd in the true Religion, and therefore thought Julian stood in fear of them, as he says; yet they never did him hurt by Open Rebellion, or Se∣cret Conspiracies: nor is our Author too old to learn of them. P. 92. He sums up the strength of what hath been said, in these Five PROPOSITIONS. ANSWER. 1. Christianitie de∣stroys no mans Natu∣ral or Civil Rights, but confirms them. 1. Christianity o∣bligeth us to prefer our Spiritual and E∣ternal Rights above our Temporal and Ci∣vil. 2. All men have both a Natural and Ci∣vil Right and Property in their Lives, till they
have forfeited them by the Laws of their Coun∣try. 2. Our Lives are to be parted with in obedience to God's Laws, though not for∣feited by the Laws of our Country. 3. When the laws of God and of our Country interfere, and it is made death by the Law of the Land to be a good Christian, then we are to lay down our Lives for Christ sake. This is the onely case wherein the Gospel re∣quires Passive Obedi∣ence, namely, when the Laws are against a man. And this was the Case of the first Christians. 3. It is not the onely Case wherein the Go∣spel requires Passive Obedience, when the Laws are against a man. There was no Law of the Romans by which Christ might be put to death; yet when he suffered, he threatned not, leaving us an example that we should follow his steps, 1 Pet. 2.19, 20, 21. and hereunto we are called. To what? to suffer, though wrongfully, v. 19. and take it pa∣tiently for Conscience sake towards God. 4. That killing of a man contrary to Law, is Murder. 4. If we suffer death wrongfully, it is Mar∣tyrdom, and accepta∣ble to God, though it be Murder in our E∣nemies. 5. That every man
is bound to prevent Murder, as far as the Law allows; and ought not to submit to be murdered, if he can help it. 5. We may so by our appeal to the Su∣preme Magistrate; as St. Paul, when he was like to be condemned contrary to Law, appea∣led to Caesar, having all the Law on his side, Acts 25.8. Neither against the Law of the Jews, nor against the Temple, nor yet against Caesar have I offended: yet doubtless if Caesar had condemned him, he would have pati∣ently submitted, after the Example of his Master, though he could have had Legi∣ons of Angels to defend him. P. 93. Now I desire those men who of late have thundred in all publick places with the Thebaean Legion, to keep that complete and ad∣mirable Example till they have got another Maximian, and till that Maximian hath got authority at once to cut 6666 throats. I think there was never more need than now, to press that noble Example: for though
we have not a Maximian, but another Con∣stantine set over us; no Julian that com∣mands us to sacrifice to Idols, but One that makes it his business that we should all with one consent worship God and our Saviour in the beauty of Holiness. Though he have all the Laws of God and man to secure him from ma∣litious and violent men, yet how are the tongues of wicked men sharpned against him, (and all his Ministers in Church and State!) How are all those devilish arts of Calumny and Reproach, the fears and jealousies of Arbitrary Power and Popery renewed, which encouraged a Rebellious multitude to the cutting of the throats not of one Legion, but of twenty at least; and the cutting off the head of a most incomparable Prince too! Would the Thebaean Legion, that laid down their lives at the Com∣mand of a Maximian, have murtered a word against so good a Governour? And when the same things are attempted a second time, shall we not bring forth the Thebaean Legion to withstand such impious practices, and rise up in judgment against them, who, notwith∣standing the Laws of God and our Country too, would not onely decimate us, but, if it were in their power, destroy us (as Nero wisht that the Citizens of Rome had but one Neck, that he might cut them all off) at a stroke? I would gladly add the consideration of the
Thundering Legion to this of the Thebaean: They by their Prayers obtained relief from Heaven, and Victory too, for the Army of a persecuting Heathen; we are taught to pray for the Confusion of a Christian Prince. But this shall suffice. Under those cruel Emperours, Dioclesian and Maximian, that most illustrious example of Passive Obedience presenteth it self to our view, which the Thebaean Legion shewed, con∣sisting of 6666 valiant Christians; the tenth man of whom when Maximian had caused to be executed for refusing to slay their Fellow-Christians, and to offer Sacrifice to his false Gods; Mauritius taking the rest of the Legion aside, used this Oration unto them (as Euche∣rius Archbishop of Lions relateth in the Acts of their Martyrdom.) I congratulate your Vertue, most worthy Fel∣low-Souldiers, that for the love of Religion the Command of Caesar wrought no fear at all in you. You have seen your Fellow-Souldiers, in a manner with rejoycing minds, to have been de∣livered up to a glorious death. How did I fear lest any of you, as it was easie for armed men to do (under pretence of Defence) should by lifting up his hands give interruption to their most bles∣sed Funerals? I had now readie at hand for the forbidding this attempt, the Example of our Christ, who by the Command of his own mouth—
Put up thy Sword which was unsheathed by his Apostle: teaching thereby, that the Vertue of Christian-Confidence is greater than all Wea∣pons: here Christ our God did clearly Prohi∣bit our minds and hands, that none with mortal hands should resist the Divine Work, but rather with ever-continued Religion add a consummati∣on to the work begun. Hitherto we have read examples inserted into the Holy Scriptures, but even now we our selves have beheld whom we ought to imitate. After this, Maximian having commanded a second decimation of those that remained, (a∣mong which it is likely that Mauritius suffer'd) Exuperius taking the Ensigns of his Legion, spake thus: My most worthy Fellow-Souldiers, I hold as you see the Ensigns of a secular warfare; but to those Arms I provoke you not: I excite not your Courage and Valour to such wars as these; another kind of fight is to be chosen by us. It is not by these Swords that you can make your way to the Kingdom of Heaven. And then wisheth this Message might be returned to the persecuting Emperour: We are thy Souldiers indeed; but withal, Gods Servants: to thee we owe our imployment in the War, to him our Innocence; from thee have we received the reward of our labour, to him we are beholding for the beginning of our life: we can∣not
so follow thee in this, though our Prince, as to deny God who is our Maker, and, whether thou wilt or wilt not, is thine also— As for us, even this necessitie of our Life doth not drive us to Rebellion— Despair it self, which most strength∣neth men in dangers, hath not been able▪ to arm us against thee. Behold, we have our Wea∣pons, and yet resist not, as willing rather to die than overcome; and chusing rather to perish in∣nocent, than live Traitors. If to what thou hast already decreed against us, thou wilt add more, be it Fire, Torture, or Sword, we are ready for it. WE ARE CHRISTIANS; and such as our selves we cannot persecute. Consider, O Caesar, the courage of this Legion: our Weapons we cast away, and thy Executio∣ner shall find our hands unarmed, but our breasts armed with the Catholick Faith. Kill us, down with us, without all fear; we offer our Necks to be cut off by the Swords appointed to slay us. And so they were all cut in pieces, and each of them were more than Conquerours, obtaining a Crown and Kingdom infinitely more glorious than that of the Roman Em∣pire. Now suppose some Dissenting Apostate Chaplain of that noble Army, that had ra∣ther lose his Religion than his Life, and had
more hopes to divide the spoils of a Tempo∣ral Crown, than to trust his Saviour for an entire Eternal one, had held forth▪ to them af∣ter this manner: My dearly beloved Brethren, fellow-Souldiers and fellow-Saints, we have hither∣to hazzarded our Lives under a Pagan and Tyrannical Prince, who hath employed us as a Forlorn Hope on all desperate designs, purposely to destroy us; and though he be drunk with the bloud of our Brethren now spilt before our Eyes, yet doth he thirst after ours also, having appointed us as so ma∣ny Sheep for the Slaughter. Hearken, my beloved, the Kings of the Earth ever were, and ever will be, Enemies to the King of Heaven: It is not I, but the Spirit of God by David tells you, The Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers take Counsel to∣gether against the Lord, and against his Anoin∣ted; but the same Spirit tells us, that not∣withstanding, he hath set his King upon the holy hill of Sion, who shall break the Kings of the Earth with a Rod of Iron, and dash them in pieces like a Potters Vessel; and his Saints shall have the honour of binding their Kings in Chains, and their Nobles with Fetters of Iron. Moreover, Brethren, we read how in old time, for the sake of his Elect, God reproved Kings, saying, Touch not mine Anoin∣ted,
and do my Prophets no harm. It is true, that God hath appointed Government as his Ordinance, but he hath not tied us up to Monarchie, which all the Wise men of Greece have rejected, and called them all by the name they deserved, Tyrants. And though our Emperours came in upon us by Conquest and Surprize, yet we have been governed heretofore by a Senate; and sometime the Senate, and sometime the Souldiery have cut off their Emperours for their Arbitrary Go∣vernment, and set up others in the room. So that if we grant the Office to be from God, yet the person appointed to that Of∣fice is a Creature of man, or a Humane Crea∣ture; and they that set them up, may pull them down; for they are appointed to be a terrour to evil-doers, and to be the Mini∣sters of God to us for our good: But when he is a Murtherer of them that do well, as we see by this bloudy Execution on our Fellow-Souldiers, he is the Devils Minister, not Gods; and in resisting, we fight not against him, but the Devil that is in him. Besides, that which this Tyrant intends, is such an arbitrary Act of his own, that the great Senate, whose Counsel and Authority he hath rejected, are afraid of the like cruelty, and would be glad to be restored to their Authoritie. Let us therefore be no longer
Servants of such men, but stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free: Hath not he made us his First-born, higher than the Kings of the Earth? Are not we a Royal Priesthood? and have not the Saints a promise that they shall inherit the Earth? The Gentiles may permit Kings to exercise Lord∣ship over them, but it ought not to be so with us, 'Tis in vain to expect till the Empe∣rours become Christians; we Christians must make our selves Emperours; at least we may divide the Empire among us, and set up Christ alone to rule as King in the midst of us, in a HOLY COMMON∣WEALTH. And now is the time, or never: If we should tamely submit to the Tyrants Sword, our Religion, which is bound up in our Lives, will perish with us, and the Generations yet unborn will curse us. Did not Moses slay the Egyptian that assaulted his Brother? and were not the Israelites com∣manded to kill the Canaanites? What if some one of our number, who undervalues his Life, go and dispatch the Tyrant? Melius pereat unus quam unitas: you Romans know my meaning. Once more, my Brethren, there is a Law and dictate of nature that will justifie us in re∣sisting those that would take away our Lives. Self-preservation is a Law above any humane
Constitution. By what Law must we die, that have the Law of Nature for our Self-preservation, which is equivalent to the Law of God? And did not Cicero that great Com∣monwealths-man tell us, that Salus Populi Su∣prema Lex? If those Infidels that are appointed to cut our Throats will venture their Lives for such an Earthly Master, shall we lay them down cowardly without doing any thing for our Heavenly Master, for our Re∣ligion, which he hath intrusted us with, and will require it at our hands, if we betray it, and seek not to convey it to our Chil∣dren? And if we die without endeavouring it, we may perish in the next world for peri∣shing so tamely in this. And thus I hope I have satisfied all scruples of Conscience. And now, I beseech you, suffer a word of Exhor∣tation. Now is the time that God will redeem his People by our hands. Now is the time that we must vindicate our Christian Liberty. Now is the time that we must destroy those Romish Wolves that would devour the Flock of Christ. What though we be in our selves but few in number? Were not the people so by whom God delivered Israel, by the hands of Joshua and Gideon? What though our Enemies be many? hath it not been known, when one hath chased a Thousand,
and two put ten thousand to flight? and may not the Roman Valour, assisted by the Arm of Christ, do more than the Jewish? Besides, though there be but this one Legion that are entire∣ly Christians, there are infinite numbers scattered up and down the Empire, whose hearts are ASSOCIATED with us al∣ready, and wait for such an opportunity as our stout resistance will give them. Did not Pliny complain to Trajan, that the Chri∣stian Assemblies were so great, that their Heathen Temples were quite forsaken, Et sacra Solennia diu intermissa? Did not Ter∣tullian many years since tell us, that the Cities and Garisons, and Camp, were filled with Christian Souldiers? and are there not great numbers multiplied now, and ready to joyn with us? And a later Doctor, Cyprian, a holy Martyr, told us, that our number is Ni∣mius & Copiosus: and the numbers of such faithful brethren are much encreased rather than diminished, since that time. Be strong then, and couragious; be not afraid nor dis∣maid, for Maximian, nor all the multitude with him: there are more with us than there are with him: With them is the Arm of flesh, with us is the Lord our God to help us, and to fight our battels. Ʋp then and be doing, ye mightie men of Valour; fight the Lords bat∣tels, and he will fight for you. Do not
basely cast away your lives like so many felo's de se; sell them at as dear a rate as you can. It better becomes the Roman Valour to dye like men in defence of their lives and Religion, than ignominiously to have their throats cut like so many Swine by a bloudy Butcher: If we perish in such a glorious en∣terpize, yet we shall live in the records of the Ages to come, and give the world a good example: but if we survive, we shall enjoy the honours and glories of the world; Religion will flourish with us, and the Church here on Earth be like that in Heaven, no more Militant, but Triumphant. Such have been the Harangues of Dissen∣ters in our latter Age, and by them they have led on a multitude to Rebellion and destructi∣on: and to such an end our Author hath pro∣posed the example of the Julian-Christians. But there was not one of these Worthies (of whom the world was not worthie) durst mutter a syllable to such a purpose; they had not so learnt Christ, as to scandalize and de∣fame him and his Doctrine, as if they were enemies to Caesar: We are Christians (say they) we have Christs Example before our eyes to teach us Obedience and Patience, and his Command not to unsheath our Swords against lawful Authoritie, neither in our own or his de∣fence. We value not the honours of this life,
but hasten to the glories of a better; and in confidence of a speedie enjoyment of them, we will not make resistance, nor accept deliverance by any ungodly act. And though we see the ex∣ample of Crueltie before our eyes in the death of our Brethren that have been cut asunder and slain with the Sword, we are readie to suffer as patiently, as we hope to reign gloriously with them. Now let any serious man among us judge which were the best Christians; these Primi∣tive Worthies, who often took their lives in their hands to fight the battels of a Pagan and Tyrannical Emperour, and patiently laid them down at last, rather than make resistance a∣gainst him; or those Modern Zealots, who will hazard their lives against a Christian and gra∣cious Prince, and by their resistance, rather take away his life, than live in obedience to him, or surrender their own into the hands of God that gave it, when God calls for it? They who say of a Heathen Persecutor, He is Gods Minister, we must obey him, not onely for fear, but for Conscience sake; he hath no power but what is given him from above for the punish∣ment of our sins: Or they that say, This is the Heir, come, let us kill him, and the Inheritance shall be ours? If our Author be to be credited in any thing, this which he says, p. 68. is the plain truth of
the matter: The Julian Christians were in quite other circumstances than the first Christians were; they were in full and quiet possession of their Religion, when Julian came to the Crown; and they should have undervalued it, if they had not done their utmost to keep it:—whereas the poor Primitive Christians were born to persecution; they neither knew better, nor expected it. And after a large flourish, he sums up all in a word, p. 71. The first Christians suffered according to the Laws of their Countrie, whereas these under Julian were persecuted contrarie to Law. We never heard that the Christians in Ju∣lian's time pleaded the Laws for their indem∣nite: Nor had they any ground so to do more than the Thebaean Legion had. For, 1. No Law of Man could make void the Law of God, of worshipping God onely: And if (as St. Augustine says) he that disobeys the Praefect that he may obey the Emperour▪ is guilt∣less; so is he that disobeys the Emperour that he may obey God. 2. There was no Publick Law that one Legion should be cut in pieces for being Chri∣stians, by another; yet this was their case: They were commanded by that Tyrant Ma∣ximius to assist him in destroying the Chri∣stians. But they answered. We are Christians, and such as our selves we cannot persecute. So that either the Emperour's Will was a Law,
or else they suffered contrarie to Law. Therefore the truth of the matter is this: Our Author had committed an errour in the Foundation, and now is forced to patch and daub for hiding of it; He supposeth the Chri∣stians in Julian's time did generally do or ap∣prove of what he represents some few of the weak and ungovernable part to have done; the contrarie whereof, as to the sounder, more learned, and pious bodie of the Christians of that Age, hath been sufficiently demonstra∣ted. So that I shall now appeal to the Judge∣ment of the Reader, and to the Conscience of the Author (if it be not seared) whether this be not the plain truth of the matter which fol∣lows. The Primitive Christians, for the first 300 years, abounded in Christian sim∣plicitie; they never relished the pleasures of the World; Ambition and Covetousness ne∣ver possest nor adulterated their spirits; the Bloud and Spirit of Christ and his Apostles ran warm in their Veins, and leapt for joy, as brisk as generous Wine, when it was poured out, for the Gospel sake, to bear witness to the truths thereof. Then it was that they were afraid to speak evil of Dignities in the Church or State: then it was said, Ecce quam se invicem diligunt! Behold how they love one another! Then it was that such Dissen∣ters
that betrayed any truth of the Gospel, or any of their Fathers or Brethren, were branded with the black character of Traditores or Traitors. If ever we will learn puritie of Doctrine, or innocencie of Life, we must take our measures from the Example and Practice of those Primitive times, whenas yet they had so many Apostolical Guides among them, that sealed their Doctrine with their bloud, as Clemens, and Ignatius, and Polycarp, Justine Martyr, Irenaeus, &c. And therefore we of all others should abhor the Doctrine of Resi∣stance on pretence of the Laws, when our Laws say, We may not resist under any pretence what∣soever. Again, is not this the truth of the matter, that when Constantine established the Church in outward splendour, and Christianitie was the way to Preferment and Secular honours and advantages, Hodie Venenum infusum est Ec∣clesioe? From thenceforward the sins of Am∣bition, Emulation, and Contention, imbitter∣ed and poisoned their Spirits; they grew wanton, and began to vex and disquiet their Governours; to supplant, bite and devour one another. And Constantine himself favoured the Cause of Arius. But when Constantius e∣spoused and made it the established Religion, then, like Jonas Gourd, Arianism and Donatism sprung up in a night, and over-topt the whole
Church: Totus mundus miratur se factum Ari∣anum. Then it was that Christ was crucified afresh indeed, when his Deity was openly deni∣ed and disputed, and those few Christians that with Athanasius, Basil, Apollinaris, and some others, defended it, were banished, and ac∣counted Impostors, and Seducers of the peo∣ple, and dealt with accordingly. And from hence most probably it was, that Julian first learnt the Principles of his Aposta∣cie, which were improved by the Pagan Phi∣losophers that were his Tutors, who could disprove the Divinity of Christ from the Do∣ctrine of the Arians, that were the greatest part of Professing Christians; and Julian made use of some of their Arguments against Chri∣stianity, concluding, that if he were not God, he ought not to be worshipped. And that Apostate often expressed a greater favour to Arius, and particularly to George an Arian Bishop of Alexan∣dria, whose writings he made use of against the Christians, ut Ecclesiam suis configeret telis, than to any of the most pious & learned Catholicks. Moreover, Julian perceived that the ha∣tred and contention of Christians was so im∣placable, that his giving them the reins would be a means to destroy them, without his use of the Sword or Whip to drive them on (as when the dogs and wolves had declared war, the wolves sent a spy to discover their numbers,
who brought word their number was great, but their colours were divers, and they did so snarl and quarrel with each other, that they were not to be feared at all.) But though the truth of the Matter appears, yet we are not come to the root of the Matter, (for that is not grounded on Truth) and the bitter root lieth deep under the ground; and this it is: (saith our Author) The first Christians suffered according to the Laws of their Country, whereas these under Julian were persecuted contrarie to Law. Against which though I have said enough already to con∣vince impartial men, yet I shall now add this further: I wonder how such men can plead the Laws of the Country against Persecution, who every day persecute those Laws, and live in open defiance and opposition of them; contriving and practising how to over-throw the Religion and Government established by those Laws. If the Julian Christians did (as you say) pray for the Destruction of their Em∣perours, reproach and brave them to their ve∣ry beards, and threaten to kick them; I won∣der what Law of the Land did maintain such practices: or if they could have found out some such Law, yet the Law of God being vi∣olated by such practices, God might justly punish them for the breach of his Laws: for no Law of man, that is temporarie and mu∣table, can indemnifie us against the Laws of
God. This is a Maxime with Lawyers (as Leli∣us de privilegiis Eccl.) Nulla lex valèat contra jus Divinum. But, p. 68. Julian found their Religion in quiet possession. What Religion I pray was then in full and quiet possession? If any, it was the Arian, which your self cannot call Christian, except you add dissenting. And if, as it hath been said, it were as bad as Po∣pery, it was worse than Paganism. Perhaps this is the Religion of our Author: for no man likely can deride the Doctrine, but he that denies the Deity of Christ. But I have so far a good opinion of you, that you con∣sidered this; and do not therefore give it the Appellative of Christian Religion, but the pro∣per name of their Religion, viz. the Arians, or dissenting Christians. If this were not the Religion that was in full and quiet possession, what was it? to revile, and threaten, and pray for the destruction of the Emperour, and to contend earnestly a∣gainst the Divinity of Christ, as Constantius Julian's predecessor did? who, as Bishop Ʋsher observes, promoted that damnable errour with all his might. Was this that which you call the reigning Religion? So was that in Crom∣wels days, when Iniquity was established by a Law, (such as that lawless Ʋsurper could pro∣cure.) Can you produce any Ʋniversal Laws
made by Constantine, that the Christian Re∣ligion should obtain throughout all his Domi∣nions? Licinius and Maximian cruelly op∣pressed them long after Constantine came to the Throne. And his Senate consisted of un∣converted Romans for a great part. Eusebius, chap. 55. of the Life of Constantine, says, he compelled none to turn Christians; and chap. 59. forbid any one to molest another for his Re∣ligion. Our Author might have gone for one of the Godly partie in those daies. I do not read that there was one Law ex∣tended throughout the whole Roman Empire, which was almost Ʋniversal, but that several Kingdoms and Cities were governed by their own Laws. So were the Jews and Heathen, as well as Christian Subjects, in their several Ci∣ties and remote Provinces. As Julian told the Bishops that were of several Perswasions, that they should not disturb the publick peace of the Empire, and then they might enjoy their own Liberties and Religion. Con∣stantine seemed to be almost of a like perswa∣sion: for why else did he not suppress the A∣rian Heresie, which from Alexandria infected the whole Empire? He did take care to pre∣vent Schism and Sedition among Christians, that the administration of the Government might be more easie: But this great man banished Athanasius into France, where he re∣mained
till Constantine his Son recalled him, as Eusebius in his Chronologie. But what if there were some Edicts for the establishment of Christian Religion in Constantine's days, nothing was confirmed by the Senate; that was accounted then a needless thing. Nor did the Edicts of one Emperour bind another: by the same Autho∣ritie as Constantine might have setled the Or∣thodox Religion, Constantius setled the Arian, and after him Julian the Pagan Religion; I mean, by his own Imperial power and E∣dicts. For the Roman Emperour was an Ab∣solute Monarch; their Will was a Law, as Gre∣gory Nazianzen, quoted by you, p. 13. The Will and Pleasure of the Emperour is an un∣written Law, backed with Power, and much stronger than written ones which were not suppor∣ted by Authority. So that though he did not, as you term it, fairly enact Sanguinary Laws, yet had he the Law of the Sword in his hands. And I think it was a great mercie of God to the Christians under him, that he did not by publick Edicts put the Sword out of his own hands, into the hands of his Heathen Magi∣strates, who would have written them all in bloud. Therefore Mr. Baxter saies, p. 20. of 4th part of his Direct. Julian was a protector of the Church from Popular Rage in comparison of other Persecutors, though in other respects he was a Plague.
Valentinian was a right Christian Emperour, and when he was chosen, the Souldiers were importunate that he should assume another as an Associate in the Empire: he tells them, It lay in you to chuse me your Emperour; but being chosen, what you desire is not in your power but mine; it belongs to you as Subjects to be quiet, and rest contented, and to me as your King to consider what is fit to be done. Zozo∣men, l. 6.86. Justinian was another good Emperour, and he assumed the sole administration of the Em∣pire to himself; and demands in his Novels, Quis tantae authoritatis, ut nolentem Principem possit ad convocandos Patres caetorosque Proceres coarctare? Who can claim so great Authori∣ty, as to constrain the Prince to assemble the Senate against his will? And Justinian (No∣vel 105.) excepts the Emperour from the coercive power of the Law, to whom, says he, God hath subjected the Laws themselves, sending him as a, living Law unto men; And the Gloss noteth, That the Emperour is the Father of the Law; whereupon the Laws also are subject to him. When Vespasian was Emperour, it was declared by the Senate, That he might make Leagues with whom he plea∣sed: And though Tiberius, Claudius or Ger∣manicus had made certain Laws, yet Vespasian was not obliged by them. And Pliny in his
Panegyrick to Trajan, tells him, how happie he was that he was obliged to nothing. So that the Christians had no more pretence of ha∣ving the Laws on their side under Julian, than under Dioclesian, Maximus, or Constantius; nor did they ever plead them to justifie a Re∣bellion against him, for want of such an Ad∣vocate or Leader as our Author. Gregory Nyssene tells us also what the pow∣er of the King or Emperour was: he defines him to be , one that hath Absolute power in himself, no Master nor E∣qual: Cont. Eunomium, l. 1. So that our Author's great Babel is fallen, viz. that the Julian Christians had their Reli∣gion established by Law, and that they were long possessed of it: For, Laws or no Laws, by the Lex Regia the Emperour could re∣verse the old, and establish new as it pleased him: and for want of Laws, where the word of the Emperour was, there was power, and none might say to him, What dost thou? Thus it was with Constantine and Constantius, and why not with Julian? And now I hope the good Christians of our Age will no longer trust to such broken Reeds as our Author puts into their hands, much less that they should take up the Sword (which will be no other than a broken Reed also, not onely to fail them, but to pierce through their sides).
Now if we should turn the Tables, and ask our Author, Whether when Jovian and Valenti∣nian were Emperours, and had made some new Edicts for the Orthodox Christians, as well as against the Arians and Pagans, it had been lawful for the Arians or Pagans to rebel in defence of their Religion? Or, to come nea∣rer home, Whether when Queen Mary had established Popery by Law in this Nation, it had been lawful for the Papists to have rebel∣led against Queen Elizabeth, they having the Laws on their side, yea and questioning her Right of Succession too: yet we do not read that they did contrive a General Rebel∣lion; though, for ought I see, our Author would have justified them, when he tells us from Zozomen, what men may do for the Re∣ligion whereof they are well perswaded. Or neerer yet: when the Long, too Long Parliament, pretended against the King, that their Religion was in danger by Poperie and Superstition, their Laws and Liberties invaded by an Arbitrary Power; did they well or ill from these pretences to raise that War a∣gainst the King, that turned the Nation to an Aceldama? Were the Laws such as could ju∣stifie that Rebellion, or no? If they could not, then I am sure they cannot now, since the late Act for Treason, in the 13th of our King, and a Declaration of Parliament, That
it is not lawful on any pretence whatsoever, &c And by several Statutes it is declared, That the King is the Onely Supreme Governour of his Dominions, over all Persons and Causes whatso∣ever. And the power of the Sword or Mili∣tia is put into his hands, as well by the Law of the Nation, as of God; and I trust he will not bear it in vain. Having thus stript this full-fac'd Bird of a few borrowed and painted Feathers, how just∣ly is he exposed to be hooted at by every boy, or dealt with as in the Apologue of such another bird, that seeing the Pidgeons to be well meated and live securely, he would get him∣self to be coloured and arrayed like one of them, and feed among them, that he might no longer be forced to prey abroad for his livelihood: but having fed with the Pidgeons a while, they per∣ceived that neither head, nor beak, nor claws, were like theirs; and therefore they expel him out of their societie; and then thinking to re∣turn to his old manner of life, the rest fall on him, and banish him from them also; so that he was forced to remain alone as one in the Desart. The Moral is onely this: Though some men may for their own concerns, and for a little time, love the Treason, yet generally all men hate the Traitor. For my part, I cannot see any one particu∣lar that did so justly render Julian odious to
the Primitive Christians, as that he had been (an Apostate) Lecturer in an Assembly of Christians. And if any such shall (for am∣bitious, covetous, or vainglorious ends) seek Protection and Encouragement from some Great men in this our Age; I shall earnest∣ly beseech them to consider, that as some have entertained good Angels unawares. so o∣thers have evil ones to be their Familiars, who usually drive them over Precipices to perish in the deep: and by their fruits you may know them. For as our Saviour said, (Joh. 8.44.) Ye are of your father the devil, because they did the works of the devil; so they, certainly, that by lyes and falshood provoke to Envie, Contention, and Bloudshed; they that falsely accuse innocent and pious persons, and bring railing Accusations against their Governours, such as Michael the Archangel durst not bring against Satan himself: however they may pass for Angels of light with some deluded people, will appear to sober and discerning persons, not as an evil Spirit under a Prophets Mantle, but in his proper colours and terrours, breathing out Flames of fire, raising Storms and Earthquakes; and at last vanish, leaving an infectious and noisome stench behind them. If this Reflection savours too much of an Invective, it is what our Author's two great Leaders have suggested. So Bracton says of
a wicked King, that he is Minister Diaboli dum declinat ad injuriam; he is the Devils Mini∣ster that acts injuriously: and Gregory says it not onely of Julian, That the Devil was in him, but even of Constantius, That some Devil (he knows not of what kind) stole in with him to his Consultations, p. 25. And when our Au∣thor calls the Prayers and Tears of the Primi∣tive Christians, Mountebank-prescriptions. And p. 74. Much wonders at those who trouble the Nation at this time of the day with the unsea∣sonable prescriptions of Prayers and Tears, and the Passive Obedience of the Thebaean Legion. And p. 75. That they throw away their lives, and are certainly wearie of them, who practise any such Passive Obedience. And p. 77. That he is a felo de se, and guiltie of his own Murder. And thereupon prepares men for resistance of a lawful Power (though it be exercised un∣lawfully) with an Ei qui vult viribus uti, erit viriliter resistendum; applying what was spo∣ken by Bracton against the violent attempts of one private person against another, to the actions of lawful Princes; and so doth teach the Doctrine of Devils: for, as St. James says, Such wisdom comes not from above, but is earthly, sensual, and devilish. Though this might excuse the sharpness of my Reflections on the Author, yet when I shall shew the provocation I had thereunto, I
think every truly Christian Reader will justifie me. And this it was. When I had read that passage in our Author, quoted by him (out of Zozomen) p. 60. it came to my remem∣brance that Milton (Cromwel's Secretarie) in his Defence of the People of England for mur∣thering King Charles the First of blessed me∣morie, made use of the same quotation, toti∣dem verbis, p. 44. From him also he took the Theme on which he declaims in so many Chapters. For thus Milton: Quid Antio∣cheni homines apprime Christiani? What did the Antiochians, who were the chiefest Christi∣ans? did they pray for Julian the Apostate, to whom they came publickly, and rent him (or, as our Author interprets it, vext every vein in his Royal heart) with their reproaches, and scoffing at his long Beard, bid him make Ropes of it? And when they heard of his death, appointed publick Supplications, Feastings, and Mirth, can you think that they ever prayed for his life and safetie? What? when it is also reported that he was slain by a Christian Souldier? These are the Pillars on which our English Solomon hath raised to himself that Temple of Honour; which yet may prove but as so ma∣ny Pillars of Smoak to the eyes of all that shall inspect them; and perhaps may have a worse effect (which smoak that hath so much fire under it is wont to have) upon the Author.
But, let us observe what worthie Lectures our Author reads us on these Texts of Milton. Chap. 3. They reproached him in words. This Chapter consists of 7 pages. Chap. 4. Of their Actions. This hath about 7 more. Chap. 5. and 6. Of their Prayers and their o∣ther Devotions, makes 11 pages. Chap. 7. His Death by a Christian Souldier; where you have the passage at large out of Zozomen, commending such as kill Tyrants, 6 pages. Chap. 8. How they used his memorie, by joy and feasting at his death, by calling him Per∣secutor, Traitor, Killer of Christ, &c. with o∣ther Reflections on their Behaviour. Chap. 9. Ad finem. He quotes also the same passages out of Bracton which Milton made use of, p. 81. Non est Rex, ubi dominatur voluntas, & non Lex: exercere debet Rex potestatem Juris, ut Vicarius & Minister Dei; potestas autem injuriae Diobali est, non Dei: cum declinat ad injuriam Rex, Dia∣boli Minister est. And as if these Arguments which that Mercenarie man made use of to ju∣stifie the death of Charles the first, were not enough, our Author adds more to them; to what end, he best knows. But certainly, if that Execrable Book deserved to be burnt by the common Hangman in France, this book de∣serves to be used so by every Loyal Subject in England; it being of much worse consequence
than that of Milton: Milton's book being writ∣ten when the Father was in his Grave, and this when the Son by many miracles of mercie is setled and preserved in the Throne: where God long preserve and prosper him. And this I suppose is the reason that our Author and Mr. Hunt cannot endure the men∣tion of 48, no more than that of the The∣baean Legion; because these men are the very Marshals and Miltons, the Contrivers and Ju∣stifiers of whatever shall be done according to that pattern in the Mount, as the old Phrase was: A Mount like that which is described Heb. 12.18. So full of terrours, as made Moses himself to tremble exceedingly. Perhaps they finding no Preferment in the Established Go∣vernment, hope to get a Bootie by fishing in troubled waters; and like the two Sons of Zebedee (for they were Fishermen also) to sit the one at the right, and the other at the left hand of some Great person, when he shall come into his Kingdom. Or if the hopes of the translation of the Kingdom should fail, and degenerate into a Commonwealth, one of them may be, as Milton was, a mercenarie Historian, or under-Secretarie of State. But now I think on it, they will never be so fit as Milton was, of whom they come as short in accuracie of Stile, as they may in time exceed him in o∣ther of his Vertues and Preferments.
I would advise our Divine Lecturer to take a Doctor's degree at Salamanca (for he may despair of it here in England) and then he may be the fitter to be a Casuist and Con∣fessor to the States General, to resolve their Cases of Conscience. And for our Lawyer, if he do but read one Lecture more on Doleman, and pursue his Argument as he hath begun, he that is yet esteemed of but as the Pick-lock of the Law, and speaks things doubtfully and my∣steriously, as the Devils Oracles were wont, may come to that Top of Preferment which Mr. Br. a Quondam Brother attained: And though he never sit in Judgment, as he did; yet he shall, if his Friends will be at the cost, have that Inscription on his Tomb, which was provided for the other. Mr. Hunt speaking of his Adversary, says, p. 152. he observes for our imitation, that the Orthodox did not depose the Arian Emperours. And answers, We ought undoubtedly to imitate them therein, for that no man, much less a Prince, ought to lose any right for a Speculative errour, or meer misbelief: But onely for wicked practi∣ces, and opinions that promote, excite, and en∣courage them. As if Opinions that overthrow the Doctrine of Christs Divinity, did not di∣rectly tend to wicked practices! Hath not this Lawyer been fee'd by the Socinians to be∣come their Advocate? But might not an
Arian Emperour be resisted, and One who is truly Christian, and a Defender of the Apostolick Faith, be opposed? And doth our Author know of any more than a Speculative errour (if so much) in him whom he prosecutes so violently? Or was not Constantius his being of the Arian perswasion, the cause of many actual cruelties practised against the Orthodox, not in remote places onely, but chiefly at Constantinople, where he mostly resided? and were not many of those Cruelties acted by the authoritie of his Edicts? as I have noted con∣cerning Macedonius his Cruelties. And so for the Sitting of Parliaments till all Grievances are redressed. Milton, p. 80. Si Rex Parliamentum prius dimiserit quam ea om∣nia transigantur quorum causa Concilium in∣dictum erat, perjuris reus erit. Mr. Hunt re∣sembles him in this, as well as if there had been a transmigration of Souls. Let his Maje∣stie satisfie his people never so well by Rea∣son and Authoritie, and serious promises of frequent Parliaments; yet this man insinuates, that he acts as if there were no intent to call a Parliament any more; And that the design of the Addressers was for discontinuance of Par∣liaments, and for a Popish Successor: though he himself observes, that in thanking his Majestie for his promise of frequent Parliaments, they do desire them. See his Preface.
P. 152. He says, as our Author doth after him, That the behaviour of the Church towards the Roman Pagan Emperours was much different from that which they bore to Julian, who succeed∣ed to Christian Emperours, was educated a Christian, and sometime bore a place in the Church: for whereas the Apostles had enjoyned the Christians to pray for the Pagan Emperours, though actual persecutors of the Church; yet THE WHOLE CHƲRCH did curse and A∣nathematize Julian with an Anathema, Quo Deus rogatur ut aliquem è medio tollat. In Julianum, cum defectioni adderet Machinationes evertendi Christianismi, usa est Ecclesia isto extremae ne∣cessitatis telo, & a Deo est audita. Grotius on Luk. c. 6. v. 22. The whole of Grotius his Note to this purpose, is in these words: Sunt quae∣dam delicta tam atriocia, ut si contumacia acce∣dat; nemo non videat esse. pro tali∣bus, dum tales manent, Ecclesia non intercedit precum suffragio, quod solis poenitentibus patet: Generaliter tamen his, ut & infidelibus, men∣tem optat meliorem. Chrysostomus, ubi anathema pronunciandum, ait, adversus facta, non adversus homines, intel∣ligit districtum illud anathema, quo Deus roga∣tur ut aliquem e medio tollat. Hujus sanè ra∣rior est usus; non tamen Nullus: nam in Juli∣anum, cum defectioni adderet machinationes ever∣tendi Christianismi, usa est Ecclesia isto extremae necessitatis telo, & a Deo est exaudita.
If our Author had not been afraid to disco∣ver from what Writers he collected his Posie of Daisies, as he calls it, p. 95. he would have repeated this of Mr. Hunt, which seems to carry more of Reason and Authority than any thing else in all his Treatise of Julian. And because I suspect that he may keep this for a Reserve (for I have heard that he intends to pursue his design against all Opposers) if he bring no other weapons but such as these of the Church-Censures, we shall not fear: for these are Spiritual weapons which the Church makes use of, (and that onely against incorrigi∣ble offenders that had committed a sin to death) as their last refuge in extream necessity: yet of these he onely says, the Church doth not intercede by supplications proper to the peni∣tents; yet, generally, even to these, as also to In∣fidels, it prays for a better mind. St. Chryso∣stome (says Grotius) speaking of the Anathe∣ma that is to be pronounced against the Actions, not the Persons, understands this severe Anathe∣ma whereby God is intreated to take away the offender from the midst of the people, &c. So that Grotius and Chrysostome having de∣livered their Judgements clearly in other pla∣ces concerning Prayers for Heathenish and Per∣secuting Emperours, they cannot be understood here to write against their own, and the judge∣ment of all those other Christians afore-men∣tioned.
To which I adde this of Tertull, ad Scapulam: Christianus Nullius est hostis nedum Imperatoris, quem sciens à Deo suo constitui, NECESSE EST ut eum diligat, revereatur, & salvum velit. And in his Apol. We reverence in our Emperours Gods judgement that made them Governours; for we know that to be in them which God would have; and of this we make account as of a great Oath. And the Oath of Christian Souldiers (as Vegetius de re Militari, l. 2. c. 5.) was; Per Deum, & per Christum, & per Spiritum Sanctum, & per Majestatem Imperatoris, &c. By God, and Christ, and by the Holy Ghost, and by the Ma∣jestie of the Emperour, who next to God was to be loved and reverenced— they swore to yield him faithful Devotion, and vigilant Service, &c. And he gives this reason for it: For a man, whether private or military, doth serve God, when he faithfully loves him who reigns by Gods authoritie. P. 151. Mr. Hunt hath another Observa∣tion that deserves a special remark: Neither will we (saith he) make use in our defence of the Papists excluding the King of Navarre, a Protestant King in France, no more than we will allow the French to murder a Protestant Mi∣nister, because we execute a seditious, traite∣rous Roman Priest. Ans. It is well known, the Romish Priests
are not executed in England upon the account of their Religion, but for such crimes as are made Treason by the Laws of our Land. And if the Protestants were not executed but up∣on the breach of such Laws, the cause of Complaint would be less than now it is. But why, on your Principles, a Protestant Prince may not be excluded by Papists, who perhaps are as fully perswaded of the truth of their Religion as we are of ours, and do aver that Salvation is not to be attained in any Com∣munion but that of their own Church, I see no sufficient reason. For they may as well plead that Dominion is founded in Grace, as you do; and that may equally justisie both parties in case of Resistance: (i. e.) it can justifie neither. And the consequences of that Act of Exclusion may dread us from doing the like: For when the Guises, and other contrivers of the Holy League (as they called it) had by great importunitie prevailed with the present King Henry the Third to agree to the Exclu∣sion of Henry the Fourth, the dreadful slaugh∣ters of the Subjects on both sides were not the onely evil consequences that ensued; but the Guisian Faction grew so insolent, as to affront and distress the King himself, so far, that fear∣ing his own destruction, he was constrained to joyn his Partie to that of the King of Na∣varre, (to whose Exclusion he had consented)
that he might preserve himself from being excluded by the prevailing Faction. So that your Quere, p. 153. Whether if the Crown should devolve upon a Roman Successor we could justifie the dethroning of him, (which the Au∣thor of Julian resolves we may not) though the French Papists could not be justified in re∣jecting the King of Navarre, requires no long consideration. Tum tua Res agitur partes cum proximus Ardet. I cannot omit another bold attempt of Mr. Hunt in his Preface, where he conjures up the old Smectymnuan Monster of Curse ye Meroz, to affright all men from an accursed Nutrali∣tie, to bring them into the blessed Association. It was a wise Law of Solon (saies he) that if the Commonwealth at any time should be di∣vided into Factions, that the Neuters should be noted with infamie. And that you may know what he means, he addes, If all that are TRƲE PROTESTANTS and TRƲE LOVERS OF OƲR GOVERN∣MENT would declare themselves on the be∣half of our Religion and Government in such terms as befit honestmen, and as the exigencie of our pre∣sent state shall require, we shall find the num∣bers of Addressers reduced to the Dukes Pen∣sioners and Creatures. And again: Our Trai∣tors
would disappear, if we had no Neuters. And to slur the proceedings of his Majestie against E. S. he says, that the name of E. S. in the Abhorrences of the Nation, were but like the name of John-a-Styles and John-an-Oakes, in putting a fictitious Case. So that it is most evident that he invites, and threatens all men that refuse, to joyn in an Association: and to what that tends, the Nation is indisserently well satisfied already. If not the Comments which these men make upon that Text, the Authors and Instruments which they make use of, such as were the most notorious Incendiaries in our late War, some Jesuites and eminent Factors for Rome, some Regicides that died in their impeniten∣cie; these, and the present endeavours to act over all the Tragedies that were plotted by them a second time, may fully convince us that there is Mors in Olla, some deadly Collo∣quintida that hath so imbittered and poisoned such sort of Writings. I must beg the Readers pardon that I have not been more particular in my Remarks on Mr. Hunt: his Book came but lately to my hands; a part of mine being first in the Press, and the rest called for, so that I made it onely an Essay to provoke some more emi∣nent persons of his own Gown to chastise him according to his demerit, who have more
health and help, more time and advantages than I have. And all that love their Religion and Peace, will abhor such persons, as by the same Methods, the same Libels, and pretences of Arbitrarie Government and Poperie, the same Arguments as were used to defend the War, and the Murder of Charles the First, seek to in∣volve us in another such; and rather than not effect it, will employ and associate with any sort of Fanaticks, Jesuits, and Regicides, such as Doleman, White, and Milton their great Exemplar and Tutor. I cannot stand to give this Age a character of that Pest of the former; I mean this Mil∣ton, whose very Sores and Impostumes these Authors suck, and spit them out to poyson the People. He was one that wrote against the whole Ministrie and their Maintenance; that would have Divorces practised on every slight occasion. And when I shall say, that against his knowledge and Conscience he mali∣ciously opposed the best of Kings, I need say no more to prove him the worst of men. That Mercenarie wretch was, I confess, a man of more than ordinarie parts: and when he came in his Chap. 4. to defend the Do∣ctrine of Resistance and Regicide against that Argument of Salmasius, which proved that none of the Christians before St. Augustine's time did practise or allow of resisting the law∣ful
Magistrate, though a Heathen or an Arian; he stretched his Wit and his Reading so far, as to bankrupt the reputation of them both; as will evidently appear in my Answer to the same Arguments, which both Mr. Hunt and our Author have borrowed from him. And because it hath been creditably reported that Milton died a Papist, and it is certain that he had been at Rome, and was there caressed by some great men, (Cardinals and others) I shall desire the Reader to consider with me, whether that defence which he makes of the Popish Doctrine for deposing of Kings, in the same Chapter, be not a probable Argument of the truth of that Report. For thus saith Mil∣ton, chap. 4. p. 47. As to what concerns the Pope, against whom you DECLAIME MANY THINGS TO NO PƲRPOSE, I give you li∣bertie to talk till you are hoarse: yet that which you assert so largely, to take with the vulgar and unlearned, That every Christian was subject to their Kings, whether they were just, or whether they were Tyrants, until the power of the Pope was acknowledged to be greater than that of the King, and till be absolved Subjects from their Oaths of Fidelitie; I have shewn that to be most false by many examples. Nor doth that seem more true which you say in the last place, that Pope Zachary did abselve the French from their Oath of Allegiance; (his reason is) for Hot∣toman,
a French-man and a Lawyer, denieth that Chilperick was deposed by the Popes au∣thoritie, or that his Kingdom was given to Pe∣pin; but that all this was transacted by the authoritie of the great Council of that Nation, as appears by ancient Annals, which shew that there was no need of absolving the Subjects from that Oath; which also Pope Zachary utterly de∣nied: for in the French Histories it is recorded, as Hottoman and Girardus witness, That the French did from the beginning reserve to them∣selves a power as of chusing, so of deposing their Kings; and that they were not wont to swear any other Fidelitie to the Kings whom they created, than that they would yield them Faith and Alle∣giance, if their Kings did perform that which they also swore to do. So that if the King by male-administration first broke his Oath, there was no need of the Pope, the perfidiousness of the King having absolved the subjects from their Oath. Yet lest this Invention of Milton's own should not be of weight to clear his Holiness, he brings the Popes infallible testimonie for himself: Pope Zachary (says he) who you say did arrogate that authoritie to himself, excuseth it, and lays it on the People: for the Popes words are these; If the Prince be obnoxious to the People by whose beneficence he posses∣seth his Kingdom, the People that make the
King may depose him. So that the result of all is, the Pope and Fanatick are agreed in this Principle, The Majestas realis is in the People; as Bellarmine with Buchanan do as∣sert; and, They that create the King, may de∣stroy him with the same breath. How industrious this Mercenarie man is to vindicate the Pope, whenas his own Creatures acknowledge that he was the Dux Gregis, the grand Instrument of dethroning that King, and sharing his Inheritance! In a Dialogue between Theophilus a Chri∣stian, and Philander a Jesuit, Bishop Bilson (p. 418. of Christian Subjection) brings in Theophilus saying: Your Law doth not stick to boast that Zacharias deposed Childerick King of France, and placed Pepin in his room. Phi∣lander answers, And so he did. Theoph. Who says so besides you? Philand. Platina saith, Ejus authoritate regnum Franciae Pipino adjudica∣tur; By Zachary's authoritie the Kingdom of France was adjudged to Pepin. And Frisin∣gensis affirmeth that Pepin was absolved from the Oath of Allegiance (by Pope Steven) which he had given to Childerick, and so were the rest of the Nobles of France; and then the King being shaven, and thrust into a Monasterie, Pepin was anointed King: which you think much the Pope should do in our days. Theoph. Zachary was consulted with whether it might lawfully be done
or no: he did not openly intermeddle with the matter, whatever his privie practices were; though many of your Bishops and Monks, to grace the Pope, make it his onely act. —But hear Za∣chary's own words, when Volorade and Bur∣chard were sent to understand his judgment: I find (saith he) in the sacred storie of Di∣vine Scripture, that the people fell away from their wretchless and lascivious King that de∣spised the Counsel of the Wise men of his Realm, and created a sufficient man of them∣selves King, (This was likely the case of Jero∣boam, who had a special Warrant from God.) God himself allowing their doings. All pow∣er and rule belongs to God; Princes are his Ministers, and therefore chosen for the people, that they should follow the Will of God, and not do what they list.—All that he hath, as Power, Glorie, Riches, Honour, and Dignitie, he receiveth of the People: the People create the King, and may when the cause requireth, forsake the King: It is therefore lawful for the Franks, refusing this Monster Childerick, to chuse one able in War and Peace, by his wisdom to protect and keep in safetie their Wives, Children, Parents, Goods, and Lives. This is the Popes Divinitie, saith Bishop Bilson, that Kings have their power of the People, which the Scripture saith they have from God.
Now as to the Annals of France, it is true that the Pope had not intirely grasped the power of deposing Princes in those days, but made use of other Instruments; yet this was done, say the Annals, Pontifice prius consulto, as Sabellicus, and the Gloss in verb. Deposuit, (i. e.) deponentibus, consensit. The true rea∣son was this: Pepin was a man on whom the Pope relied to quell the Lombards, and defeat the Grecians, that he and Pepin might divide the Spoils of the West, as it came to pass: for the Emperour was turned out of Italy. Now let the Reader judge how diligent an Advocate Milton is for the Pope; that not∣withstanding his own words advising it, and the testimonie of his own creatures affirming it, and the matter of fact and the event de∣monstrating it, would yet excuse him from having a hand in deposing of that French King. And is this a fit Guide for our Modern Writers? Is it not possible (as our Author says) but to take many things from Doleman in the case of Succession? and many more from Milton, when you would irritate or defend the People of England in case of Resistance and Re∣gicide? Have the Boutefeus of this Age nothing to set the Nation into a flame, but those Fire∣brands which were rak'd up in the Ashes of that prosligate Villain Milton, who pleaded
the Cause of the Pope Gratis, and for money that of—Good God! what a Spirit of Rebel∣lion is spread over the Land! when, as it was observed by Dr. Heylen at the beginning of the last unnatural War, No times were more full of Odious Pamphlets, no Pamphlets more ap∣lauded, nor more dearly bought, than such as do most deeply wound those Powers and Dignities to which the Law hath made us subject. Me∣thinks we are like the man in the Gospel, Matth. 12.44. out of whom the unclean Spi∣rit being cast out, it walked up and down through drie places, seeking rest and finding none: then said he, I will return to my house from whence I came out; and finding it emptie, swept, and garnished, he taketh with him seven other Spi∣rits more wicked than himself, and they enter in and dwell there: and the last state of that man is worse than the first. Deus avertat O∣men! I beg my Readers pardon that I may ani∣madvert a little on these Libellers, and ac∣quaint them, that to their Progenitors we owed the kindling, fomenting, and inflaming those late Wars, that made us a confusion at home, a scorn and a reproach abroad. Prynne, Burton, and Bastwick, were like so many Fo∣xes let loose and encouraged, like the Priests and Preco's of Mars, to scatter Fire-brands through the Nation. Nor would the times
permit a little water to be sprinkled for the quenching of them, but fed them with oyl. The Laws were silenced and out-lawed then, as they are now, as if indeed we were inter Arma: there wanted not scourges to punish them, but an arm to inflict the legal Sanctions. Then it was, first, That Burton in a sediti∣ous Sermon compared that excellent Prince to Julian, and his Chapel to Julian's Altar: And tells the same storie of Maris Bishop of Chal∣cedon, who called Julian Atheist and Apostate to his face, as our Author hath done in print. That Male-content having been admitted to the Kings Chappel for a while, and defeated of a Bishoprick to which he aspired, turned Apo∣state, and defamed the whole Order as Anti∣christian. He had served that excellent Prince in his Closer; and missing of the Preferment in the Court, for his turbulency, being bani∣shed thence, he began to court the People, and sought it in the Camp; not being ashamed to profess himself an old out-cast Courtier, worn our of favour and Friends there; which was the reason that he became a Professed enemy both to King and Court. Then it was that he made his Pulpit a Drum, to beat up for Sedition and War. Prynne, Bastwick, Leyton, and many others, took the Alarm; and dipping their Pens in Gall, made way for the Sword, that glutted it self with so
much bloud. He presumes to dedicate his Seditious Harangues, as so many Fire-brands, to the Houses of Parliament; where finding too much combustible matter, he made such a flame, as warmed him a little, but made a general conflagration through the three King∣doms. Had it not been much better that two or three such Boutefeus had suffered according to their deserts, than that the whole Nation should fall a Sacrifice to those Idols of a Seditious party? There wanted not then good Laws against such disturbers of the publick peace. The Sta∣tute of Westm. the first provided, That no man should publish or tell any false News whereby dis∣cord or occasion of discord or slander may grow be∣tween the King and his People or Nobles. And a Statute was made the second of Richard 2. ch. 5, for punishing counterfeiters of false news, and lyes, of Prelates, Earls, Dukes, &c. of things which by them were never spoken, to the slander of the Prelates, &c. And the punishment was left to the discretion of the King and Council. And old Bracton records this ancient usage: Si quis Machinatus fuerit, vel aliquid fecerit, &c. If any one shall contrive or do any thing a∣gainst the life of the King, or to make Sedition in his Army, or shall give consent or counsel there∣to, although they effect not the mischief which
they designed; he shall be guilty of Treason. And accordingly one John Bonnet a Wool-man was drawn and hanged for scattering seditious Li∣bels in London. In the 4th year of Hen. 5. as Stow relates, Sir William Stanly, a person of great valour, was condemned and executed as a Traitor, for saying (less than our Author doth) That if he thought Perkin Warbeck to be the undoubted Son of Edward the 4th, he would never bear Arms against him. And in the 9th year of H. 7. Bagnal, Scot, Heath, and Kennington, who had taken Sanctuary in St. Martins le grand, were taken out, and three of them executed, for forging Seditious Bills to the slander of the King and Council. The like proceedings were made against Barrow, Greenwood, Penry, Ʋdal, and many others, who were condemned, and some of them ex∣ecuted for the like Seditious Writings against Queen Eliz. and her Government: concer∣ning which I shall present to our Authors Her Majesties Proclamation. By the QUEEN A Proclamation against certain Seditious and Schismatical Books and Libels, &c. THE Queens most Excellent Majesty, considering how within these few years
past, and now of late, certain seditious & evil-disposed persons towards her Majesty, and the Government established for causes Ecclesiastical within her Majesties Domi∣nions, have devised, written, printed, or cau∣sed to be seditiously and secretly published & dispersed, sundry schismatical and sediti∣ous Books, diffamatory Libels, and other phanatical Writings amongst her Maje∣sties Subjects, containing in them Do∣ctrine very erroneous, and other matters notoriously untrue, and slanderous to the State, and against the godly reformation of Religion and Government Ecclesiasti∣cal established by Law, and so quietly of long time continued, and also against the persons of Bishops, and others placed in authority Ecclesiastical under her High∣ness by her authority, in railing sort, and beyond the bounds of all good humanity: All which Books, Libels, and Writings, tend by their scope to perswade and bring in a monstrous and apparent dangerous Innovation within her Dominions and Countries, of all manner of Ecclesiastical Government now in use, and to the a∣bridging, or rather to the overthrow of her Highness lawful Prerogative, allow∣ed by Gods Law, and established by the Laws of the Realm, and consequently to reverse, dissolve, and set at liberty the pre∣sent Government of the Church, and to make a dangerous change of the form of Doctrine, and use of Divine Service of God, and the Ministration of the Sacra∣ments
now also in use, with a rash and ma∣licious purpose also to dissolve the Estate of the Prelacy, being one of the three anci∣ent Estates of this Realm under her Highness, whereof her Majesty mindeth to have such a reverend regard, as to their places in the Church and Commonwealth appertaineth. All which said lewd and se∣ditious practices, do directly tend to the manifest wilful breach of great number of good Laws and Statutes of this Realm, inconveniencies nothing regarded by such Innovations. In consideration whereof, her Highness graciously minding to provide some good and speedy Remedy to withstand such no∣table, dangerous, and ungodly Attempts, and for that purpose to have such enor∣mous Malefactors discovered and con∣dignly punished, doth signifie this her Highness misliking and indignation of such dangerous and wicked Enterprizes; and for that purpose doth hereby will and also straightly charge and command, that all persons whatsoever, within any her Majesties Realms and Dominions, who have or hereafter shall have any of the said seditious Books, Pamphlets, Libels, or Writings, or any of like nature already published, or hereafter to be published, in his or their custody, containing such mat∣ters as above are mentioned, against the present Order and Government of the Church of England, or the lawful Mini∣sters thereof, or against the Rites and Ce∣remonies
used in the Church, and allow∣ed by the Laws of the Realm: That they and every of them do presently after, with convenient speed, bring in, and deliver up the same unto the Ordinary of the Dio∣cess, or of the place where they inhabit, to the intent they may be utterly defaced by the said Ordinary, or otherwise used by them. And that from henceforth no per∣son or persons whatsoever be so hardy as to write, contrive, print, or cause to be published or distributed, or to keep any of the same, or any other Books, Libels, or Writings of like nature and quality, con∣trary to the true meaning and intent of this her Majesties Proclamation. And likewise, that no man hereafter give any instruction, direction, favour, or assistance to the contriving, writing, printing, pub∣lishing, or dispersing of the same, or such like Books, Libels, or Writings whatso∣ever, as they tender her Majesties good fa∣vour, will avoid her high displeasure, and as they will answer the contrary at their uttermost perils: and upon such pains and penalties, as by the Law any way may be inflicted upon the offenders, in any of these behalfs, as persons maintaining such seditious actions, which her Majesty min∣deth to have severely executed. And if any person have had knowledge of the Au∣thors, Writers, Printers, or Dispersers thereof, which shall within one month af∣ter the publication hereof, discover the same to the Ordinary of the place where he
had such knowledg, or to any of her Ma∣jesties Privy Council: the same person shall not for his former concealment be hereafter molested or troubled. Given at her Majesties Palace at Westminster, the thirteenth of February, 1588. In the One and thirtieth year of her Highness Reign. God Save the Queen. Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Chri∣stopher Barker, Printer to the Queens most Excellent Majesty. 1588. Now, either our Authors knew these things, or no: if not, they may give me thanks for minding them of these Laws, some of which are still in force, which ought to bind up their hands from the like practices, lest they meet with the like punishment. Sure I am, they are obliged in Conscience, if not in Interest, time∣ly to beg pardon, and make▪ their Recantations as publick as their Crimes. But if they did know these things, and yet act so considently and industriously against them, Miror admodum ut quorum facta imitantur, eorum exitus non per∣timescunt. Certainly these men think them∣selves in some Ʋtopian Commonwealth, ubi sentire quoe velis, & quoe sentias loqui licet; where they think according to their own lusts, and talk as lavishly. as they think: In
magna fortunâ, minima licentia. Every action of our Superiours, every word, yea, the very thoughts and intentions of their hearts, are arraigned, censured, and condemned, as if they onely were to be accountable: But as for the Mobile, Nos numerus summus, & magno domi∣namur Atridi. The confidence of their num∣bers makes them confident of impunity; and the Priviledges of the People far exceed the Prerogative of the Prince. Quidvis impune facere, hoc Regium est. Though other Restraints have proved inef∣fectual, all the wholsome Laws of the Land, all the sad experiences of the national plagues of the Sword, Fire, and Pestilence, which have fallen; or rather have been drawn down on our own heads by our Ingratitude and Rebel∣lion against God and our Superiours, have been baffled: yet those stronger ties of Gods Commandments, so plainly, so frequently, and under such intolerable penalties bound upon our very Souls and Consciences, should yet con∣strain us to live more piously and peaceably than hitherto we have done: Or at least the Mercies of God, who saved and redeemed us with an out-stretched Arm, and hath set over us the meekest and most merciful Prince on the Earth. His patience and long-suffering to∣wards us after so long and heinous provoca∣tions, his defeating the hellish Plots of our
Adversaries, who unweariedly watch for an opportunitie to devour us, should at last lead us to Repentance, and cause us to consider and do, in this our day, the things that belong to our peace, before they are hid from our eyes. Against the Sophistrie of such unreasona∣ble men for Resistance, I shall oppose the Do∣ctrine of the Apostle for Obedience and Sub∣jection, which he delivers, Rom. 13. Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is no power but of God: the powers that be, are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God: and they that resist, shall receive to themselves dam∣nation. v. 5. Wherefore we must needs be sub∣ject, not onely for wrath, but also for conscience sake.
OF OBEDIENCE ACTIVE & PASSIVE Due to our SUPERIOURS. THose few directions of the Apostle, Rom. 13.1, 2, &c. are so full and plain, that there needs no Comment on them, if men were not resolved against their dutie, and employed their wits to pal∣liate their sins, and destroy their Souls. For from that Text we are taught, 1. That all lawful Government, the  is from God; The powers that be are ordained of God. 2. That God often gives this Power to wicked men. The Powers that were in be∣ing when the Apostles wrote, were such as Nero and Claudius, Heathen Persecutors. 3. That in every Government there is a
Supream or higher Power, that judgeth all, and can be judged of none; for without such a Power no Government can subsist. 4. That such Powers must be cheerfully o∣beyed in all things not contrary to the Will of God; paying them Custom, Tribute, Ho∣nour, and Fear, as to Gods Ministers. 5. That in things contrarie to the Will of God, as we ought not to obey, so we ought not to resist. 6. That the penaltie of Resistance is the Wrath of God, eternal Damnation. 7. That we are obliged as well not to re∣sist in things contrarie to God's Will, as cheer∣fully to obey in things agreeable thereunto, for conscience sake; that is, in consideration of the Command of God, which layeth an Ob∣ligation on our Conscience. 1. That all Government is originally from God. This seems to be granted by our Au∣thor, and therefore I shall say the less concer∣ning it; Mr. Hunt also asserting, p. 38. that it is impossible any thing can be of mans appoint∣ment, which is of Gods ordination: There can be no such thing as a Co-legislative power of men with their Maker. Government therefore (says he) is of God, but the Specification thereof is of men: and the best definition that can be made of Government, is in the words of both the Apo∣stles,it is Gods Ordinance,
but a Humane Creature: Wherein he contra∣dicts himself as it were even in the same breath, having said immediately before, It is impossible any thing can be of mans appointment which is of Gods ordination, understanding it as he doth, not of the Species, but of the Origi∣nal Right and Authoritie of Government: For p. 36. he demands, Where is the Charter of Kings from God Almighty to be found? for nothing but the declared Will of God can war∣rant us— to give up the Rights and Liber∣ties of the people. If they are lawful, I am sure it is villanie to betray them. Here you plain∣ly see the people are encouraged to resist their Prince, on pretence of defending their Rights and Liberties, or else they are declared Vil∣lains and Traitors. But let us examine the ground of this As∣sertion: He quotes 1 Pet. 2.13. Where (he says) the Apostle stiles Kings, as well as Gover∣nours under them, the Ordinance of man: which cannot have any other sence, but that men make them, and give them their power; and therefore (says he) when the Apostle calls the power of Government Gods Ordinance, it is because in ge∣neral God approves of Governments; as if there were any Governours which were advanced if not Gratia Dei, as our stile hath it, yet De∣creto ac Dono Divino; when Pilate himself, who condemned Christ, had his power given him from above.
I wondered to read this, in a man that had shewed much diligence and reading (as to matters of Law) in his Treatise concerning the Bishops Right, thus to faulter and preva∣ricate, in asserting (p. 36.) that Kings have no Charter from God. And my wonder is yet increased, when I read his confident conclusion. That these two places could not be reconciled by any other interpretation but his own. I am much inclined to think that Mr. Hunt knew a better way of reconciling these Scriptures; onely, finding no other offering themselves willingly to serve his Hypothesis, he thought to press this of St. Peter to it. Now the de∣signe that he drives is against the Succession, p. 42. which (says he) is of a Civil nature, not established by any Divine Right; —and the several limitations of the Descent of the Crown, must be made by the People in conferring the Royal Dignitie and Power. Had Mr. Hunt talked at this rate in Cromwel's days, when he was about to make himself a King, it had been tolerable; but to talk thus in a Kingdom so long continued in a Legal Succession, and so well constituted, that nothing but such new sug∣gestions are like to disturb it, needeth Pardon, though he expects Praise for it. In other things I thought Mr. Hunt an in∣genuous and bold man, that spake his own Sentiments, as if he were in Civitate libera;
and I would willingly have excused him upon that account here, or as a man labouring un∣der the common fate of such as meddle with matters out of their Spheres: for seldom meet we with such Blunderers as Divines, when they attempt the work of Lawyers and States-men; or Lawyers, when they invade the Office of the Divine. But none of these things can be pleaded in Mr. Hunt's excuse: for no doubt he had consulted with such Divines as wrote in the time of the Late War, at least such as had a hand in that War, and yet survived. The Assemblies Annotations were at his hand; and I suppose he would have consul∣ted them, or such as they were, (i. e.) no great friends to Kingly Government. Hear then what they say on the words Ordinance of man. By Ordinance is meant the framing and ordering of Civil Government; called the Ordi∣nance of man, not because it is invented by, or hath its original from men; for all power is from God, Rom. 13.1, 2. though sometime he useth men as means to derive Power or Government to such or such a person or persons, that so they might be the more willing to yield Obedience: but because it is proper to men, or because it is discharged by men. And on the word Su∣preme they note: There is therefore no other Supreme on Earth above the King in his Domi∣nions.
Pareus is another common Author, and one whom Mr. Hunt probably would have con∣sulted about this Opinion above others, he having written such things against the power of Kings as deserved to be committed publick∣ly to the flames.  apellatio ad Deum primum autorem nos revocat; The word Crea∣ture recalleth us to the consideration of God, who is the Prime Author of Magistracie: for though Magistrates are said to be created, that is, or∣dained by men, yet their first Creator properly is God alone. Thus he, in the Appendix to his Comment on Rom. 13. Dubio 3. And there he teacheth you plainly how to reconcile St. Peter with St. Paul, whom you make to contradict each other. The Apostle (says he) calls Magistracie a humane Ordi∣nance, not causally, as it is devised by men, and set up at their pleasure; but subjectively, as it is administred by men; and objectively, as exerci∣sed about the government of humane Societies; or lastly, in respect of the end, as constituted of God for the benefit of men. Calvin and Beza, and generally all the Mo∣dern Expositors, say the same: and whoever reads the words following, where this Ordi∣nance of man is divided, to the King as Supreme, and to Governours sent by him, must needs ac∣knowledge, that the Apostle speaks not of the thing, but the persons. Omni personae, omni
principatui, cui nos divina dispositio subdi voluit, saith Bede on that place. Dr. Hammond's Paraphrase I think is be∣yond all exception, because it perfectly recon∣ciles the sence of St. Peter with that of St. Paul: for by every Ordinance of man, he un∣derstands every Heathen Governour, every mor∣tal Prince. And his learned Notes do evince the truth of his interpretation; which being too long to insert, I refer the Reader to them, and shall onely give you his Reason, which is this: That the Gnosticks, who had so early trou∣bled the Church, taught, that Christian Servants and Subjects were not bound to obey their Hea∣then Masters and Magistrates; whereas the A∣postle enjoyns them to obey both, not onely if they be good and gentle, but also if they be froward, if they be unbelievers. We may not make our Libertie a cloak for Ambition or Rebellion; and pretend to vin∣dicate our Countrie, when we intend to en∣slave it: As Antiochus, who brought a great Armie into Greece, pretending to deliver it, when it was in a condition of Freedom and Prosperitie: And thus the Lacedemonians en∣deavouring to free themselves from one Ty∣rant, made way for Thirtie to domineer over them. But Mr. Hunt's demand is, what Scripture we have for the Kings Charter. I answer, That
Saul had a Charter, 1 Sam. 8. for God chose him: and how far it extended, read there, and Skiccard de Jure Regum apud Hebraeos. And after God had rejected Saul, who had first rebelled against God, yet he hath the Title and the Reverence of the Lords Anointed given him by David still. And God himself calls Cyrus his Anointed (though a Heathen). And Daniel acknowledged of Nebuchadnezzar, The God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom, power, strength, and glorie, Dan. 2.27. These then had it not from the People. Pilate himself, though an Inferiour Magi∣strate, had his Charter owned and submitted to by Christ himself. And when it is said in the Old Testament, By me Kings reign, Prov. 8.15. and in the New, even of the Roman Em∣perours, such as Nero and Claudius, that they are ordained by God, and that our Obedience is due to them for the Lords sake, and for Con∣science sake; He must be an Ignoramus, or worse, that can see in Scripture a Charter for the Peoples rights and power even to resist their Prince, and none for the Prince to vindi∣cate his Authoritie over the People. It would be irksome to the Reader to relate what is obvious in Heathen Writers concern∣ing the Original of Kingly power. Nature did at first find out a King, saith Seneca: And A∣ristotle says, That by nature not onely the Father
hath rule over his Children, but also the King o∣ver those that are within his Kingdom. This is the Government that God himself erected from the beginning, giving to Adam a Patri∣archal, which is tantamount to a Monarchal power. This he granted to Israel, and con∣tinued to the coming of Christ. To this power in the Romans, Christ and his Apostles submit themselves, and command every Soul to follow their examples: and all the Primi∣tive Christians did so, till the Pope of Rome, to the great scandal of Christianitie, invaded the Thrones, and usurped the power of their lawful Emperours. Gregory the Seventh, Pope Ʋr∣bane, and Paschal were the first that stirred up Subjects against their Princes, and the Son a∣gainst his Father. We are taught (saith Polycarp) to yield O∣bedience to all Principalities under God, except in things destructive to our Souls. Therefore do as you please; cast me to wild beasts or the fire, which is not to be compared to that eternal fire prepared for the ungodly. In the Constitu∣tions of Clemens, it is declared a hainous sin to resist the Prince: and the Councils for 1200 years taught no other Doctrine. And when those Popes first turned Rebels, and procee∣ded so imperiously as to Excommunicate the Bishop and Church-men of Liege for adhering to the Emperour, and stirred up Robert Earl
of Flanders to destroy all that Clergie; they wrote a most excellent Epistle, declaring, That they never had heard of any such Doctrine or Practice from any of the Fathers, and that they had observed fearful Judgments of God falling on such as did rebel against their Princes. And so it fell out: for all the Popes great Instru∣ments, Radolphus, and Herman, and Egbert, were cut off; and gave the World magnum Documentum, a severe Caution not to rise up against their Princes, no not for the sake of an Infallible Pope. This was the sence of the Primitive Fa∣thers. Irenaeus proves it by Scripture, and concludes, By whose command they are born men, by his command they are made Princes. So Tertul. Inde Imperator, unde homo; inde po∣testas, unde Spiritus. It is God (saith Origen) who setteth up Kings, and removeth them; and in his own time raiseth up such a one as is useful to the State: Contra Celsum. Theophilus Bishop of Antioch; I will honour the King, not adoring him, but praying for him; knowing that by God the King is ordained. So Athenagoras, of Aurelius and his Son Commodus, says, They had received the Kingdom from above. St. Basil also on Psal. 32. The Lord setteth up Kings, and removeth them; and there is no power but what is ordained of God. And to conclude with Greg. Nazianzen, concerning the Power of the
Governor of his Province, Orat. 17. to the Citi∣zens of Antioch, That together with Christ he did rule the people committed to his charge; that from him he had received the Sword, and was to be accounted as the Image of God. So S. Chrysostom: And if we reverence those Officers that are chosen by the King, though they be wic∣ked, though they be Thieves and Robbers, not despising them for their wickedness, but standing in awe of them for the dignitie of him that ele∣cted them; much more ought we thus to do in the case of God, and the King chosen by him. Serm. 1. of David and Saul. So that even wicked Princes have a Charter from God. So, our Saviour said of Pilate, Joh. 19.11. Thou couldest have noautho∣ritie or power against me, except it were given thee from above. And St. Paul of the Roman Emperors, There is no power but of God, the powers that be, are ordained of God; and he that resists, resisteth the Ordinance of God. And that St. Peter says the same, though in other words, hath been made evident: Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether to the King as supreme: for so is the will of God, 1 Pet. 2.13-15. St. Augustine, de Civitate Dei, l. 5. c. 21. Regnum terrenum dat Deus piis & impiis: Qui Mario, ipse Caio Caesari; qui Augusto, ipse & Neroni, &c. God gives an Earthly
Kingdom both to good and evil Princes: He that gave it to Marius, gave it to Caius Caesar; he that gave it to Augustus, gave it to Nero; he who gave it to the Vespasians, Father and Son, most mild and loving Emperours, gave it likewise to that most cruel man Domitian: And not to recount them all, he that gave it to that Christian Prince Constantine, gave it to that Apostate Julian. These things, without doubt, that one and true God doth rule and govern as he pleaseth, although for secret causes, yet not for unjust. So the Prophet, Dan. 2.37. Thou, O King, art a King of kings: for the God of heaven hath given thee a kingdom, power, strength, and glorie. And chap. 5.21. The most High ruleth in the kingdom of men, and gi∣veth it to whomsoever he will, chap. 4. And as God setteth them in the Throne, so he rules by them, and over-rules them, gui∣ding all their actions to his own just and wise ends. If all the Princes of the World should conspire, they can do no more than what Gods hand and counsel have determined before to be done, Acts 4.28. God knows how to effect good and gracious ends, even by wicked Kings. He made Cyrus an Instrument to build him a House in Jerusalem, 2 Chron. 36.23. and calls Nebuchadnezzar his Servant, Jer. 25.9. The heart of the King is in the hands of the Lord as the rivers of water; he turneth
it whithersoever he pleaseth. He can restrain the spirits of Princes, as he did Abimelech, and not suffer them to touch his People. He can cause the wrath of man to turn to his praise. He stirred up the spirit of Cyrus to deliver the Jews from the Captivitie of Babylon, Ezra 1.1. He made Darius and Artaxerxes instrumen∣tal in building and beautifying the House of the Lord, Ezra 6.22. and chap. 7.27. Wherefore, as the Psalmist says, Psal. 97.1. The Lord reigneth, let the earth rejoyce: let the multitude of the isles be glad thereof. For though Clouds and Darkness are round about him, and we cannot see the reason or end of his Providences; yet Righteousness and Judgment are the habitation of his Throne, v. 2. Were the Almightie like the Epicureans God, that could not intend the affairs of the world with∣out great trouble, and therefore retired him∣self, and left all to Chance, we might then think it fit to chuse for our selves: but when every Choice and every Chance is ordered by the Almightie and wise God; when it is said, Sam. 18.18. The people had chosen Saul, chap. 10.24. it is said, The Lord had chosen him. And if the Magistrate be chosen by Lot, yet, as Solomon says, Prov. 16.33. The Lot is cast into the lap, but the whole disposition thereof is of the Lord. We may not say there∣fore as that Prince did, 2 King. 6.33. when
God had sent a Famine in Samaria, This evil is from the Lord, why should I wait on him any longer? much less should we resist the esta∣blished Ordinance of Heaven: for, if it be of God, ye connot overthrow it, lest haply ye be found even to fight against God, Acts 5.39. in whose all-wise dispensations we ought to ac∣quiesce, and patiently to submit to them. When Jeroboam rebelled against Rehoboam a wicked Prince, you may find what a black character he and his Confederates have in the Scripture, 2 Chron. 13.5. Ought you not to know that the Lord God of Israel gave the kingdom over Israel to David and to his sons for ever, by a covenant of salt? yet Jeroboam the servant of Solomon the son of David is risen up, and hath rebelled against his Lord. And there are ga∣thered to him VAIN MEN THE CHIL∣DREN OF BELIAL, and have strengthned themselves-against Rehoboam when he was young and tender-hearted, and could not with∣stand them. And now ye think to withstand the kingdom of the Lord in the hands of the sons of David.—v. 12. O ye children of Israel, fight ye not against the Lord God of your fathers: for ye shall not prosper. From this Scripture these Observations are obvious.
1. That a Succession to the Crown, Jure Divino, is no new thing, v. 5. 2. That it is no Excuse for breaking Gods Command, to plead we followed Providence. 3. That to rebel against an evil Prince, such as Rehoboam was, is to rebel against the Lord, v. 8. 4. That such as strengthen such a Rebellion, are Sons of Belial, v. 7. 5. That the Kings hearkning to evil Coun∣sellors, is no sufficient Plea to warrant a Re∣bellion. 6. Nor his oppressing the People. 7. That notwithstanding their great num∣bers (Jeroboam having eight hundred-thou∣sand chosen men of valour) they shall not prosper, v. 12. and v. 17. there fell with Je∣roboam five hundred thousand men of va∣lour. 8. That Rehoboam was not so bad, but Je∣roboam was much worse: for he made all Is∣rael to sin, setting up Calves as Gods, for the People to worship; whereas under Reho∣boam the Worship of God was preserved (though the People were oppressed) v. 10. The Lord is our God, and we have not forsaken him; and the Priests which minister to the Lord, are the sons of Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their business.
9. That after that bad King, God sent o∣ther, good ones, to establish his Worship: and therefore we must wait the Lords leisure, and not murmur against, nor resist his Ordi∣nance and Decrees, but submit to the hand of God, who often punisheth a wicked People by an unrighteous Prince.
HOW FAR Wicked Princes Ought to be obeyed. 1. NEgatively: not in any thing con∣trary to the revealed Will of God: to all Gods Laws they are bound themselves, Deut. 17.18. And God will call them to a more severe account than others, there being greater obligations laid on them, and their evil Examples like to do more hurt. And much more are we bound to obey those Laws of God which oblige the greatest Po∣tentates, above any Laws of men. 'Tis St. Augustine's Gradation, De Verbis Dom. Ser. 6. If thy Curator command thee any thing, must it not be done? yet if the Proconsul coun∣termand it, thou despisest not thy Curator, but servest a greater. And if the Emperour com∣mand one thing, and God another, what do you judge fit to be done? And it is resolved thus: Da veniam Imperator; tu carcerem, ille Gehen∣nam
minatur: We ought to obey God rather than man. 2. Positively: In all things that are not contrary to Gods Will, we ought cheerfully to obey: So St. Basil, Re∣gula Ethic. 79. Where the Command of God doth not hinder or interpose. For otherwise they have no power at all. Whatever is really good, God hath commanded us already, and forbidden whatever is evil; but hath left the command of things indifferent to his Vicege∣gerents, to judge of the expediencie and use∣fulness of them: And if we obey them not in this, we obey them in nothing. Which is well expressed by Aulus Gellius a Heathen, in the person of a Father commanding either what is right or what is wrong. If it be right, it is to be done, not because he commands it, but justice requires it: If it be wrong, it ought not to be done, because it is unjust; and therefore the Father is not to be obeyed in any thing. To this Aules Gellius answers, that the division is imperfect, because there are things of a middle nature, wherein the Father is to be obeyed with a filial ingenuity and readiness: which is much more strong in behalf of the Prince. The word used by the Apostle is  a military word, signifying to be under com∣mand: and as the Centurion said of his Soul∣diers, Matth. 8.9. If I say to this man, Go, he
goeth; to another, Come, and he cometh; and to my Servant, Do this, and he doeth it. And thus the Centurion did himself: for he was  under Authoritie. And such obedience we must yield, as St. Paul requires by Titus 3.1. where to the  he addes, , (i. e.) dicto obedire, and to be ready to every good work. We ought to obey even a Popish Prince, saith Mr. Baxter. And there can be no question but we ought to obey them in what God hath commanded: We ought to pay them Tri∣bute and Custom, as Tertullian testifies of the Primitive Christians: we ought to shew them Reverence, Honour, and Fear: we ought, as good and profitable Members of the Com∣monwealth, diligently to follow our Callings, and advance the Trade and happiness of the Nation: We ought to defend their Persons, and fight their Battles against their Enemies; and in extraordinary cases, to give them ex∣traordinary assistance. We bring unto you, said Justine Martyr to Antonius, more help and Tri∣bute than all others, being taught by our Lord to give to Caesar the things that are Caesars: We ought to pray for the welfare of them and their people, that with and under them we may lead quiet and peaceable lives. So Tertullian prayed for Domitian a great Tyrant, for his long Life, secure Empire, stout Armies, faith∣ful
Senators, & quaecunque hominis & Caesa∣ris vota sunt. We ought to bless God for the good things we enjoy under them; we ought not to envy at their prosperitie, to mur∣mur and repine at every severe Dispensation; but to our Prayers joyn Intercessions and Thanksgivings: for though there be some E∣vils in their Government, yet there would be more, if that Government should be turned into Anarchy and Confusion. Si ubi jubeantur (Milites) quaerere sin∣gulis liceat, pereunte obsequio, etiam Impe∣rium intercidit, as Tacitus, l. 1. If Souldiers be permitted to dispute the Commands of their General, the whole Empire may fail on the neg∣lect of obedience. It was a severe Counsel gi∣ven by St. Augustine (Epist. 73.) to Possidonius: Rather think what course you ought to take with them that will not obey, than to convince them that what they do is unlawful. And in truth, there would be endless Dissentions, if every Subject should be permitted to dispute the lawfulness of such Commands as are enjoyn∣ed him, not by his Prince alone, but by the mature deliberation of his Council; especially when, as it is with us, every one hath his vote in chusing those Counsellor, that in our names consent to the Laws. This were to do what is foretold by Solomon, Prov. 20.25. After vows to make enquiry.
It is a pernicious Opinion, that hath infe∣cted too many of this Age, That though we do not actively obey the Princes Commands, yet if we submit to the Penalty, the Law is satisfi∣ed, and we are free from guilt. In answer to which, I say: 1. That Obedience is more than Non-resi∣stance; it must be active and cheerful, as in paying Tribute and Custom, so in other parts of obedience; to go and come, and do what is com∣manded. 2. Suffering, or paying the penaltie, is not the chief intention of the Law; but the du∣ty of Obedience, without which the ends of Government will be frustrated, viz. Peace and good Order. 3. The Law of God enjoyns us to obey the Laws of men that are not contrary to his Law. Now though we satisfie the Law of our Country by bearing the penalty, yet the Law of God is not thereby satisfied; that Law requires Repentance and Amendment, (i. e.) that we do so no more. As in that instance of frequenting Divine Service, we do not think a Papist hath satisfied the Law when he pays Twelve pence; neither indeed do others: For it is Gods Law that is broken, who commands us not to forsake the publick Assemblies; and to obey them that have the rule over us: For we are to obey for Consci∣ence
sake, (i. e. because of the obligation which the Command of God hath laid upon us). And when the Magistrate calls for our obedi∣ence in this or that particular which is not a∣gainst Gods Word, God commands our obe∣dience to him, he having Gods Authority in such cases; and to disobey, is not onely to disobey man, but God: Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, and for Conscience sake: and the penalty of diso∣bedience is damnation. So that it is an Atheistical Suggestion, that Rulers and Tyrants did first invent Religion, to keep men in awe. For although no other Terrours are sufficient to keep men in obe∣dience but those of Hell and eternal Damna∣tion, because men may carry on their mischie∣vous designs so secretly, or with such a high hand, as to escape punishment in this life; yet it is not man but God that requireth obedience even to humane Laws, under the Severest San∣ctions of Eternal Death.. Object. But what if the thing commanded be not good? then we owe no Obedience: for the Magistrate is no longer Gods Minister than he commands for God: When he commands against God, he commands without Authority, and so we may disobey him without sin. Answ. There are but two Rules whereby we are to judge whether the Commands
of our Superiours are good or not. The first is the Law of God; and when we make that our Rule, we must be as sure that the Word of God condemns what the Magistrates command, as we are sure that God commands us to obey our Magistrate: And in all reason we should chuse what is our most plain and indispensable duty, before that which is doubtful; especially when the penalty of not obeying is no less than Damnation: for that is the wages of sin, or disobedience to Gods Law. 2. A second Rule is the Laws of men, which do bind the Conscience when the Command is not contrary to Gods Word. So that the Case to be resolved is onely this: What we must do when the Magistrate commands things which we judge not expedient. In which case, considering especially our circum∣stances, the Laws established being such as we our selves have consented to, it is too late for us to dispute the inexpediency of them; for so there can never be an establishment, it being impossible to make such Laws as may not be excepted against by some, especially such as transgress the Laws. In such cases therefore, the Magistrate, not the Subject, is to expound the Law. It is sufficient that the Laws have a tenden∣cie to the publick and more general good, though
some private men may suffer in the Execu∣tion of them: And when resisting those Laws which are made, will do more hurt than good, we ought to obey them, though we suffer un∣justly in so doing. As Dr. Sanderson gives an instance in Souldiers who for their Cowardise, or some other crime, are adjudged to be puni∣shed in a way of Decimation, (i. e. every tenth man): now although some of those that suffer may be guiltless and valiant men, yet the private inconvenience must be endured, rather than a publick mischief should be tole∣rated. Of this the Learned Casuist speaks so largely and satisfactorily, that I shall refer my Reader to his last Praelection, p. 356. De Obligatione Conscientiae. When we are commanded to do what we apprehend not to be for our good, we must have a double consideration: First, to the person commanding, who is Gods Minister, and therefore may not be resisted, though, in the second place, he abuse his power in comman∣ding what is not good or lawful: For if in this case we resist, we usurp the Power, and invade and destroy the Order and Government that God hath set over us. If we might resist when we apprehend that we are commanded things against our Religion, our Laws, or Liberties, then there could be no such thing as Rebel∣lion; and then there would not long be any
such thing as Religion, Libertie, or Govern∣ment in the world. Doubtless the Apostle was sensible what kind of Governours were in Rome when he wrote his Epistle, name∣ly, such as commanded for the most part things that were impious; yet we read not of any resistance: and doubtless those Primi∣tive Christians best knew the Apostles mind, and practised accordingly.
THE REASONS For not resisting Wicked Princes. BEcause, 1. He is Gods Minister. For the Lords sake, we must submit, saith St. Peter, and for Conscience sake (i. e.) for the Obligation that God hath laid upon us as he is Gods Minister. This swayed with Da∣vid: He was the Lords Anointed, and there∣fore, he could not lift up a hand against him: nor would St. Paul speak evil of any of the Rulers of the People. For, to speak evil of them, is accounted as Blasphemy, and Disobedi∣ence is as Sacriledge: And, as St. Paul, A resi∣sting of the Ordinance of God. Obj. As he is Gods Minister for good, we are ready to obey him▪ but when he commands what is evil, he is no longer Gods Minister, but the Devils, and we ought not to obey him.
Ans. He is Gods Minister still as to his Of∣fice, though in respect of the abuse of it by un∣righteous Actions, he do the work of the De∣vil. And many times God placeth cruel and unrighteous Kings, (as a just Judgment) over an unrighteous people; according to the Im∣precation of David against those that were e∣nemies to so good a King, Set thou an ungodly man to have rule over them. Regis quando boni sunt, muneris est Dei; quando mali, sceleris est populi. When good Kings bear rule, it is a token of Gods Favour; when wicked ones, it is the effect of the peoples Iniquity. As Job says, Chap. 34.30. juxta Septuag. Regnare facit Hypocritam, propter pec∣cata populi. God takes away good Kings in his anger, and sets evil ones in their rooms: yea, many times, for the sins of the people, he permits good Princes to fall, as he did David in numbring the people, that they and their King might suffer under a common Calamity. It is an observation of Aeneas Sylvius, de Ortu Im∣perij, c. 16. Deus saepe propter peccata Subdito∣rum deprivari permittit vitam Rectorum. When Rehoboam hearkned to evil Counsellors, 1 Kin. 12.15. The Cause was from the Lord, that he might bring to pass his saying, &c. Now who shall judge whether the thing commanded be for our good or not? We have very plain precepts which require our Obedience
to Princes in all things that are not against the word of God: And we ought to have as plain precepts Affirmative or Negative for the things that we resolve to do or not to do according to the Kings command: i. e. No∣thing can justifie our disobedience to our Prince, except there be as plain Scripture-proofs for the intrinsecal evil of the action commanded, as there are for the necessity of Christian Obedi∣ence. Where is it said, Ye must needs disobey your Prince when he commands you to worship God in the publick assemblies, or to pray unco∣vered, or to receive the Sacrament on your knees; as it is said, Let every soul be subject to the higher powers; and, Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man; and, Obey Magistrates and them that have the rule over you? In this one Common Good of Order and Go∣vernment, many good things are included: for, as Cicero said, de Legibus 3. Without Govern∣ment, neither House, City, or Nation, nor Man∣kind, nor Nature, nor the World it self could subsist. And St. Chrysostom on Rom. Hom. 23. Take away the higher Power, and all goes to wrack; neither City, nor Family, nor Assembly, or any thing else can stand; the stronger will de∣vour the weaker, and all things be turned up∣side down. It is therefore concluded by all Wise men, That a bad Prince is better than none. For a demonstration whereof, the Per∣sians
after their Kings death permitted the people to live in a Lawless manner for five days together, that after the experience of the out∣rages and violences committed in the inter∣regnum, they might be the more endeared to their Prince. Consonant to which is that in Judges, chap. 21.16. when there was no King in Israel, every one did that which was right in his own eyes: which made them on any terms to desire a King. 2. We are to obey them, that we may silence the ignorance of foolish men, that think and speak evil of Christianity, as if it set up Christs Kingdom against Caesars, and a good Christian could not be a good Subject; which slanders we should confute by our peaceable conversations: and this will gain us favour at home, by miti∣gating the Princes displeasure; or toleration a∣broad, if we be put to flie for our lives, when it shall be known that we are of peaceable and patient Conversations. The Christian Religion was from the be∣ginning reproached as a disturber of the Secu∣lar powers; and therefore it was the Care of Christ to clear his Disciples from this Crime, by paying tribute, and living in subjection to the Rulers of this world, that he might give them no offence. And the Apostles knowing that they were reported to be Seditious, and such as would turn the world upside down, have
taken all possible care to undeceive the ene∣mies of the Gospel, by obliging the professors thereof to obey their Rulers, under the greatest obligations that the wit of men could in∣vent. So that in case the King do command such things as are evidently forbidden by God, we see what is then to be done: we must peace∣bly acquiesce in the providence of God; as Taci∣tus said, we may bonos Imperatores voto expetere quoscunq: tolerare, l. 4. Submit to them as Instru∣ments and Rods in the hand of God, correcting or punishing us for our sins. God hath the de∣vil himself in a Chain, and hath set bounds un∣to him: as in the case of Job, whose life he could not take away, nor go beyond Gods Com∣mission. Commit your selves therefore to God in well doing▪ who hath said, Vengeance is mine, and I will repay it. And as David to Saul, 1 Sam. 24.12. The Lord judge between thee and me, and the Lord avenge me of thee; but my hand shall not be upon thee: or, as in 1 Sam. 26.10. The Lord shall smite him, or his day shall come to dye, or he shall descend into the battel and perish: the Lord forbid that I should stretch forth my hand against the Lords Anoin∣ted. We may not impute all that we suffer to our enemies; the hand of God is in it, and we must (as David did) acknowledge it to be the
Lords doing. We must receive evil at the hands of God, as well as good; and bless him when he takes away, as well as when he continues his Mercy to us. Jer. 29.7. The Jews were commanded to seek the peace of that City (though it were Babylon) wherein they were Captives, and to pray to the Lord for it: for in the peace thereof ye shall have peace: and doubtless in the disturbance of it, they were like to be the first and greatest sufferers. Obj. But may we not resist wicked Prin∣ces when they unjusty seek our destructi∣on? Ans. This (says our Author) is the Mahometan Doctrine of the Bow-string: which I think is a most scandalous, if not blasphemous expres∣sion. For this example our Saviour hath set us, who though most innocent and most af∣flicted, yet was most patient under all his suf∣ferings: and we must look to Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith. And it is directly contrary to 1 Pet. 2.19. where, in the judg∣ment of all Expositors, we are in the same man∣ner to obey Magistrates as Masters, (i. e.) though we suffer wrongfully, to take it patient∣ly, as our Saviour hath given example, who when he suffered he threatned not, &c. Read chap. 4.12, 13. and chap. 3.14, 15, &c. Those Christians who wrote their Apolo∣gies to the Emperours and Governours that were
then persecuting of them, would not dare to speak any thing but what was an apparent truth; yet they all disclaim the practice of Resistance, as contrary to the Doctrine that they had received, viz. to be Subject to the Higher Powers, &c. Thus Justine Martyr, Lactantius, Athenagoras, Cyprian, &c. I shall name one for all. We are defamed (saith Tertull. ad Scapulam) touching the Imperial Majestie; yet never were Christians found to be Albinians, Nigrians, or Cassians: (i. e.) they never sided with any Factions against the Emperours; though if they had so done, their numbers were so great, that they might have overthrown his Forces: They might in one night with a few Fire-brands avenge them∣selves, if they held it lawful to revenge evil with evil. Had we been minded to profess o∣pen Hostilitie, could we want numbers of men, or force of Arms? we have filled your Islands, Castles, Towns, Tents, Tribes, and Wards, yea even the Palace, Senate, and place of Judge∣ment. For what War were not we able, though fewer in number than you, who go so willingly to our Martyrdom, if it were not more lawful in our Religion to be slain than to slay? And yet under all their Persecutions they multiplied: Li∣gabantur, includebantur, torquebantur, urebantur, laniebantur; & tamen multiplicabantur, saith St. Augustine, de Civit. Dei, l. 22. c. 6.
Grotius, l. 1. c. 4. de Jure Belli, &c. speak∣ing of that Sacred Maxime of the Apostles, Acts 4. It is better to obey God than man, dis∣courseth thus: If either for this (i. e. our obedience to God) or for any other cause, he that hath the Soveraign power offer us an injurie, it ought rather to be patiently tolerated, than forcibly resisted: for al∣though we do not owe an Active Obedi∣ence to such Commands of Princes, yet we do owe a Passive: we may not transgress the Laws of God or Nature for the pleasure of the greatest Monarch, yet ought we ra∣ther patiently to submit to what shall be in∣flicted on us for disobeying, than by resi∣stance to disturb our Countries peace. The best and safest course, in such a case, is either to preserve our selves by flight, or resolutely to undergo whatever shall be imposed on us. His Reason is cogent: Because Civil Societies being instituted for the preserva∣tion of Peace, there accrues to that Com∣monwealth a greater Right over us and ours, so far as is necessarie for that end.—And if a promiscuous Right of forcible Resistance should be tolerated, it would be no longer a Commonwealth, (i. e.) a Sanctuarie a∣gainst Oppression, but a confused Rabble. For this, among other things, he quotes that noted Saying, Principi Summum rerum
arbitrium dii dederunt, subditis obsequii glo∣ria relicta est. God hath given to Princes the Soveraign power, leaving to us the glo∣rie of Obedience. If a Souldier resist his Captain, striking him, and but lays hold of his Weapon, he is casheered; if he break it, or strike again, he shall be put to death. That this was the Hebrew Law, he proves from Josh. 1.18. 1 Sam. 8.11. Deut. 17.14. which he so expounds, That the Governours may not be resisted, though they command what is not right. And therefore it is ad∣ded in that place of Samuel, v. 18. that when the people are so oppressed by their King, that there is no remedie, they are to invoke his help who is the Supreme Judge of Hea∣ven and Earth. And when our Saviour commands in the New Testament to give Caesar his due, he intended doubtless that they should yield as great, if not greater O∣bedience, both Active and Passive, unto the Higher Power, than what was due from the Jews; which St. Paul (Rom. 13.) expounds more largely, and chargeth those that resist the power of Kings with no less Crime than rebellion against Gods Ordinance, and with a Judgment as great as their sin. So that as there is a necessitie for our Subjection, there is also for our Not Resisting: Wherefore the Powers set over us are to be obeyed, not ser∣vilely,
superstitiously, or out of fear; but with free, rational, and generous Spirits, tan∣quam à diis dati, as being Gods Ordinance; and being commissioned by him, cannot do more or less than he orders and permits them to do. Another reason is drawn from our benefit, the Government being constituted for our good, and therefore in conscience not to be resisted: for the Apostles Argument respects that universal good for which Government, was first instituted, (i. e.) the publick Peace, wherein every one is concerned more than in his private.—Now he that resists, doth as much as in him lies dissolve his Countries Peace, and so will burie himself in the Ruines of it at the end; and were it not for Go∣vernmens, a Kingdom would be but like a great Pond, wherein the bigger Fishes devour the lesser. Omnia erit fortiorum. Object. The Commands of Princes do not alway tend to the publick good; and when they decline from that end, they are not to be obeyed. Answ. Though the Supreme Magistrate doth sometime, through fear, anger, lust, or other passions, swerve from the path of Ju∣stice and Equitie; yet these hapning but sel∣dom, are to be past by as personal blemishes: which, as Tacitus observes, are abundantly
recompensed by the benefit of better Princes. —Laws may be called good, though they fit not every mans case, if they obviate such dis∣orders as are frequently practised, and so do good to the generalitie of the People. Thus Grotius. If the People may resist their Prince, I would know in what Cases it may be done. It may be done (say some) in case of Religion, when that is in danger; in case of Libertie, when that is invaded; in case of Oppression, when that is heavie; in case of the King's exercising an Arbitrarie power; in case of his denying his Peoples Priviledges and Immunities. Nay, we have known that meer Fears and Jealou∣sies, which were fancied onely to promote a Rebellion, have been used as an Argument to justifie it. But will any of these things justifie the re∣sistance of a Son against his Father, or a Ser∣vant against his Master? Or if we may make the People Judges of the lawfulness of resisting in one or more of these Cases, why may they not in all, and in as many more as they shall please to be sufficient? But if any cause can justifie Resistance, it must be that of Religion; and, if any Religion, that which is the true Religion. Now if we admit the Christian Religion to be the truest Religion, that condemns Resistance above any
other, as hath been demonstrated by its Pre∣cepts, and the practice of those Primitive Chri∣stians, who best knew the sence and the mind of our Saviour in those Precepts: and if any Christians should maintain the contrarie, it would give the Princes of the World a just occasion to be jealous of it, and root it out of their Dominions: for what Prince would per∣mit any such number of men to abide and mul∣tiply in their Dominions, that profess it to be lawful to make resistance against them? Besides, there are few men bred up in any Religion, but they think their own to be the true Religion: and then they may resist their Prince, how false and destructive soever it be; and so a Papist or Anabaptist, a Jew or a Pa∣gan, may think it lawful for them to resist; and so no Prince can be secure of the Obedience of his People. Therefore we must take away all pretences of the lawfulness of Resistance, or we must grant All pretences to be lawful that the People shall judge so to be. Therefore the Scripture hath forbidden resistance in any case, as our Law, grounded on Scripture and Reason, hath also done, on any pretence whatso∣ever. It had been enough to oppose Bishop Ʋsher's sole Judgment against our Author's. Bishop Ʋsher, of the power of Princes, p. 214. The pa∣tience of the Saints was not onely seen in the
Primitive Persecutions, but continued as well under the Arian Emperours, who retaining the name of Christians, did endeavour with all their power to advance that damnable Heresie; but also under Julian himself, who utterly revol∣ted from the very profession of the Name of Christ. Sr. Augustine observed the same, on Psal. 124. Julian was an Infidel, an Apostate, and Idolater; yet, Milites Christiani servie∣runt Imperatori Insideli; Christian Souldiers served this Heathen Emperour. When they came to the Cause of Christ, they would acknow∣ledge no Lord but him in Heaven; but when he said, Go forth to fight, Invade such a Nation, they presently obeyed: They were subject to their Temporal Lord, for his sake that was their Eter∣nal Lord. The Arian Persecution by Constantius (who had also Apostatized from the true Faith) was as violent, and of much longer continu∣ance than that of Julian; yet though the Christians had then (as you pretend) the Laws on their side, they made no resistance. I am constrained to repeat this again, because I meet with a contrary Assertion in Mr. Hunt, p. 153. I must remember him (saith he) out of Socrates, Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 38. when the Soul∣diers of the Arian Emperour Constantius were by his command sent to enforce them to become Arians, they took Arms in defence of their Re∣ligion.
Where I perceive, as great a Lawyer as Mr. Hunt is, he hath taken honest John Milton into his Consult; who says, Chap. 44. of the Primitive Christians (Idem bellum Con∣stantio indixerunt, & quantum in se erat, Im∣perio & vita spoliarunt) That they waged War with Constantius, and as much as in them lay, spoiled him of his Life and Empire. This be∣ing said by Milton, how notoriously false soever, Mr. Hunt is ready to assert the truth of it, and makes an offer of as good Authoritie for it, as ever Milton did for the Kings Condemna∣tion; as will appear by the History. This passage refers us to a horrible Relation of the Arian Persecution acted by Macedonius, who procured Edicts from that Emperour to force the Christians to the Arian infidelity. The History begins chap. 27. Macedonius after the death of Paul Bishop of Constantinople (who was banished first, and then slain in exile by the Arians, Athanasius hardly escaping them) enters on those Churches, who having great power with the Emperour, stirred up as great Wars and Cruelties between the Christians themselves, as any that were acted by the Tyrants; and he got his impious actings to be confirmed by the Emperours Edicts. Pre∣sently he proclaims the Edicts in all the Ci∣ties, and the Souldiers are enjoyned to assist him: The Orthodox are banished not onely
from their Churches, but their Cities — Then they constrain the people against their wills to communicate with the Arians, and used as great violence as ever any of those used that forced the Christians to the worshipping of Idols, applying Whips, Tortures, and all kind of Cruelties. Some were Sequestred of all their Goods; others Banished; many died under their Torments; and those that were to be Banished, were slain in the way. These Cruelties were practised throughout all the Cities of the East-part of the Empire, espe∣cially at Constantinople. This Persecution when Macedonius was made Bishop, was increased more than be∣fore; of which Socrates, in chap. 38, gives a fuller relation, p. 142, Edit. Valesii: That he then persecuted not onely Catholicks, but the Novatians also, who agreed with the Ca∣tholicks in the Consubstantiality. Both were oppressed with intolerable mischiefs. Agel∣lius the Bishop of the Novatians is forced to flee; but many, eminent for their piety, were apprehended and tormented for refusing to communicate with them; and after other Tortures, they gagg'd their Moueths with Wood, and forced their Sacrament into them: which was to those good men the greatest torment of all. They also forced the Women and Children to receive their Baptism. If a∣ny
resisted, they used Whips, Bonds, Impri∣sonment, and other cruelties; of which it shall suffice to relate one or two instances, leaving the Auditors to judge by them, of the inhumane actings of Macedonius and his Par∣ty. Such Women as would not communi∣cate with them, they first squeezed their Breasts in a Box, and then cut them off; some with Iron, and others with Causticks of scal∣ding Eggs. A new kind of torment, never used by the Heathen against us Christians, was invented by these who professed Christianity. These things I am informed of, saith Socrates, by Auxanontes a very old man, a Presbyter of the Novatian Church; who before he was made Presbyter, endured many indignities, being cast into Prison with one Alexander a Paphlagonian, and beaten with many stripes, whereof this Alexander died in prison, but Auxanontes lived to endure more torments. I have not time to translate the entire Hi∣story, which may be read in that Chapter; I shall therefore come to that part of it rela∣ted to by Mr. Hunt: which is thus: Macedonius, hearing that in the Province of Paphlagonia, especially at Mantinium, there were such a multitude of Novatians as could not be expelled by the Arian Ecclesiasticks, pro∣cures four Companies of Souldiers to force them to turn Arians. They, in defence of their Sect,
armed themselves with despair, as with Wea∣pons; and gathering together in a Body, with Hooks, and Hatchets, and what Weapons were at hand, met the Souldiers; in which scuffle many of the Paphlagonians, and neer all the Souldiers, were slain. This I heard (saith So∣crates) from a Paphlagonian that was in the Fight: And he adds, that the Emperour him∣self was offended with Macedonius for this a∣ction. I should indeed have wondered at the con∣fidence of Mr. Hunt in accusing from this story the Orthodox for arming themselves in defence of their Profession, when it was onely a rout of Novatians that were by the Arian crueltie driven to despair, that defended them∣selves against them. But I am so transported at another saying of his, that I have no ad∣miration of any thing else, how false or per∣nicious soever: You shall find it, p. 192. of his Treatise concerning the Succession, where having suggested, that if the D. be not ex∣cluded, he doth certainly make us miserable; and mincing the matter a little, saying, We ex∣clude onely his Person, not his Posteritie: he is not afraid to add — And we will not entail a War upon the Nation, though for the Sake and Interest of the glorious Familie of the STƲ∣ARTS. The speech is so heinous, that it cannot admit any aggravation. Well may
such men as he and his Plagiary seek to justifie resistance of lawful Powers, having in effect not onely drawn the Sword, but cast away the Scab∣bard. We are told of one that was ready to kick an Emperour, and of others that play'd with his Beard; but this is little less than kicking at the Crown, and striking a blow at the root, to render the whole Family as glorious as they made the Father of it: Unless he can give some other sence of it than this: Rather than not exclude the D. we will exclude the glo∣rious Family of the Stuarts. And in what sence he calls it a glorious Family, needs his ex∣plication. But will the Exclusion of the D. as certainly prevent our misery, as his Succession effect it? Did you never read how zealous some Priests and Pharisees were for a Bill of Exclusion against a far better person? John 11.47, 48. What do we? for this man doth many Miracles: if we let him thus alone, all men will believe on him, & the Ro∣mans will come, & take away both our place & na∣tion And did not the passing that Bill, make way for the Romans to bring all their fears on their own heads? And was not our late dear King excluded from Crown, Kingdom, and life, upon such fears; and was that a means of our Peace and Happiness? I wish I could say our fears now, are as false as they were then. We have his R. H. Declaration for our Security,
viz. That the Members of the Church of England are the best supporters of the Crown. Insomuch that if it fall to him to be concerned, he will ever countenance and preserve them and it. And p. 225. Why may we not suppose that a Popish Successor will defend his Regalia a∣gainst the Pope? Our Ancient Kings did so in the Reign of Rich. 2.16. c. 5. In a Statute of Praemunire the Parliament declares. That the Crown of England, (against the Encroach∣ments of the Pope, hath been so free at all times, that so hath been in no earthly sub∣jection, but immediately subject to God in all things touching the Regalty of the same Crown, and to none other. And God defend (say they) that it should be sub∣mitted to the Pope, and the Laws and Statutes of the Realm be by him defeated and avoided at his will, in perpetual de∣struction of the Soveraignty of the King our Lord, his Crown, Regalty and of all his Realm. And I hope his Royal Highness will say as they did, God defend. Moreover, the Commons say, That the things so attempt∣ed (viz. purchasing Bulls from Rome, executing Judgments given in the Court of Rome, transla∣ting of Prelates out of the Realm, or from one Preferment to another) be clearly against the Kings Crown and Regalty used and ap∣proved of the time of all his Progenitors: Wherefore they and all the siege Com∣mons of the same Realm will stand with
our said Lord the King, and his Crown and Regalty in the Cases aforesaid, and in all other cases attempted against him and his Crown and Regalty in all points, to live and to dye. And moreover they pray the king, and him require by way of Justice, that he would examine all the Lords in the Parliament, as well Spiri∣tual as Temporal, severally, and all the Estates of the Parliament, how they think of the Cases aforesaid, which be so openly against the Kings Crown, and in derogation of his Regalty, how they will stand in the same cases with our Lord the King in upholding the rights of the said Crown and Regalty. The like promises were made by the Lords Temporal and Spiritual, and the default was to be punished by a Praemunire, which is, To be put out of the King protection, and their Lands and Tenements, Goods and Chattels forfeited to the King; and that they be at∣tached by their bodie, if they may be found, and brought before the King and his Coun∣cil, there to answer to the Cases aforesaid, &c. Now if these professed Papists did so resolute∣ly and unanimously contest the Regalia a∣gainst the Pope, what greater zeal and resolu∣tion may we justly expect from a Protestant Parliament (for such we may have, if it be not our own fault) if the Pope or any Agents of
his should attempt to destroy the foundations of our established Religion and Laws! Moreover, in the days of Queen Mary, we read how much time, and what contrivances and largesses it cost that Queen to form a Par∣liament to lier liking, though then the Nati∣on were mostly Papists; and how much they contended still for the Regalia against the Pope, and reserving of Abby-lands, &c. to the Purchasers: nor, when all was done, did any man suffer without publick process in form of Law: there were no throats cut, nor bloud∣shed by private Messengers or Assassinates, as we are taught to expect from every Justice of Peace and Tything man, p. 85. and by I know not what Janizaries; and that we shall be slain to see what Grimaces we make, p. 89. Be∣sides, the number that suffered in her five years, were not comparable to the number that have been slain in one hours fight during the Rebellion; nor indeed to those that were Martyred for their Religion and Loyalty by il∣legal proceedings in the Mock-Courts of Justice, during that Ʋsurpation: the number of the Marian Martyrs being not above three or four hundred (though they were too ma∣ny.). Now a Wise man should look back upon the mischiefs that have befallen the Nation by re∣sisting the lawful Prince, and the endeavours to
alter the Succession from the right Heir; as well as forward upon the mischiefs that may never be, and which upon a supposition of a Popish Successour are aggravated almost be∣yond a possibilitie of being effected. Re∣member what it cost the Nation when the Succession to the Crown was disputed between the Houses of York and Lancaster: There perished in that War, as Historians do ac∣count, two Kings, one Prince, ten Dukes, two Marquesses, twentie one Earls, twentie seven Lords, two Viscounts, one Lord Prior, one Judge, one hundred thirtie nine Knights, four hundred twentie one Esquires; and of the Gentrie and Commons an incredible number. So that in such cases, the Remedie is generally worse than the Disease. I have not said this (God is my witness) to abate the just and honest care of the Nation to keep out Poperie, by such timely provision as his Majestie and his great Council shall see most probable; but to allay the inordinate Hearts which may set the whole Kingdom in a sudden flame, onely to prevent the fear of the suffering a Trial of our Faith, if God should call us to it. And I cannot consider, without some horror, what sore and long Wars and Devastations may follow upon a Bill of Exclusion, as well as on a Popish Succes∣sor. And if of two evils the least is to be
chosen, I should rather (if the Will of God so be) submit to my lot, how hard soever, under such a One, than that the whole Nation should be rent in pieces again, either by a Re∣bellion at home, or Invasions from abroad; which may happen upon such an Exclusion: for, Regum afflictae fortunae facile multorum O∣pem alliciant ad misericordiam, maximeque eorum qui aut Reges sunt, aut vivunt in Regno quod Regale iis nomen magnum & sanctum esse videa∣tur: The oppressed estate of Kings easily moves many to pitie, especially them who are either Kings themselves, or do live in a Kingdom to whom the name of a King is Au∣gust and Sacred; Saith the great Orator, Pro lege Manil. Let us therefore leave the King and his Great Council to their free Determinations, and acquiesce in the sage advice of Gamaliel, St. Paul's Master, Acts 5.39. Let us refrain from these things: for if this counsel or this work be of men, it will come to nought: but if it be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest haply ye be found even to fight against God. And I shall conclude the business of Exclusion with the Determination of Bishop Sanderson, whose single Judgment will outweigh in an equal ba∣lance all the Opinions of the Opposers: You have it, p. 350. of his book de Obligatione Conscientiae. I think (saith he) that an He∣reditarie
Kingdom may not lawfully be changed for an Elective (as in and by the Exclusion it is like to be), nor for any other form of Govern∣ment, either by the People alone, nor by the Peo∣ple and Nobles joyntly, nor by the whole bodie of the People in their greatest latitude, that is, the People, Nobles, and the King, consenting toge∣ther: unless perhaps the Royal Progenie should so totally fail, that there is not one surviving, who may claim it as his due by Right of Inheri∣tance. And let it be considered, that he wrote this before the Bill of Exclusion was ever dreamt of. And now I cannot but reflect upon the Prog∣nosticators and Wizards of our Time, that amuse the people with the fancies and fears which their own guilt hath created, as if we should be all swallowed up in a moment, and there were a fatal necessitie of endless miseries atten∣ding us: such as Mr. Baxter in his Prognosti∣cation, and our Author, who, p. 89. tells us of such a dismal prospect as makes every honest mans heart to shake. I remember, some years since, upon the great Eclipse of the Sun, Lilly and some others made such a dismal representa∣tion of it, as struck a terror into a great part of the Countrie, and made them take home their Cattel to their houses, and seek Sanctu∣ary themselves in the Churches, as if Dooms∣day were come; when the cause was natural,
and nothing fell out but according to that course which God had appointed for the Mo∣tion of the Heavenly bodies. Though wise men are not moved at such bugbears, yet they have an ill Aspect on the people, to dispose them for such Commotions as may promote the interest of discontented and designing men. For my part, I shall continue to pray for his Royal Highness, as our Liturgy directs; and if it be the will of God to send us a Popish Successor to punish us for our resistance of a Protestant King, whose bloud still cries for Vengeance; I had rather die for not resisting him, than to be as instrumental in procuring a Bill of Exclusion, as this man would be, and as successful as he can hope to be, & at my death to have it written on my Tomb, Here lieth the first Author of this Sentence: RATHER THAN THE DƲKE OF Y. SHOƲLD NOT BE EXCLƲDED, WE WILL EXCLƲDE THE GLORIOƲS FAMILY OF THE STƲARTS. And I will yet pray against the wickedness of these men: Lord cloath all such his enemies with shame; but upon his head, and the heads of his seed, let the Crown flourish, I perceive Mr. Hunt to be a great devoto to some kind of Parliaments; and that which was convened in the first of King James, was
one that consisted of Wise, Loyal, and Pious persons; I intreat him therefore to consider what was Enacted by them in their Recogniti∣on, 1o. Jacobi; where after the Preamble it is thus declared: We therefore your most humble and Loyal Subjects, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and the Com∣mons in this present Parliament assem∣bled, do from the bottom of our hearts yield to the Divine Majesty all humble thanks and praises, not onely for the said unspeakeable and inestimable benefits and blessings above-mentioned, but also that he hath further enriched your Highness with a most Royal Progeny of most rare and excellent gifts and forwardness, and in his goodness is like to encrease the hap∣py number of them. And in most humble and lowly manner do beseech your most excellent Majesty, that (as a memorial to all Posterities amongst the records of your High Court of Parliament for ever to endure, of our Loyalty, Obedience and hearty and humble Affection) it may be pub∣lished and declared in this High Court of Parliament, and enacted by the authori∣ty of the same, That we being bounden thereunto (N. B.) by the Laws of God and man, do recognize and acknowledge, and thereby express our unspeakable Ioyes, that immediately upon the dissolution and decease of Elizabeth sate Queen of England, the Imperial Crown of the Realm of Eng∣land, and of all the Kingdoms, Domini∣ons,
and Rights belonging to the same, and by inherent Birth-right (N. B.) and lawful and undoubted Succession, descend and come to your most Excellent Maje∣sty, as being lineally, justly, and lawfully next and sole Heir of the Blood-Royal of this Realm, as is aforesaid. And that by the goodness of God Almighty, and lawful right of Descent under one Imperi∣al Crown, your Majesty is of the Realms and Kingdoms of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, the most potent and mighty King, and by Gods goodness more able to protect and govern us your loving Sub∣jects in all peace and plenty, than any of your noble Progenitors: and thereunto we most humbly and faithfully submit and oblige our selves, our heirs and posterities for ever, until the last drop of our bloods be spent. And we beseech your Majesty to accept the same as the first-fruits in this High Court of Parliament of our Loyal∣ty and Faith to your Majesty and your Royal Progeny and Posterity for ever. Now, as Grotius says, a People may be pre∣sumed to be the same that they formerly were, till some publick act shew that their judgments are altered. How dares Mr. Hunt then to say, p. 47. If any man is so vain as to say that an unalterable course of Succession is established among us by Divine Right; I say he is a man fitted to believe Transubstantiation, and the In∣fallibility of the Pope? &c. And if any man shall
add, that this is the Doctrine of the Reformation, and adventure to tell the people so; they are the most impudent falsaries that ever any Age produced; when there is scarce a Child but hath heard what was done and maintained by the Clergy in the Case of Mary Queen of Scots. How can this man, (who doubtless is an Ig∣normus if he never knew this Recognition) de∣clare so often as he doth, particularly in p. 198. that the Succession of the Crown is the right of the whole Community, their appointment, their constitution, and creature in Parliament? Did he never read what is said by Grotius de Jure belli? He says, If a Kingdom descend by Suc∣cession, an Act of Alienation is in itself null, l. 1. c. 4. s. 9. Which agrees with what Bishop Sanderson delivered before. And Mr. Hunt himself says, Grotius is more than ten witnesses: and if you add the Bishops, I think them of more value than a hundred. In quâ tandem Civitate Catilina arbitraris te vivere, saith Cicero: you that make Hue and cry after such as write for Religion and Loy∣alty, as if they were ready to banish them∣selves, or prove felo's de se; consider, I pray, under what Government you are: and though you may escape the Magistrates wrath, yet you ought to be solicitous  you may e∣scape the wrath of God, to which you have made your self obnoxious.
I have but one Remark more on Mr. Hunt, which is, that he hath consulted another fa∣mous Author, one Mr. Thomas White, who, being a Romish Emissary, made it his business to continue our distractions. This man wrote a Book entituled, The Grounds of Obedience and Government: And his Motto is, Salus Populi Suprema Lex esto; whereof I have gi∣ven you the genuine sence already. Now among many other Notes transcribed by Mr. Hunt from this Jesuitical Writer, p. 158. he comes to answer the Objections of Divines concerning the Authoritie of Princes, and non-resistance. Ʋp steps the Divine (saith he) to preach us out of Scripture the Dutie we owe to Kings, no less than Death and Dam∣nation being the guerdons of Disobedience and Rebellion. And p. 159. They will speak Rea∣son too, telling us, that God by nature is high Lord and Master of all: That whoever is in power receiveth his right from him: That Obe∣dience consists in doing the Will of him that commandeth; and conclude, that his Will ought to be obeyed till God taketh away the Obliga∣tion, (i. e.) till he who is to be obeyed himself releaseth the Right. Besides, p. 160. They al∣ledge that God by his special command transfer∣red the Kingdom from Saul to David, from Re∣hoboam to Jeroboam. So that in fine, all that is brought out of Scripture falleth short of pro∣ving
that no time can make void the right of a King once given him by the hand of God. Now mark what Mr. White says to overthrow the sense of these Scriptures. The reason (says he) of THIS WEAK WAY OF AL∣LEADGING SCRIPTƲRE is, that when they read that God commandeth or doth this, they look not into Nature to know what this Commanding or Doing is, but presently imagine God commands it by express and direct words, and doth it by an immediate position of the things said to be done; whereas in Nature the Com∣mands are nothing but the natural Light God hath bestowed on Mankind, and which is there∣fore frequently called the Law of Nature. Like∣wise Gods doing a thing is many times onely the course of natural second Causes; to which be∣cause God gives the Direction and Motion, he both doth, and is said to do all that is done by them. Now to the same end (viz. to prove that Kingly Government is not from God but the People, and therefore may be altered and resi∣sted) and in the same words for the most part, doth Mr. Hunt deliver this black invention of Mr. White, p. 144. The nature of Govern∣ment and its Original hath been prejudiced—by men that understand nothing but words: and Grammar-divines, that without contemplating Gods Attributes, or the Nature of man, or the
reasonableness of moral Precepts, have underta∣ken to declare the sence of Scripture; and in∣fer, that Soveraign Power is not of Humane In∣stitution, but of Divine Appointment, because they find it there written, That by him Kings reign: Imagining, that when the Scripture saith God commands or doth this, that God commanded it by express words, or doth it by an immediate position of the thing done; whereas in nature his Commands are nothing but the natural Light God hath bestowed on Mankind: Likewise Gods do∣ing a thing is onely the course of natural and se∣cond Causes, to which because God gives Dire∣ction and Motion, he doth both, and is said to do all that is done. Likewise Gods doing a thing, is onely the course of natural and second Causes, to which; because God gives the Direction or Motion, he doth both, and is said to do all that is done. All this is verbatim Mr. White: So is his Rail∣lerie in the same Phrase, to bring an Odium on Divines that would prove Government out of the Scripture: White calls them Grammar-Divines, Verbal and wind-blown Divines, p. 162. And Mr. Hunt calls them Men that un∣derstand nothing but Words, and Grammar-di∣vines. Who (saith Mr. White) without Lo∣gick, Philosophie, or Morality, undertake to be Interpreters of the Sacred Bible: Who (saith Mr. Hunt) without contemplating Gods Attri∣butes,
or the Nature of man, or the Reasonable∣ness of Moral Precepts, have undertaken to de∣clare the sense of the Scripture. It is not strange to me, having read a De∣fiance to the Royal Family, to read the like a∣gainst the Clergie. But that the Scripture also should suffer, and the uncertain and mu∣table Traditions and Effects of natural Causes be made equivalent with the immediate Commands of God in the Scripture, though it be no new thing among Jesuits, yet a true Protestant should abhor it. The man is so angry that he hath done the ungrateful Bishops any right, that he will have satisfaction right or wrong from the rest of the Clergie: And though he call the younger sort onely Cox∣combs, yet his design is to bring the whole Clergy into contempt. But any young Divine may draw such Conclusions out of the Premises, as might exclude him out of the Society of all good and learned men. 1. That to conclude from the sence of Scri∣pture, is a weak way of Arguing. In this Mr. White and Mr. Hunt consent. 2. That non obstante what the Scripture says of Divine Right of Soveraign Power, it is not of Divine, but Humane Institution. 3. That Providence, and the Effects of second Causes, being influenced by God, are of equal
Authority with the Precepts enjoyned by the Word of God. 4. That the Soveraign Power being but of Humane Institution, may be resisted, and is al∣terable. 5. That they who mock the Messengers of God, do go on to despise the Word of God, and abuse his Prophets; a sin which often stirs up the Wrath of God, so as there is NO REMEDY. And this I observe in the behalf of the abu∣sed Clergie. 6. That having cast off our Loyaltie to our Governours and their Laws, puts us in a fair way to cast off the Soveraignty of God and his Laws. 7. That the worst of Papists, and their most Atheistical Arguments, are made use of by some that call themselves true Protestants, against the express Commands of God for obedience to the Higher Powers. From all which Premises I shall onely con∣clude as to my self, That it is much more de∣sirable to perish by the hands of a known Ene∣mie to God and the true Religion, than to out∣live that Religion, and by a successful resi∣stance against the Ordinance of God, to live in the enjoyment of Temporal wealth and Ho∣nours, and to deserve this Epitaph to be en∣graved on my Tomb.
Plorate quotquot estis Pacis vitaeque placidae Pertaesi: Conservator optimi Populi, pessimus Legum, Libertatis, Religionis Protector: Post Oliverum Primus, nulli Secundus: Deperditae Respublicae Instaurator: Regum timendorum tremendus Judex, Regiae Stirpis Extirpator Perfidus, Juris Consultorum Doctor Ignoramus. Qui Consentientibus dissentit ab omnibus Orthodoxis, Antiquis & Modernis: Qui Dissentientibus consentit omnibus Papistis, Anabaptistis, Regicidis: Scrutator Majestatis oppressus à Gloria, Inglorius obiit.
OF Passive Obedience. IT is a very hard Case, that when the Scri∣pture injoyns such as are of the Ministry in this Nation to put the people in mind to be subject to Principalities and powers; and the Canons of the Church to which we have subscribed, oblige us four times in the year at least, to manifest, open, and declare, in our Ser∣mons and Lectures, That the Kings power with∣in his Majesties Realms, &c. is the highest power under God, to whom all men born within the same, do by Gods Laws owe most Loyaltie and Obedience, afore and above all Powers and Po∣tentates on Earth; that for so doing, we should be reproached as Time-servers, and such as advance an Arbitrarie power; and that such Doctrine is calculated and fitted on pur∣pose for the use of a Popish Successour, and to make us an easier prey to the bloudie Papists, p. 89. And all this, by those men who are equally o∣bliged by Oaths and Subscriptions to do the same as we. Of these things the Author accuseth a lear∣ned
Doctor, who had affirmed (in a Sermon I suppose, and he quotes p. 8.) That the Go∣spel doth not prescribe any remedie but flight a∣gainst the Persecutions of the lawful Magistrate; allowing no other means, when we cannot escape, between denying and dying for the Faith. This is in p. 80. and p. 85. for saying, That the Go∣spel by its own confession is a suffering Doctrine, and so far from being prejudicial to Caesars au∣thoritie, that it makes him the Minister of God, and commands all its Professors to give him and all that are in authoritie under him their dues, and rather die than resist them by force. Now to remove the prejudice of such as are of our Author's Judgment, I shall first propose the Judgment of Mr. Baxter, (as a preparative to the more candid entertainment of what I shall propound concerning Passive Obedience.) P. 24: of the 4th part of Chri∣stian Directorie, Direct. 31. Resist not where you cannot obey; and let no appearance of pro∣bable good that may come to your selves or to the Church, by any unlawful means, as Treason, Sedition, or Rebellion, ever tempt you to it: for, evil must not be done, that good may come by it. But, Sect. 61. it is objected, If we must let Rulers destroy us at their pleasure, the Gospel will be rooted out of the Earth: When they know we hold it unlawful to resist them, they will
be emboldened to destroy us, and sport themselves in our bloud, as the Papists did by the poor Al∣bigenses. Answ. All this were something, if there were no God that can easilier restrain and destroy them at pleasure, than they can injure or destroy you. If God be engaged to protect you, and hath told you that the hairs of your head are numbered, and more regardeth his Honour, Go∣spel, and Church, than you do, and accounteth his Servants as the Apple of his eye, and hath pro∣mised to hear them, and avenge them speedily; then it is but Atheistical distrust of God, to save your self by sinful means, as if God could not or would not do it. Thus he that saveth his life shall lose it. This Mr. Baxter speaks against Rebellion and unlawful Arms and Acts. To this pur∣pose he quotes Grotius de Imperio, p. 210. an∣swering the like Objection, (viz.) Mutato Regis Animo, Religio Mutabitur; That if the King change his mind, the Religion will be chan∣ged also. Answ. In this case the onely remedie is in the providence of God▪ who hath the hearts of all men in his hand, but especially the Kings, God worketh his ends both by good and evil Kings: sometime a calm, sometime a storm is most profitable to the Church. If the King be of a perverse and corrupt Judgment, it will be worse for him than for the Church. But all this, you will say, is against unlawful acts and means,
which they that have the Laws on their side cannot be said to use. To this Mr. Baxter answers, p. 26. What power the Laws have▪ they have it by the Kings Consent and Act. And it is strange impudencie, to pretend that his own Laws are against him. If any misinter∣pret them, he may be confuted. I suppose Mr. Baxter means, by some other method than that of arguing, as St. Augustine advised in the like case. The Law and Ordinance of Government, and especially of Monarchie, is founded on the Law of God and Nature; and no positive Laws, or condescentions of Governours, can make void the Law of God. For though a righteous Prince will not violate those Laws which he hath consented to, yet if he should, it will not justifie those Subjects that shall vi∣olate the Law of God and Nature, in resisting and rising up against him in Rebellion; which would as it were argue great ingratitude to them who by Acts of Grace have obliged them∣selves: (for, as St. Augustine observes, our Prince, like God himself, becomes a Debtor to man, Non aliquid à nobis accipiendo, sed omnia nobis largiendo; Not by receiving any thing from us, but by promising all good things to us.) So it is a certain way to bring us all to Confusion, if the King should be judged as a Criminal upon every transgression of the Law.
And I would ask those who would bind their Kings in such Fetters, By what autho∣ritie they would proceed against him and judge him: would they erect another High Court of Justice, or bring him from his Throne to the Block? Would they arm the people a∣gain, on pretence of fighting for their Laws and Liberties? The end of those things we have seen to be the death of a most righteous Prince, and the general destruction of the Sub∣jects. Wherefore I commend to you that of your Bracton: Omnem esse sub Rege, & ipsum sub nullo fed tantum sub Deo. And if he con∣tradict himself in this, the suffrage of Nature, and the Laws of all well-governed Nations, will condemn him; which agree in this, That Principi non est Lex posita, there is no Law a∣bove the Prince that makes the Law, and by whose Authoritie alone the Laws are executed: for it is he that beareth the Sword. And Plutarch says of him, that he doth, not onely govern according to the Laws, but hath a power above them. He hath so indeed for the good of his Subjects, to whom the rigorous execution of the Laws, in many cases, would be an insupportable burden, if by the Kings Authoritie they might not be moderated, and interpreted by Rules of Equitie; against which our Dissenters have the least rea∣son of any men alive to object. And if we
grant him this power for our good, how can we deny it to him for his own? That Learned Casuist, Bishop Sanderson, whose modesty in other Resolutions is eminent, in resolving this Question, Whether it be law∣ful for the Prince in cases extraordinary to do any thing besides or against Law, undertakes to prove the Affirmative, with an extraordi∣nary confidence; and, which is more, to prove it by that abused Maxime which some would invert against the King, Salus Populi Supre∣ma Lex, That the Peoples Safetie is the highest Law. And if I prove not this, as your selves shall confess, from that very Maxime (saith he) then say, that I cannot see at noon-day; and censure me to have been not a Defender of this good Cause, but a Betrayer and Praevaricator. Which thus he doth: First, he tells us the O∣riginal of that Sentence, viz. from Cicero de Legibus, in these words, l. 3. Regio Imperio duo sunto, iique praeeundo, judicando, consulen∣do, Praetores, Judices, Consules appellantur: Militiae Summum Jus habento nemini paren∣to, Ollis Salus Populi Suprema Lex esto. Now to whom doth this power belong? to them (says the very Letter of those Laws) to whom the Imperial power was committed, that is, to the two Consuls for the time being. Come now. (says the Bishop) all you that are the Patrons of Popular confidence, read, weigh, and exa∣mine
every Word, Syllable, and Comma, and shew where you can find the least hint of any power granted to Subjects against their Prin∣ces will, either to judge concerning the safety of the people, or to determine and do any thing a∣gainst the Laws. Doth not the whole series both of Things and Words loudly proclaim, that the Supream Authoritie which is above all Law, and that the care of the Publick safetie proper∣ly belongs to him alone to whom the Imperial power, the right of the Militia, and that Supream Authoritie which is subject to none, is granted? When the Law commands one thing. (says Aeneas Sylvius, de Ortu Imperii, c. 20.) and Equity another, it is fit the Emperour should temper the rigour of the Law with the bridle of Equity. Seeing no Decree of the Law, though made by never so deliberate advice, can sufficient∣ly answer the various and unthought-of plottings of mans nature— and it is manifest that the Laws which aforetime were just, in after-times may prove unjust, harsh, and unprofitable; to moderate which, it is needful that the Prince, who is Lord of the Laws, interpose his Autho∣rity. And where it is said, that a Law, though it be severe, should be observed; this respects inseriour Magistrates, not the Emperour, to whom the power of moderating the Laws is so connexed, that by no decrees of man it can be pull'd from him. Bishop Sanderson gives a pertinent instance
to this purpose, in his Book de Oblig. Consc. p. 384. That when upon discovery of the Gunpow∣der-plot the Traitors fled, some of them were pursued by the High Sheriff of Worcester-shire, who having hunted them from place to place, came to the Confines of his Countie, beyond which he was not to pass with his Souldiers by the Law: yet fearing that they might otherwise escape, he pursues them into another County, takes them, and brings them Prisoners. Yet knowing he had transgressed the Law, and lest others in mat∣ters of less moment should be encouraged to do the like, or himself be exposed to future trouble, he presently goes to the King and obtains his Pardon. What excellent Chymists were they, who out of those golden Laws should draw out so many Swords and Axes against their Sove∣raign and Fellow-subjects, on such a vile pre∣tence! And is not our young Empyrick neer of kin to them, who by his Mountebank-Re∣ceipts would poyson the People with a con∣ceit that they may by the Laws arm them∣selves against the King, if they shall judge that he doth transgress those Laws? that then he is no longer a Minister of God, but of the Devil, and may be persecuted as a Mid∣night-Thief, or Highway-Robber, or in the words of Gregory, as a common Cut-throat, pag. 25. And that he is hardly to be bla∣med, who shews himself so courageous for
God, and for that Religion which he approves, as to assassinate his Prince. To conclude, it is the judgement both of Divines, Civilians, and States-men, that there must be in Kings and Governours a Supream Power to mitigate the rigour of the Laws, and to suspend the execution of them; to pardon some Delinquents, and in case of necessity to provide for the safety of the People, besides, and against the Laws: and that to arm the People, and teach them on pretence of the Law to resist their Prince, is a pernicious Te∣net, destructive to Government. It is Criminal, (saith Mr. Hunt p. 41.) and no less dangerous to the being of any Polity, to re∣strain the Legislative Authority, and to enter∣tain principles that disable it to provide reme∣dy against the greatest mischiefs that can happen to any Community. No Government can support it self without an unlimited Power in providing for the happiness of the people. No civil Esta∣blishment but is controlable and alterable to the Publick Weal: Whatever is not of Divine In∣stitution, ought to yield and submit to this Power and Authority. And this is all that I, or a∣ny of my Brethren that I know of, ever in∣tended to say of the extent of the Kings Power: That such distempers as are incura∣ble by common and prescribed Remedies, such as the Kings Evil usually is, must have ex∣traordinary
applications, such as the Kings hand, and none but his, may successfully ad∣minister. Nor doth any among us plead that the King is above the Directive power of the Laws, but onely that he is not under the Coercive power of them. For which cause Antonie would not permit that Herod should be called to an ac∣count of what he did as a King, for then he should in effect be no King at all: for what power can judge him who is the Supreme power on Earth? The Emperour (saith Tertull.) is solo Deo minor, inferiour to God onely, and un∣der the power of God onely; In cujus solius po∣testate sunt, à quo sunt secundi, post quem primi. And St. Ambrose spreaking of David, applieth it to other Kings: He was a King, and obnoxious to no humane Laws, because Kings are free from punishment for their offences, being secured by the power of their Empire. If the People have power to call the King to an account, the E∣state is Democratical: if the Peers, it is Aristo∣cratical; but if indeed it be Monarchical, nei∣ther, nor both, can judge their Prince. In the first Homily against Rebellion, p. 1. our Church says, that in reading of the Holy Scriptures we shall find in very many places, as well of the Old Testament as the New, That Kings and Princes, as well the evil as the good, do reign by Gods Ordinance; and that Subjects are bound to obey them.
The Augustan Confession, Article 16. Chri∣stians must necessarily obey the present Magi∣strates and Laws, except when they command to sin. French Confession, Article 11. We ought to obey Laws and Statures, pay Tribute, and bear other burdens of Subjection, and undergo the Yoke with a good will, although the Magistrates should be Infidels; so that Gods soveraign Au∣thoritie remains inviolate. The Belgick Confession. All men, of what dignitie; qualitie, or state soever they be, must subject themselves unto the lawful Magistrates, pay them Imposts and Tributes, and please and obey them in all things not repugnant to the Word of God: Also pray for them, that God would be pleased to direct them in all their actions, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life under them in all pietie and honestie. The Helvetick Confession. Let all Sub∣jects honour and reverence the Magistrate as the Minister of God: Let them love and assist him, and pray for him as their Father; let them obey him in all his just and equitable Commands, and pay all Imposts. Tributes, and other Dues faith∣fully and willingly: And in case of War, let them also lay down their lives, and spill their bloud for the good of the Publick, and of the Magistrate; willingly, vailiantly, and cheerfully. For he that opposeth himself to the Magistrate,
provoketh the heavie wrath of God upon him∣self. The Bohemian Confession. Let every one yield subjection in all things not contrarie to God, to the Higher Powers and their Officers, whether good or bad. The Saxonick Confession. The more a Chri∣stian is sincere in Faith, the more he ought to subject himself to the publick Laws. But I shall end where I began, with the Doctrine of our Martyrs and Confessors, who sealed with their bloud the Truths that they published with their Pens; for whom in vain do we build and garnish Monuments of Fame to their memories, while we are Apostates from their Doctrine and Practice. The first Reformers of our Religion, in the Institution of a Christian man, on the Fifth Com∣mandment, say, That Subjects be bound not to withdraw their Fealtie, Truth, Love, and Obe∣dience from their prince FOR ANY CAƲSE WHATSOEVER IT BE; ne for any cause may they conspire against his person, ne do any thing towards the hinderance or hurt thereof, or of his estate: And by his Commandment they are bound to obey all the Laws, Proclamations, Precepts, and Commandments made by their Princes and Governours, except they be against the Commandment of God. And likewise they be bound to obey all such as are in Authoritie un∣der
their Prince, as far as he will have them o∣beyed. They must also give unto their Prince aid, help, and assistance, whensoever he shall re∣quire the same, either for suretie, preservation, or maintenance of his Person and Estate, or of the Realm, or of the defence of any of the same against all persons. And there be many examples in Scripture of the vengeance of God that hath fal∣len upon RƲLERS and such as have been disobedient to their Princes. But one princi∣pal example to be noted, is of the Rebellion of Core, Dathan, and Abiram, made against their Governours Moses and Aaron: For punishment of which Rebels, God not onely caused the Earth to open, and to swallow them down, and a great number of other people with them, with their houses, and all their substance; but caused also a fire to descend from Heaven, and to burn up two hundred and fiftie Captains which conspired with them in the Rebellion. And again, on the Sixth Commandment: No Subjects may draw their Sword against their Prince, for what cause soever it be, nor against any others (saving for lawful defence) with∣out their Princes license. And it is their dutie to draw their Swords for the defence of their Prince and Realm, whensoever the Prince shall command. And although Princes which be the chief and supreme Heads of Realms, do other∣wise than they ought, yet God hath assigned no
Judges over them in this world, but will have the judgment of them reserved to himself. Sir John Cheek, who was Tutor to King Ed∣word the Sixth, and a person of great Lear∣ning and Integrity, in his Book called, The true Subject to the Rebel, speaks to this pur∣pose: If you were offered persecution for Religi∣on, you ought to fly for it; and yet you intend to fight. If you would stand in the truth, you ought to suffer like Martyrs; and you would slay like Tyrants. Thus for Religion you keep no Religion, and neither will follow the Council of Christ, nor the Constancy of Martyrs. And then asking the people why they should not like that Religion which Gods word established, the Primitive Church authorized, and the whole consent of the Parliament confirmed, and his Majesty had set forth; he says, Dare you Com∣mons take upon you more Learning than the Cho∣sen Bishops and Clerks of this Realm have? I suppose that the Author of Julians Life might transcribe that Act of Queen Mary a∣bove-mentioned, out of Mr. Prynnes second part of the Loyalty of pious Christians, &c. where we have it printed at large, p. 65. from whence he might very honestly have told us Mr. Prynnes Judgment of such Prayers as were made against the Queen; who, (p. 64.) says, That Queen Maries zealous Protestant Bishops, Ministers, and Subjects likewise, made constant
prayers for her: But some over-zealous Ana∣baptistical Fanaticks using some unchristian ex∣pressions in their prayers against her, That God would cut her off, and shorten her daies, occa∣sioned this special Act against such prayers. And having repeated the Act, he adds, p. 66. These prayers were much against, and direstly contrary to the Judgment of Archbishop Cran∣mer, Bishop Farrer, Bishop Hooper, Rowland Taylor, John Philpot, John Bradford, Edward Crome, John Rogers, Laurence Sanders, Ed∣ward Laurence, Miles Coverdale Bishop of Exon, and others of our Godly Protestant Bi∣shops and Ministers, who soon after suffered as Martyrs. They in their Letter (May 8. 1554.) professing, that as Obedient Subjects we shall be∣have our selves towards Queen Mary, and all that be in authority, and not cease to pray to God for them, that he would govern them all generally and particularly with the Spirit of Wisdom and Grace: and so we heartily desire and humbly pray all men to do, in no point con∣senting to any kind of Rebellion or Sedition a∣gainst our Soveraign Lady the Queens Highness; but where they cannot obey, but they must diso∣bey God, there to submit themselves with all patience and humility, to suffer as well what the will and pleasure of the higher Powers shall ad∣judge, as we are ready through the goodness of the Lord to suffer whatsoever they shall judge us
unto. And Bishop Hooper wrote an Apologie against the Slanderous report made of him, that he should encourage and maintain such as cursed Queen Mary: printed 1552. wherein his In∣nocence and Loyalty to the Queen, in praying for her, are vindicated at large, So far Mr. Prynne. Take the sence of one Marian Martyr more, Mr. William Tindal, in a Book de Christiani hominis Obedientia, saying, In every Kingdom, the King, which hath no Superiour, iudgeth of all things; and therefore he that endeavoureth or intendeth any mischief or calmity against the Prince that is a Tyrant, or a Persecutor, or who∣soever with a forward hand doth touch the Lords Anointed, he is a Rebel against God, and resisteth the Ordinance of God. And as it is not lawful upon any pretence to resist the King, so it is not lawful to rise up against the Kings Officer or Magistrate that is sent by the King for the execution of those things that are comman∣ded by the King. And Mr. Barus in Tract. de Humanis Con∣stitut. saith, That the Servants of Chrict ra∣ther than commit any evil, or resist any Magi∣strate, ought patiently to suffer the loss of their goods, and the tearing of their members: Nay, the Christian, after the example of Christ his Master, ought to suffer the bitterest death for Truth and Righteousness sake: and therefore
who ever shall rebel under pretence of Religion, aeternae damnationis erit reus. Now these men gave their Opinions for Pas∣sive Obedience, even before Queen Mary had altered the Laws, (i. e.) their Religion was by the established Laws of the Land, the onely al∣lowed Religion; yet they were far from de∣fending it by resistance and Rebellion. It is a difficult matter to perswade them to suffer, that never knew what it was to obey: such as were educated in a time of Rebellion, and instead of being catechized in the Princi∣ples of the Gospel, were from their childhood taught how to stand on their guard, and defie their Governours; and being become wealthie by the Spoils wrested by themselves or their Ancestors from the King, the Church, or their more Religious and Loyal Brethren, think that Providence will justifie them in all their Sedi∣tious attempts, and that the Millennium of Christs reign upon Earth is begun; and that all Laws now must be subservient to the support of that Perswasion of theirs; and that their Re∣ligion hath been in full and quiet possession e∣ver since 42 at least; and therefore to teach men now, that they ought to suffer rather than resist their lawful Princes, is the Mahome∣tan Doctrine of the Bow-string; which is indeed the whole Oeconomie of the Gospel, as will appear by what followeth.
If we compare Deut. 28. with Matth. 15. it will appear, that as Prosperitie was the Bles∣sing of the Old Testament, so Persecution is of the New And there is no Robberie in the Exchange: for though we are called to forsake house, friends, and lands for Christs sake, we shall receive in this time a hundred fold, though with persecution, Mark. 10.40. besides the Aureola, or double Crown, in the life to come. How comes it then to pass, that the Doctrine of the Cross is become Foolishness, and a Stum∣bling-block to us Christians, as it was to the Jews and Greeks? That which was the Glorie of the Apostles, and esteemed above earthly Kingdoms by the Primitive Christians, even the Crown of Martyrdom, is now trampled on, despised, and discredited, as the reward of Fools, and men wearie of their lives. The Gnosticks drew tears from the Apostles eyes, when he considered how they both taught and practised the lawfulness of denying Christ in times of persecution: (Phil. 3.18.) Many walk of whom I have told you often, and now tell you with weeping, that they are enemies to the Cross of Christ. Such were crept in a∣mong the Galatians, who by all art and indu∣strie increased their numbers, that they might not suffer persecution for the Cross of Christ, Gal. 6.12. But God forbid (saith the Apo∣stle) that I should rejoyce save in the Cross of
our Lord Jesus Christ, whereby the world is cru∣cified to me, and I unto the world. The Scars that Souldiers receive in the ser∣vice of their Prince, are esteemed Marks of Honour: and every pettie Prince can lead forth Legions to look Death in the face at his command: Every new Sect can boast of their Dipticks and Martyrologies; and there is scarce a good man in the world, but some or other would even dare to die for him: And what difficulties do affright men of resolution, when they contend but for a Garland of Flowers or Laurel, fading and unsatisfactorie rewards! And hath our blessed Redeemer onely so ill de∣served of us for all the great things that he hath done both for our Souls and Bodies? or is he only so unable to requite our service and labour of love, that we should forsake him, when a small Storm threatneth us, or falls up∣on our heads? When Henry the Fourth of France was engaged in fight against his Ene∣mies, and his Friends began to give ground; he minds them what a Reproach it would be to the Nobilitie and Gentrie of France, that of all their numbers, there were not fiftie that stood by him in the Camp, that had thousands waiting on him in his Court. Pudet haec op∣probria, &c. It is no rash, fruitless, or desperate designe that our Saviour calls us to: He forewarned
us at our first entrance to our Holy Profession, that we could not be his Disciples except we de∣ny our selves, and take up the Cross and follow him: and he that doth not so, saith our Saviour, is not worthy of me, Matth. 10.38. Matth. 16.24. Luke 14.27. Nor is it fruitless: he hath wise and great ends, not onely for the glorie of his Father, but the good of his Church, in e∣very affliction: that Vine, as well as the com∣mon ones, spreads and prospers the more, when it is at the wisdom of the Vine-dresser wate∣red with blood. As in lesser afflictions God chastiseth us for our good, that we may be parta∣kers of his Holiness; so doth he with greater, that he may bring us to glory. Many a man might have perished eternally, if they had not perished temporally; God by his Righteous judgments calling their sins to remembrance, and working in them repentance unto life. Behold, saith St. James, we count them happy that endure. You have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; that the Lord is very pittiful, and of tender mercy. Jobs Graces had not given so great a light and ground of Consolation to the world, if they had not been tryed in the fire of afflicti∣on; which is so needful for the purging out our Corruption, that we are told▪ All that will live godly in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution; and that we must through Many tribulations
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. The Afflictions which God sends do often bear an Inscription of those sins that procured them: as when Josephs brethren were under apprehension of great fear, they said one to a∣nother, We are verily guilty concerning our Bro∣ther, in that we saw him in the anguish of his Soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear him. If we are opprest and persecuted by our own Country-men and false brethren, let us consider whether we have not been such, and dealt so with our Brethren. If God permit us to be persecuted by a Christian Prince, con∣sider what guilt yet lieth on the Nation for the Persecution and Murther of a most Christian King; and learn to improve the Judgment into a Mercy, by repentance and patience un∣der Gods afflicting hand. If no such guilt lies upon us, then think that God calls us forth as Combatants, to shew examples of Chri∣stian Faith, Love, and Resolution, in an Age that is corrupted by long prosperity, and become effeminate and delicate, through plenty and luxury: and a Plethory is to be cured by Phle∣botomy. How the Church thrived under Persecution, we have many instances. The first Persecution scattering the Disciples, caused the Gospel to be planted through the world; and being planted, the bloud of those that dyed made it
so fruitful, that the President of Palestine wrote to Tiberius, that they were weary of slay∣ing them; who never so much as fled or hid themselves, and yet multiplyed the more for be∣ing put to death. Pliny also writing to Tra∣jan, complains, prope jam desolata templa, & sacra Solennia diu intermissa. It was otherwise when the Church flourished outwardly in the days of Constantius: the Christians drove one another from the Altars, and by their ambiti∣ous and popular Contests, made the Sacrifices of God to be abominated by the heathen. Whatever the punishment be, we must ac∣cept it as the demerit of our Sins, and as in∣flicted by a most righteous and glorious God. And if because, as in the days of Constantius, we denie the power of godliness, and exercise of Charity to one another, it is just with God to deprive us of the very form of it, and commit us to be Chastised by a common Enemy, as they were by Julian; We must bear the Indigna∣tion of the Lord, because we have sinned against him. Consider what Christ suffered for us; he endured the Cross, despising the shame; and be∣ing now at the right hand of God, calls on us to follow his Example, promising, that if we suffer, we shall also reign with him. And shall our Saviour be forsaken as soon as he is appre∣hended, and be again called on to come down
from the Cross, that we may believe in him? shall we draw back, as the beasts were wont, from that Altar which our Saviour hath san∣ctified and made our surest Sanctuary a∣gainst Evils? Think it not strange, saith St. Pe∣ter, 1.4.12.) concerning the fiery trial which is to try you, as if some strange thing had hapned to you; but rejoyce, in as much as you are made partakers of Christs sufferings; that when his Glory shall appear ye may be glad with exceeding joy. Would our Saviour have bid us to re∣joyce and be exceeding glad when we suffer per∣secution for his sake, if it were a thing impossi∣ble, that as Afflictions do abound so our Consolati∣ons shall also? With what an Emphasis doth the Spirit of God describe the blessedness of them that suf∣fer or die for the sake of Christ! 1 Pet. 4.14. the Spirit of God and of Glory (i. e. the glorious Spirit of God) resteth on you: and vers. 15. If any man suffer as a Christian, let him not be a∣shamed, but let him glorifie God on this behalf. And so St. John, Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord for they rest from their labours, and their works follow them, Revel. 14.13. Be thou faithful unto death (to the suffering of death) and I will give thee a Crown of life, Revel. 2.10. If we did indeed believe all that to be true which our Saviour hath told us, we would not
be offended at the Cross. The growth of our fears, is from the decay of our Faith: Why are ye fearful, O ye of little Faith! Abraham, who was strong in Faith, was also perswaded that what God had promised, he was able to per∣form, and therefore offered up his onely Son, who was dearer than his own life; and left his Country and Kindred at the Command of God. This was the Victory whereby the an∣cient Worthies overcame a world of Persecu∣tors, even their Faith, that Faith that gave a subsistence to things to come, and apprehended them as present: that Faith that made them look through things Temporal to things Eternal. They could, as the Proto-martyr St. Stephen, see the heavens opened, and Christ standing at the right hand of God; Et quid pulchrius Deo spectaculum, quam Christianus cum dolore congressus, quum adversum minas, supplicia, & tormenta, componitur! No spectacle is more pleasing to God, than a well-composed Christian conflicting with punishments and torments. Christ as it were leaves his seat, and stands up, not onely to behold, but to encourage and assist such Combatants. Non enim nos spectat tantum, sed in nobis ipse luctatur. And when Christ takes all that is done to his Members as done to himself; when in all their afflictions he is afflicted; when he assures us as by his Word
and Oath, that he will never leave us nor for∣sake us; And that all things shall co-operate to our good: If the love of Christ were indeed shed abroad in our hearts, it would constrain us to do and suffer any thing that he shall call or command us to do or suffer. For there is no fear in love: perfect love will cast out all base fears. Love would so unite us to him whom we love, that as nothing could on Christs part separate us from his love; so neither would any thing on our part work a separation, Rom. 8.38. And what is there in the world, or in our selves, of such weight, as the full enjoyment of our Saviour may not outweigh! here is no∣thing but sin and misery, infirmities and tempta∣tions daily assaulting us, and leading us Cap∣tives. The very Heathen, that had no hopes of a better life, saw cause to be weary of this, and esteemed it the greatest blessing, not to be born; but the next to it, to die speedily. But to us Christians, to whom Cita mors est victo∣ria laeta, death should be esteemed a gain; it is a passage from a vale of tears, to a Crown and Kingdom, where we shall be ever with the Lord. Wherefore lift up the hands that hang down, and the feeble knees, and make your selves ready for your last journey to your everlasting Rest. And let them that are called to suffer accord∣ing to the will of God, commit their souls to him in well doing, as to a faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4.19.
AN APPENDIX, Containing A more full and particular Answer to Mr. Hunt's Preface and Postscript. THe Author of the life of Julian having taken his Measures and chief Mate∣rials from the late Libels of Mr. Hunt, and both of them their whole Scheme from John Milton's Defence of that most exe∣crable Murther committed on the Royal Mar∣tyr, by those whom he calls the People of Eng∣land, who were indeed the very scum and off-scouring, the reproach and pests of the Nation; I shall make my way to the Confutation of the first, by some Remarks on the Writings of the other. And whereas I did onely occa∣sionally reflect on some passages of the Post∣script of Mr. Hunt, in my Answer to the Life of Julian; I shall now more particularly ex∣amine those other seditious and treasonable
Writings of Mr. Hunt. which since came to my hand. The first Pamphlet which I have answered in the precedent Papers, is, the Life of Julian. He begins his Preface to the Reader with a story of Mahomets Horns, half Fire and half Snow; which by altering the phrase he bor∣rowed from a parallel expression of Mr. Hunt's upon the like occasion: for he compares the Addressers to those pleasant Knaves that cry with one side of the face, and laugh with the other, Postscr. p. 13. And to him that acted a grave Spaniard with one side of his body, and a brisk French-man with the other. This drew on his conceit of Guelphs and Gibellines; and it was very easie by so strong a Chain of thoughts as our Author hath, to pass from Spain and France into Turky; with the Religion and Man∣ners of which Country he seems better ac∣quainted, than with that of Christendom, or else he would never have compared the Doctrine of the Cross with the Mahometan Doctrine of the Bow-string, p. 8. of his Preface. But sure he stretcht his Chain very much, when from the Address of the men of Rippon, thanking his Majestie for his Declaration to govern by Laws, and to maintain the establish∣ed Religion, and to call frequent Parliaments, and desiring that the Crown might descend in the right Line; he concludes, that they prayed
against all these, and made it their humble re∣quest that they might be sure of a Popish Suc∣cessour, and were weary of their Religion, p. 5, 6. But he broke every link of this Chain, when (though he put on his considering-Cap) he could not find any Precedent or Example for such an Address. But presently had an imper∣fect remembrance (for such indeed it was) of the contrary Carriage of tho Primitive Christi∣ans towards Julian: whereas our Author might more easily and fitter to his purpose, have remembred the Behaviour of some other Chri∣stians (as they professed themselves) towards King Charles the First; and then he might have deserved the Office of a City-Remem∣brancer. But he wickedly, and (I hope by what I shall discover) in vain endeavours to impose his Seditious Doctrine on the Nation. For this Notorious Plagiary hath taken his whole de∣sign (as Mr. Hunt had done before him) from an Argument of that profligate Villain, John Milton, whereby he attempted to defend the Murther of our Royal Martyr: and that some passages in the Life of Julian have the same malignant aspect and influence, I have shewn in my Observations on a passage quoted by our Author out of Sozomen, in commendation of Regicide. So that his Chain of Thoughts will
hang no more together than a Rope of Sand: for he runs so far from the Loyal Addressers, as to fall in with Rebels and Regicides. His whole design is to justifie Resistance of Lawful Powers in defence of that Religion which we profess and allow of, especially when we are in possession of that Religion, and it is established by Law: (though by the way, both the esta∣blished Religion and Christianity it self, as well as the Laws of the Land, are ipso facto destroy∣ed by resistance.) This Leviathan fancying to himself a wide difference between the Case of those Christians that lived under Julian, and the Case of the first Christians, sports himself in the depth of this great Invention, and scoffs at all the Ar∣guments brought for Obedience and Subjection from the Primitive Christians before Constan∣tine, as the Leviathan in Job 41. who esteemed Iron as Straw, and Brass as rotten wood, and laugheth at the shaking of the Spear. Their case (saith he of the Christians in Julians time) and that of the Primitive Christians, was as widely different, as Laws for men and against men can possibly make them: Yet for ought I see, be the Laws for or against his Doctrine of Resistance, it must be swallowed; for though he tells us that our Laws do not admit of such thoughts as his Julian Christians did put in practice, yet the design must on, or the whole
labour of our Author must perish. And who can help it? when men will build on the Sand, and daub with untempered Mortar, such as blood and slime, whatever cost or time is bestowed on such a Fabrick, is cast away, and the fall of it will be great. On this false supposition these two Master-builders, with whom I am now accounting, do with an unaccountable Confidence lay the stress of all their Discourses. And though I have said e∣nough to destroy this false Hypothesis in the Answer, yet because they think to supersede the Arguments brought for Obedience, from the practice of the first Christians for three hun∣dred years, and perswade the present Age that they do not at all concern us, but that we may rather do as the Julian Christians did, that is, rail at and resist our Superiours, having our Religion established by Law, though both our Religion and Law declare precisely that we may not resist, for any pretence whatsoever; I shall add somewhat here to prevent that pre∣judice and preoccupation which our Authors have falsly and maliciously insinuated, And to this end, I shall prove, that the Christians in Ju∣lians time were under the same Government and circumstances (abstracted from the Chri∣stian Religion) with those of the first three hundred years; and if they had resisted, it was altogether as unjustifiable as that of those Pri∣mitive
Christians would have been, or ours now can be. Cicero acquaints us wherein the Imperial Power did consist when it was first founded among the Romans, l. 3. de Legibus, in these words: Regio Imperio duo sunto, iique prae∣eundo, judicando, consulendo, Praetores, Judices, Consules appellantor: Militiae Summum jus ha∣bento, nemini parento: Ollis salus Populi Supre∣ma Lex esto. (i. e.) Let there be two persons in the Royal Empire, and let them be called from their precedence Praetors, from their Judi∣cature Judges, from their Consultations Consuls: Let them have the highest command of the Mi∣litia: Let them obey no man: Let the safety of the people be to them the Supream Law. How this latter Clause is to be understood, is ful∣ly resolved in the preceding Discourse. But all these do certainly amount to an Absolute un∣controlable power, which being first setled in the two Consuls, was afterward by the Senate conferred on Augustus, and called the Lex Re∣gia; by which it was declared, that (Quic∣quid per Epistolam statuit, cognoscens decrevit, aut per Edictum propalavit, Lex esto) Whatever he should determine by his Epistle, whatever he should decree upon Cognizance, or declare by his Edict, should be a Law. This very power of the Empire was in be∣ing when our Saviour and his Apostles lived
on the Earth; who, though they were far remote from Rome, yet precisely submitted to the Roman Emperours, and did indispensibly oblige his Disciples in all times to come to do the same; because the powers that then were, though an Augustus, Nero, or Claudian, Hea∣then and Persecutors, were ordained of God, to be his Ministers, to bear the Sword, to receive Tribute and Custom, Fear and Honour, &c. And that therefore they must needs be subject, not onely for fear of wrath, but for the Lords sake, and for Conscience sake. And the obe∣dience which was to be given them is expres∣sed by , to be at their Command as Souldiers are to their General, and , to obey them at a word, Titus 3.1. Hence it was (I mean from the Roman Laws, not from the Scripture) that Dion says of Augustus, that he was , Free, and of absolute Authoritie, both over him∣self, and over the Laws: for, Rex est Lex viva, & reipsa praecipit ut Lex per scriptum: That the Emperour is a living Law, and commands as much by word, as the Law doth by writing: and the S.P.Q.R. by their own abbreviation, be∣came an unintelligible Cypher. Thus the Roman Empire continued until the Reign of Constantine, or else he could not have propagated the Christian Religion so much as he did by his Edicts; there being, as is
supposed, many strict Laws against it. And it is not to be credited by Christians, that the Imperial power should be disanulled by their becoming Christians. If it be said that they themselves did consent to the abridgment of it, let the Records be produced, and let the Do∣nation of Constantine in this respect be more probable than that fictitious one which the Pope produceth for the Western Empire, of which I have spoken in another place. See the Histo∣ry of the Donatists. What was done by Con∣stantine, who was not baptized till the latter end of his Reign, and made many Edicts for the toleration of all Religions, as is shewn in the foregoing Papers, will scarce amount to an Establishment of the Christian Religion. But granting that he had to the utmost of his power established the Christian Religion, yet his Successor thought himself not at all o∣bliged by his Edicts: for, by the same Reason that Constantius should be bound by the E∣dicts of Constantine, Constantine should be bound by the Edicts of Dioclesian for the per∣secution of Christians. But, as our Author hath observed from Gregory Nazianzen, who speaking of Julian's Souldiers, who (were most of them Christians, and yet besides the Law of God) knew no other Law than the Will of their Prince. Invective 1. p. 75. And in truth, if the Christian Emperours had been ex∣plicitly
and absolutely bound up to their Sub∣jects to maintain their Religion and Priviledges which by the favour and grace of those Empe∣rours were granted to them, and the Subjects left at liberty to defend and obey their Empe∣rours, the Emperours had been in a worse condition than their Subjects: for upon the Peoples changing of their Religion, as we know they did when almost the whole World became Arians. they might have resisted their most Orthodox Emperours; as Mr. Hunt affirms they actually did in the Reign of Constan∣tius. But what Religion could the Christians plead that they were long in possession of, and was established by Laws! When Constantius nothing regarding the Constitutions of his Pre∣decessor, did with all his might, and frequent E∣dicts, establish the Arian Religion, and suppress the Orthodox, hath been already shewn. Be∣sides, there were Ʋrbes liberae, not onely free Cities, but free Nations under the Romans, who were govern'd by their own Laws and Magistrates, and , which they held inviolable. Of this nature Josephus, l. 16. c. 4. of his Antiqui∣ties, observes the Asian Churches mentioned in the Revelations to be, who had jus, a right of Liberty, and legal Priviledges, yet did none of those Churches ever plead their
Priviledges, or plead exemption from the Em∣perours Edicts. Yea, Christ himself, who might have pleaded exemption from paying tribute unto Caesar, (the Children as he says being free) yet to avoid scandal, he works a Miracle for the payment of it, and enjoyns his Disciples to give unto Caesar the things that are Caesars. The weight of these and those other Argu∣ments which follow, will I doubt not sink that Triumphant Arch which our Author hath raised, into those Quick-sands on which he grounded it. And I shall now proceed to e∣rect a lasting Pillar to the perpetual Infamy of this Author, upon such firm and impregnable grounds, as shall continue against all the im∣petuous but impotent blasts of this Boreas. It hath been accounted a good method for refuting of Errours, to reduce them to their first Principles and Originals. Be it known then to all men, that our Author hath bid de∣fiance to the Laws of God and Man, in teaching the Doctrine of Resistance, which was never taught among any Christians until Popery was come to its perfection. That he hath as much as in him lierh, scandalized and even condemned the Primitive Christians, as allow∣ing of and practising that intolerable Doctrine of Resistance. That both he and Mr. Hunt, have defended this Doctrine by the same Arguments
as the Jesuits, John Milton, and other Regicides have done. That John Milton, &c. received the same Principles from Mr. Burton, Mr. Burroughs, Bridge, Marshal, and others, in de∣fence of the late Ʋnnatural War against Charles the First. That their design is to raise another War, on the same grounds, against their pre∣sent Prince. And though they seem to blind their designs by preparing onely to exclude a Popish Successour, yet 'tis beyond denial, that all the Arguments of the Author of Julian are levelled against the Prince that is in possession, and that he doth with the shew of Authority recommend the assassination of such a Prince, and that Mr. Hunt's Original far exceeds the Transcript in such impious designs. If this Character be not black enough, let him that reads and understands, onely subscribe the name of the Author of the Life of Julian with that of Mr. Hunt, In perpetuam Rei memori∣am; and you have all in two words. As for Mr. Hunt, if this passage which I shall name do not amount to more direct Treason, than those for which he says he would indite a great person (no less than a Secretary of State) of— Treason in a plea for the Suc∣cession; I think there can be no such thing. The Paragraph, p. 193. as it is marked in my Copy, is verbatim this: Speaking of the Duke— Let him attempt the Crown not∣withstanding
an Act of Parliament for his Ex∣clusion, he is all that while but attempting to make us miserable: if he be not excluded, he doth it certainly, (we exclude onely his Person, not his Posterity). And WE WILL NOT ENTAIL A WAR ƲPON THE NATION, THOƲGH FOR THE SAKE AND INTEREST OF THE GLORIOƲS FAMILY OF THE STƲARTS. Is not this spoken Dictator-like? Did Crom∣wel say more when he bragg'd that he had the Parliament in his pocket? Then, We will have this, and we will not have that; We will proclaim the Family of the Stuarts Traitors, and we will have our own will. His premise is this— If the Duke be not excluded, he doth certainly make us miserable, by entailing a War upon the Nation: (which may be false, if the ancient Proverb be true (Gen. 22.12.) In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen: it was spoken when the knife was lifted up to make Isaac a Scri∣fice, (and we know that the burning bush was not consumed.) But the Conclusion is certain∣ly most impious, We will not entail a War up-the Nation, though for the sake and interest of the glorious Family of the Stuarts. To let pass that Irony of THE GLORIOƲS FAMILY OF THE STƲARTS; The plain sence of the words to a Logician is
this: Rather than not exclude the Duke of York, who will certainly make us miserable, we will exclude the glorious Family of the Stu∣arts. This is as much as need to be said at present, to cure the preiudice of a deluded and unthinking people, as Mr. Hunt calls them Had. Mr. Hunt's Preface and Postscript come to my hands before I had well-nigh fi∣nished my Answer, and sent some sheets to the Press (the rest being called for with all expe∣dition) that the Printer might not be prejudi∣ced by the edition of other Tracts on this sub∣ject; I should have taken a more particular view of all that is contained in them: whereas I can now onely cursorily make a few Remarks, and leave the Reader to judge Ex ungue leo∣nem. We live (saith he, p. 150.) in an Age of my∣stery and prodigie, producing things monstrous and unnatural; and our language must be agree∣able to the things we speak. And so it is very obscure, and yet unnatural, But I shall en∣deavour to drag this Author to the light, and present him with his three heads. The first is his Invective against the Clergy. This poureth forth flouds of Contempt upon the whole Order. The second is his Justification of the late Ʋnnatural War: and this Head breaths out an horrible and infectious stink.
The third, his endeavour to promote another such War as that was: And this Head casteth out Firebrands and Swords, to alarm and arm all the Malecontents in the Nation, for a resi∣stance of their Governours. I know he doth not want his lurking holes and Subterfuges to hide these monstrous defor∣mities: but all in vain, Treason will out; and Magna est veritas▪ & prevalebit. The first Head breaths out a contempt of the Clergie; to which he makes way by a Pre∣amble that will rather aggravate than excuse the Crime. 1. Our Author complains that his honest design (as he calls it) to serve the Church hath been by many perverted, p. 1. of the Pre∣face: and p. 5. that some have endeavoured to set his two Discourses (viz. his Argument for Bishops, and his Postscript) at variance; that the first was written to set off the latter with some advantage, and that the Author de∣signed to get from the Argument, a more pardo∣nable libertie of inveighing against the Church-men in the Postscript. Habetis consitentem Reum. Doubtless the Argument did not effect that grateful Acknowledgement from the Bishops which he expected. They knew him per∣haps to be a mercenary man, one that had or would write as much falsely against them, as he
had done truly for them, if it might tend to his better advantage; and therefore he was resolved to pull down what he had built up, and to seek more beneficiary Patrons. Let us therefore consider who they were that thus resented and complained of Mr. Hunt, p. 5. If it had been (says he) the conceit of the Popish Faction onely, and not also of those Gentlemen whom I principally designed to serve, and in them the Church of England, &c. Here it is as plain, as if it had been written with a Sun-beam, that he means the Bishops, who were mostly, if not onely, concerned in that Argu∣ment. But how maliciously doth he suggest, that they were influenced by the Popish Faction! who, p. 6. (he says) had corrupted some of our Church-men with Principles that subvert our Government, and betray the Rights of our peo∣ple: They have debauched the manners of our Church-men, and lessened their Athoritie and Esteem with the people: The Order is inslaved, by collation of Preferments upon less worthy men. Qui beneficium accepit, libertatem a∣misit. Is not this a stout Advocate for Bishops, that tells the world, that those of that Order (in∣definitely) are contemptible slaves, that have sold their Libertie for Preferment; that they are corrupted in their Principles, to the subver∣ting
of our Government, and betraying the Rights of the people; and so debauched in their manners, as that they have lessened their esteem and authoritie with the people? Is not this the old Censor Morum, or Cato Redivivus? And is it possible that a learned man should thus prevaricate and contradict himself so grosly, as it were in the same breath? Let not Mr. Hunt think to evade this, and say he speaks this of our younger Divines, (of which we shall hear enough by and by, to make all good mens ears tingle at the horrid falsehood of it): he speaks this of the Order, and particularly of the dignified men of that Order; of these it is that he speaks, p. 7. (for he is not yet come to his distinction of young and old Divines; those that are inslaved by the Preferment they have, and those that seek Preferment by other arts, of which anon) That they lick up the Vomit of Popish Priests; and whatever is said maliciously by them against the first Reformers, is daily repeated by (now come in) our young Clerks out of the Pulpit, with advantages of immodestie and indiscre∣tion. Now for our young Divines, whom (p. 50. of the Postscript) he calls good-natur'd Gentle∣men of the Clergie, Tom Triplet is the onely young man that I knew, who was so lasht af∣ter he came from the University; Old Gill
never laid on so unmercifully, as this Dema∣gogue doth, p. 9. We have a sort of young men that have left nothing behind them in the Ʋni∣versitie but the taint of a bad example, and brought no more Learning with them thence, than what serves to make them more assured and more remarkable Coxcombs; who will undertake to discourse continually of the Interest of Reli∣gion, of which they have no manner of sense; and of the Constitution of our Government, of which they are utterly ignorant. P. 8. These, like Dot∣terels, Apes, and Parrets, who have no more un∣derstanding than those Animals, are perpetually repeating any thing, though never so destructive to Church and State, that is suggested by any Popish Mercenarie Writer; if he hath but the cunning to bestow an idle Complement upon the Church, or calls Rogue or Villain seemingly, or in pretence, for their sakes, (I hope our Bishops have not hired any for such purposes) especi∣ally if he can furnish to their young Invention any Topicks of Raillerie against an Imaginary Pres∣bytery, and against the Parliaments, &c. a very fair Capacitie and Recommendation this, as they imagine, to Preferment: These are the men I confess for whose sake I writ the Postscript. The Preface then it seems was writ for the Bi∣shops. But this unmerciful man hath not yet done lashing our young Divines. P. 10. Too many
of the young Clergie (says our Aristarchus) do assist the Gentrie in their Loyal Debauches most scandalously, for the service of the Church, and maintaining the honour of their Order. These degenerate Levites are magnifying perpe∣tually the priviledges of their Tribe, extolling their Order, yet in terms that disgrace it; and by their lives they vilifie it. And now, like the old Persecutors, he hath wearied himself, to torment poor Innocents. I hope our young Divines have yet so much of their Grammar-learning, (for the Subject is scarce capable of the more serious Stelliteuticks of the Ʋniversity-studies) as to return some Reflections on the laborious Travels of this in∣famous Tom Coriat, and make him feel what it is, Ludere cum Sanctis, in our Lawyers Latine, (i. e.) to play with Edge-tools. In the mean time, his own folly and impietie will chastise him, it being evident that Mr. Hunt deals with the Bishops, not onely as men use their Dogs, who feed them with a bit and a knock; but as Butchers are wont to use their Hogs, who claw them and scrape them a little, that they may with more conveniencie cut their Throats: He advanceth them as it were on a Pinacle of the Temple, that he may cast them down the more irrecoverably. He tells us, p. 15. that Calvin, Beza, and P. du Moulin, Monsieur Moyne, Claude, and de
l'Angle highly approved of the Order and Office of Bishops: And from Grotius, that Non de∣bent res bonae damnari, quia sunt qui iis abutun∣tur: That good things ought not to be condem∣ned, because there are some that do abuse them. Yet p. 11. he tells them also, the Apostolicalness of their Order will not secure it, if they do not fill up the dutie of their Office, (i. e. if they do not fully comply with his designe:) And p. 12. he remembers them that there are Churches of Christ that do make a shift without their Order, and Religion need not perish though the Order fail. So that it is plain, that by the word Or∣der he means Episcopacy; and insinuates, that it is a needless thing, it may be grub'd up root and branch. And is not this a fair Apologie for his real intention to serve the Bishops? P. 23. He complains that too many eminent men in our Church are brought to a dead Neu∣tralitie; and thereby we are brought to this pass, That Religion it self must be the devoted thing to the rage and folly of the Priests of that Religion: (As if they had all conspired to be felo's de se). And on this ground he proclaims his Curse ye Meroz against them as execrable Neuters. P. 6. he says, They have raised a bitter Zeal against that Separation which them∣selves have contrived, fomented, and promoted: and it is brought to that pass, that those are ac∣counted Church-Fanaticks, though Conformists,
that cannot contentedly see and endure the neerer approaches of ruine both of Church and State: These are their fear and their hate, the Sons of Anak, the Giants of the Land, that they imagine so insuperable, that they are for making themselves a Captain, and returning back into Egypt, p. 7. This he repeats, p. 46. where he endea∣vours to lay the sin of Corah. &c. upon those who in our days do most faithfully adhere to Moses and Aaron; and would excuse those, who having lost their Corah and other renow∣ned Leaders, by an exemplary Divine Judge∣ment, did the very next day murmur again a∣gainst Moses and Aaron, falsely accusing them, who were the meekest men upon Earth, of ta∣king too much upon them, (i. e.) of ruling by an Arbitrary power, and making themselves absolute: For so, v. 13. of that 16th Chapter, they accuse Moses of seeking to make himself altogether a Prince: and v. 14. he is accused of seeking to put out the eyes of the People, as Mr. Hunt also doth, p. 13. Postscr. We are used (saith he) as Sampson, bound, and our eyes put out, and made sport for the Philistimes. I fear Mr. Hunt will hardly have his eyes opened, till (as the mole) he comes to die. With such murmurings as these they so provoked Moses, that the Lord was angry with him for their sakes; and, as the Author of Julian's life ob∣served of the Prayers of the Christians in Ju∣lians
time, they contrived and effected his death: for he dyed in the Land of Moab, and was not to enter into Canaan. Who they are that murmur at the Con∣duct of Moses and Aaron, is too visible to be denied (viz.) they that accuse them of Arbi∣trary Government, that proclaim themselves the Holy People; they who hearken to those false Spies that discourage the people with sto∣ries of Insuperable evils, of being certainly mi∣serable, and having a War entailed on the Na∣tion, fire and faggot, and an Inquisition, &c. For my part, I think these murmuring Pro∣gnosticators are they who are for making a∣nother Captain in the room of Corah, and going back again to Egypt. And though we do not look on these as the Sons of Anak, in∣vincible Giants; yet are they as the Canaanites were to Israel, thorns in our sides. They are still troubling us with their wiles and their lyes, their Associations and Consults, their Seditious Libels and Pamphlets, such as these of our two Authors; their Doleman, and the Rights of the Kingdom; Their Plato Redivivus, their No Plot, and Sermons of Per∣secution, and Daniel in the Den; which, like the Frogs and Plagues of Egypt, are croaking in every corner, and infecting every part of the three Nations. They which cry up those for the godly Party, and devout Men, that are in∣spired
with Scruples from God himself, on pur∣pose to put a bar against the proceedings of Moses and Aaron. By such men and means (the truth is) we are brought into a great strait; we have a deep Sea before us, and a howling Wilderness behind us. And yet we murmur not; our Sins have deserved these things: Nor do we think of making any other Captains to our selves, than those whom God in great mercy, and by many Miracles, hath preserved and continued unto us. We are not for Egypt in your sence, nor for being reduced to a State of Bondage through the Wilderness of a new War: We are for standing still, keeping our places, and doing our duties, and wait for the Salvation of God. Though we were by the wickedness of unreasonable and cruel men de∣prived of our Moses, yet God hath sent us a Josua, and with him are the Priests of the Lord, and the Ark of his Covenant, to which, we doubt not, the swelling streams of Jordan will give way, and we shall yet pass to Canaan on dry land. Now let the Reader judge who do abuse the Scripture to serve their turn, as Mr. Hunt doth advise, p. 46. P. 35. Mr. Hunt becomes an Advocate for a sort of Gibeonites, that they may have an act of Comprehension; and represents them as a very harmless and friendly people. The Dis∣senters
(says he) have neither power nor will to destroy our RELIGION or Government; they are already of our Church, and it is expected that they should be Petitioners to the Bishops for their intercession towards the obtaining some indulgence in some little matters, that they may bring them into an intire communion with us. And again, That they are in profession as Loyal as any that boast themselves true Sons of the Church of England, p. 19. But though some profess an irreconcileable hatred, even in their pleas for Peace; the great question is, what their practice is and hath been. Postscr. p. 89. Can any man imagine (says he) that any prejudice can accrew to the Church of England, if she did enlarge her Communion by making the Conditions of it more easie? And p. 90. Is it fit that the Peace should be hazarded, or the Nation put with reason or without in fear of it; or a Kingdom turned into a Shambles, for a Ceremony or a Ritual in our publick Worship? &c. What is it the Advocate of these men pleads for? hath he full instructions from his Clients? doth he know their minds, and what will give them satisfaction? What he contends for, hath by several men of the Church been granted to them. Why may not (say you) standing at the Sa∣crament be granted— And the signing with the Cross in Baptism be dispensed with when desired?
When the Dean of St. Pauls and the Bishop of Cork have made some overtures for conce∣ding these things, Mr. Baxter answers the first, that he made them sibi & suis, for the advan∣tage of himself and others of his own Per∣swasion; and without taking any notice of them in the latter, answers his Discourse with scorn and contempt. But our Liturgie must also be altered for their sakes: p. 91. you would have more Offi∣ces, and those we have, not so long: though some complain they are too many and too short alrea∣dy. And for the Rubrick, that must be alter∣ed, (not for the present onely) as general scruples shall arise; and that may be to the worlds end. But to answer more particularly: you say the Dissenters have neither power nor will to destroy our Religion and Government. Answ. When they were less considerable for their numbers than now, being (as you say) four fifths of the Nation, they had both power and will to effect both. What hath been done, may be done; and Mr. Baxter justly feared that they were Nati ad bis perdendam Remp. Anglicanam. That they are the trading and wealthie part of the Nation, is generally boa∣sted by themselves. We know Mr. Baxter urgeth in the name of his Brethren, that there are many hainous
sins in our present Constitution that hinder their Conformitie; the taking off of which will be an acknowledgement of our guilt, and their justifi∣cation. As for the prejudice that may ac∣crue by altering the conditions of our Com∣munion, you give us a fair warning, p. 93. tel∣ling us of the Church of Rome, that their Do∣ctrine of Comprehension is so large, that they de∣stroy their Religion to increase the number of their Professors: by granting the demands of some, we shall but encourage others, and make them presume to be Judges in their case and quarrels. And we have found by sad experi∣ence the inconvenience of admitting such as the Country-conformist and the Author of the Life of Julian into our Communion. And you say, p. 35 and 36 of the Preface, That the King and States of the Realm will ne∣ver suffer so excellent an Ecclesiastical Consti∣tution as we enjoy, to be subverted: Yet the Dissenters project in Mr. Humphrey's Half-sheet, intended to be presented to the Parliament, doth certainly tend to her destruction, as hath been shewed elsewhere. And if the King and States will not ad∣mit an alteration, you know the Bishops can∣not: and if the States will not, and the Bi∣shops cannot, ought not they that would make themselves wiser than their Rulers to submit, (notwithstanding their scruples against a Ce∣remony)
rather than to hazard or disturb the peace of the Kingdom? And is it not an un∣just complaint of yours, of turning it into a Shambles for a Ceremony or a Ritual? And to conlude, if (as you observe, p. 92.) a discourse managed with almost irresistible Reason, Can∣dour, Temper, and Address, be matter of exaspe∣ration, and they turn again, and be more confir∣med in their separating way, what condescentions will reclaim them? P. 36. It is added— That absurd Opinion that Dominium fundatur in gratia, is charged on those that are for the Exclusion of the Duke: And they think that by pronouncing that absurd piece of Latine, they have at once put to silence and shame all reasons of Nature, Religion, and State that urge and require it. How we can maintain the Negative against the Papists, if we should practise the same as they do, on this Position, I cannot perceive: and therefore we must charge it impartially on all that deserve it. Bishop Davenant ad∣mits it for good Latine; and I think that you quarrel at the words, to avoid the sence of the Thesis which that learned Bishop main∣tained against the Papists, concluding, that the Pope could not challenge the power of Deposing Kings by any Title but that of Anti∣christ, whose Founder was Hildebrand, who like Satan, claimed a power to dispose of all
the Kingdoms of the World: And you your self think that our Saints ought not to do so. We come now to the Postscript, which he hath told us was written for the sake of our young Divines, those good-natur'd Gentlemen, who doubtless will return his Civilities. His pretence is to answer some Objections that were made against them; but in truth, they are his own accusations of them, which he prose∣cutes with all the might and malice he can, up∣on this ground, because the Bishops must be made out of them; and being so bad already, he hath foretold how much worse it will be, when they sell their Liberty for that Prefer∣ment. It is said then, p. 1. (our Author knows by whom) That they affirm it to be in the power of a Prince by Divine Right to govern as he plea∣seth: That the power of the Laws is solely in him: That he may, if he please, use the consent of Parliaments to assist the Reason of his Laws, when he shall give any; but it is a great conde∣scention in Kings to give a Reason for what they do, and a diminution to their most unaccountable Prerogative: That they are for a Popish Suc∣cessor and no Parliament, and do as much as in them lies, give up our ancient Government and the Protestant Religion, the true Christian Faith,
to the absolute Will of a Popish Successor, giving him a Divine Right to extirpate Gods true Re∣ligion established among us by Law, and to eva∣cuate our Government by his absolute pleasure. Then, after a little pause, having almost run himself out of breath to tell the Nation these Falshoods, he thus inlargeth himself, p. 2. That just now, when we are under the dread of a Po∣pish Successor, some of our Clergie are illumina∣ted into a Mysterie, That any Authoritie in the Government, not derived from the King, and that is not to yield to his absolute Will, was re∣bellious, and against the Divine Right and Au∣thoritie of Kings in the establishment, against which no Ʋsage or Prescription to the contrarie, or in abatement of it, is to be allowed. That all Rights are ambulatorie, and depend for their continuance on his pleasure: So that though the Reformation was made here by the Government established by Law, and hath acquired Civil Rights not to be altered but by the King and the three Estates, these men yet speak (says our Lawyer) as if they envied the Rights of their own Religion, and had a mind to reduce the Church back again into a state and condition of being persecuted, and designed that she should be strip∣ped of her legal Immunities and Defensatives, and brought back to the deplorable helpless con∣dition of Prayers and Tears, do utterly abandon and neglect all the provisions that Gods provi∣dence
hath made for their protection: Nay, by this their new Hypothesis they put it by Divine Right in the power of a Popish Successour, when he pleaseth, at once, by a single indisputable and irresistable decree to destroy our Religion and Government.— That they believe no Plot but a Presbyterian Plot; for, of them they believe all ill, and call whom they please by that hated name, and boldly avow that Popery is more eligible than Presbytery, for by that they shall have grea∣ter Revenues, and more authority and rule over the Lay-men, A heavy Charge this, (saith Mr. Hunt, p. 4.) if true: but he is sure it is imputable but to a few, though he had told us in the Preface, that many, too many were so corrupted: and in ma∣ny places he speaks indefinitely of the whole Order. Now our Lawyer cannot but know, that it lies on him who hath divulged these slanders, to make proof of them, though he pretends they were objected by others. And all the Conforming Clergy are cast under the suspition of these unsufferable Crimes. If Mr. Hunt had any regard to the welfare of the Church, he would have singled out such Crimi∣nals, and brought them to shame and condign punishment, there being sufficient Laws for the punishment of them: and it being the inte∣rest of the Magistrates to free the Church and State from such pests. A Judas may creep in
among Christs own Disciples, and a Jonah hide himself in the bottom of the Ship: But doubtless it is the interest of all that are in such a Ship, to have them discovered and cast out, that the storms which threaten their common destruction may be allayed; especially when (as Mr. Hunt says) they come often under ob∣servation, frequent publick houses, and talk loud. He that doth not according to his power seek to prevent these evils, is consenting to, and con∣tracts the guilt of them. Qui non vetat cum po∣test, jubet. But it consists not with Mr. Hunts design to do the Church such a real Service as to free her from such miscreants, but to involve the whole Clergy under the same defamation, that they may fall under the same condemnation. To this end, instead of extenuating the num∣ber of such, he aggravates their faults; as, 1. Being such as may choak the Constancy, Resolution and Zeal of the most addicted to the Service of the Church-men. 2. That they are acted by the Papists. 3. That they are agreeable to, and indeed make up the most modern Project and Scheme of the Popish Plot. And 4. That They deserve to suffer as the betray∣ers of their Country, and to be prosecuted with greater shame and ignominy than the Traditores were by the Ancient Christians. And thus
having breathed a while, he this ill-natured Lawyer begins to lash our good-natured Divines again. Ʋpon such scandalous and false Suggestions as these it is (saith he) that the generality of the Clergie, who any way appear for a Christian Subjection to the King, and a defence of the e∣stablished Government of the Church, are repre∣sented as Popishly affected, and betrayers of the True Protestant Religion and the Laws, &c. I would have Mr. Hunt to answer his own Question, p. 101. What Fines and Imprison∣ments, Pillories and Scourgings do they deserve, that persecute the Church with revilings, when they themselves are tolerated? It must be some large Bribe, or promise of the publick Faith, that thus ingageth our Law∣yer to support a dying Cause, and to take part as well with Papists as Fanaticks, to bring the English Reformation into contempt. For what neerer way is there to effect it, than first to represent those who he says established our Religion in Queen Elizabeths days, to be asser∣tors and promoters of the Doctrine of King-kil∣ling? Secondly to affirm, That in the days of King Charles the first, by preaching up the Divinity of Kings, and their Absolute power, that unnatural War was begun? And Thirdly, p. 7. That at his Majesties
return, Fanaticism had expired, if some peevish old and stiff Church-men had not studied obsta∣cles, and some craftie States-men had not pro∣jected that the continuance of the Schism would be of great service to destroy the Church. And for the present Age, the Clergy great and small are all under the same condemnation; Great Friends to Popery and Arbitrary Govern∣ment; such as have no sense of Reason or Religion; such as will not when it is in their power pre∣vent the ruine of their Nation, but are either accursed Neuters, or else wilful Actors in drawing down the Judgments of God upon us. And we are like to have no other; the Fountains be∣ing corrupted, can send forth nothing but unclean streams. I pray God preserve the Honour∣able Inns of Court from such Impostors as Mr. Hunt! Let not Mr. Hunt think to hide his Malice against the Clergy, by a seeming commendation of their Offices as Apostolical, when he adds, that Religion may subsist without it, and when by all manner of evil arts he seeks to inrage the multitude against them: Nor that he is to be taken as a Friend to their persons or main∣tenance, who labours so much to take away their good names, which, like precious Oyntment, I hope will send forth the better savour, for be∣ing thus Chafed.
Alas! we are not so very Dolts, but that we know such little Arts to be the daily practice of every Sycophant and Tale-bearer, who being minded to disgrace a person, useth the same method as Mr. Hunt doth toward the Cler∣gie; first to invent, then to spread abroad and aggravate their supposed faults or personal in∣firmities, as pretended Friends. For thus they insinuate:Do you know such a person, and do you hear nothing concerning him? There is a strong Report that he hath done such and such evil things, as will ruine him and all his Family. I am heartily sorrie to hear such things of him; but they cannot be hid or denied. I am much troubled to hear of such gross miscarriages. He was in a very good Way, and had many advantages of be∣nefitting himself and others; but he hath a∣bused them, and outlived them all; and his high Place and Calling doth but discover his nakedness the more, and will precipitate his ruine. It could hardly enter into my be∣lief, that a person that knows and professeth better things, could ever have been guiltie of such Crimes. And perhaps you will be as incredulous as I was; but they are too true. I perceive it is not all gold that glisters. How a man may be deceived by an outward form and fucus of Honestie and Religion! I thank God I am undeceived my self, and hope o∣thers
will be so too. He is a very Wolf in Sheeps clothing, a Persecutor of the Righteous, who seemed a Preacher of Righteousness, &c. Have no fellowship or communion with him: he is in the very gall of bitterness, and the bond of iniquity. If such Insinuations are vile and odious in a vulgar mouth against a single person, how much more vile are they in the printed Harangues of a man of understanding, against the whole Order of the Clergie, with a malicious de∣signe first to disgrace, and then to destroy them! Either this Gentleman is well acquainted with the Ʋniversities, and the generality of those that from thence are admitted to the Priesthood, or not. If he be not, he is inexcu∣sable for printing such Scandals against them: if he be, he cannot but know that there was never better Discipline in the Ʋniversity, never greater Circumspection used concerning such as are admitted to Holy Orders, than now there is: and that if ever (Clerus Anglicanus est stupor Mundi) it was true that the English Clergie were the admiration of the world, it is so now. And therefore the Author of these oblique Reflections strikes at all the Heads of the Ʋniversities, and at all the Bishops in their several Diocesses, as if they were the Causers and Promoters of all these Disorders.
I do therefore appeal first to his own Con∣science, whether the far greater number, both in the Ʋniversitie and in the Clergie, be not men of Learning, Integrity, Piety, and Loyalty; and then he should in justice have given them such a character as the major part doth deserve: Denominatio sumitur à majore. And then I appeal to the testimony of more equal and in∣different men: And such a one I take Dr. Burnet to be, who for his late Writings had the Thanks of the Nation in a Parliament-way: and he deserved it, if he had written nothing else but the Testimony which he gives of the present Clergie. God hath not so left this Age and Church, but there is in it a great number in both the Holy Functions, who are perhaps as eminent in the ex∣emplariness of their lives, and as diligent in their labours, as hath been in any one Church in any Age since Miracles ceased. The humility and strictness of life in many of our Prelates, and some that were highly born, and yet have far outgone some others from whom more might have been expected, raiseth them far above censure, though perhaps not above envie. And when such think not the daily instructing their Neighbours a thing below them, but do it with as constant a care as if they were to earn their Bread by it: when they are so affable to the meanest Clergie-men that come to them; when they are nicely scrupu∣lous
about those whom they admit into Holy Or∣ders, and so large in their Charities, that one would think they were furnished with some un∣seen ways; these things must needs raise great esteem for such Bishops, and seem to give some hopes of better times. Of all this I may be al∣lowed to speak the more freely, since I am led to it by none of those Bribes either of Gratitude, or Fear, or Hope, which are wont to corrupt men to say what they do not think. But I were much to blame, if in a Work that may perhaps live some time in the world, I should onely find fault with what is amiss, and not also acknowledge what is so very commendable and praise-worthy. And when I look into the inferiour Clergie, there are, chiefly about this great City of London, so many so eminent, both for the strictness of their Lives, the constancie of their Labours, and plain way of Preaching, which is now perhaps brought to as great a perfection as ever was since men spoke as they received it immediately from the Holy Ghost; the great gentleness of their Deportment to such as differ from them, their mutual love and charity, and in a word, for all the qualities that can adorn Ministers or Christians; that if such a number of such men cannot prevail with this debauched Age, this one thing to me looks more dismally than all the other affrighting sym∣ptoms of our condition, That God having sent so many faithful Teachers, their labours are still so ineffectual.
If any man think the Doctor speaks par∣tially, let him hear Mr. Hunt's own Testi∣monie, p. 48. of the Postscript: Our Age is blessed with a Clergie renownedly learned and prudent. And p. 105. he commends our Church for the purity of her Doctrine, prudence of her Discipline, and her commendable, decent, and in∣telligible Devotion. This Testimony is true, and therefore they who contradict it cannot be too sharply rebuked. But what reason can be conceived for these contradictory procee∣dings? This Gentleman (I conceive) might fan∣cie himself to be Chairman of the Commit∣tee for Trial of Ministers, and hath taken his Measures for proceeding in that case, from the practice of his Predecessors, who formed Articles of the like nature against the Clergie of that Age. Imprimis, For adhering to the King against his Parliament. Item, For preaching a necessitie of obedience to the King as Supream, and thereby endea∣vouring to introduce an Arbitrary Power. Item, For disobeying the Votes and Ordi∣nances of Parliament for demolishing of Super∣stition, and keeping out of Popery. Item, For defending Episcopacie and Li∣turgie; for not keeping the daies of Fasting and Humiliation appointed to crave a blessing on the
Parliaments Forces, and the days of Thanksgi∣ving for defeating the Kings designs. Item, For preaching up Passive Obedience, when the Laws do allow us to make resistance in defence of our Religion, our Liberties, and Lives. Item, For insufficiencie, not being able to pray ex tempore, or to preach without book. Wit∣ness Dr. Pocock, Bishop Sanderson, &c. Item, For administring the Sacrament to all that desired it, and for using the Lords Prayer as a Charm. Such were the Articles by which a great part of that Clergie was destroyed, of whom the world was not worthy. With such our Gentleman is still in travel; but I hope his labour will be in vain. Read some of those Sermons and Treatises which of late years have been published by such as you call young Coxcombs. Consider the strains of Piety and Moderation, of Rea∣son and Judgement, of Industrie and acquired Knowledge; and I am confident you will find so little hopes to be believed by others, that you will see reason enough not to believe your self. Let him talk of the persecution of Julian, and other Pagans; this which our Author pro∣motes, exceeds them all. Others did but Oc∣cidere Episcopos, this man seeks Occidere Epis∣copatum;
and under a pretence of pleading and praying for them, he contrives how to prey upon them. What else meaneth that in∣sinuation which he quotes from Grotius, to gain it some Authoritie, having bankrupted his own? Verso in morem abusu intermitti res ip∣sas non est infrequens, p. 13. of Preface: which he applieth to the Episcopal Office. Nomen & eminentia Episcopalis eorum culpa quibus obti∣gerat, omnem sui perdiderat reverentiam, & in odium venerat plebis. I greatly wondered to hear that Prayer of his against Sacriledge, p. 103. He that de∣signs, contrives, or consents to spoil the Church of any of her Endowments, may a secret Curse waste his substance; let his Children be Vaga∣bonds, and beg their bread in desolate places. But when I call to mind Mr. Humphries pro∣ject for increasing the number of our Bishops, whom he would have to be chosen by the several Factions, Presbyterian, Independent, &c. and these, whether Lay-men, or Clergie-men, to preside over those Parties, it remem∣bred me of a passage of Mr. Hunt's, p. 90. of his Postscript, where he demands thus— Will it be any prejudice that the number of her Bi∣shops be increased, and that Suffragans be ap∣pointed and approved by the present Bishops? &c. So that when other Trades fail, Mr. Hunt as well as Mr. Humphries may have some
hopes of being made Suffragans at least. For the Order of Episcopacie may be laid by, as he intimates, and then some Lay-superintendents may succeed, and enjoy their Honours and Re∣venues. Therefore to his Curse I shall add my Prayer for a blessing on Levi, Deut. 33.11. Bless, Lord, his substance, and accept the work of his hands: smite through the Loins of them that rise up against him, and of them that hate him, that they rise not again. The second Head contains a justification of the late unnatural War, p. 6. It is difficult (he saith) to tell how that late unhappie War began, or how it came to issue so tragically in the death of the late King. And being to speak in so difficult a case, he enters his caution, p. 50. I would not be perversly understood by any man, as if I went about to justifie our late Wars. But it will appear to be Protestatio contra fa∣ctum. P. 102. He says, That War would have been impossible, if the Churchmen had not maintained the Doctrine that Monarchie was Jure Divino, in such a sence that made the King Absolute. This was a fiction of Mr. Baxters; and through the Loins of the Clergie, they strike at the King, as if that glorious Prince intended Ty∣ranny. But that good Prince was far from any design of ruling by an Arbitrarie power: he had no Army, nor Mony to raise one; but by
the contrivance of some men, his Father was engaged in an expensive War for the recove∣rie of the Palatinate, which exhausted all the Exchequer, and reduced the Royal Family to great necessities; and then they failed in their promised Supplies, and left him to a precarious way of subsisting, and to stretch his Preroga∣tive for the preservation of himself and Fami∣ly. He would have parted with the half of his Power and Prerogative, as he often offered, to have preserved or restored peace to his Sub∣jects. But when he spake to them of Peace, they made themselves ready for Battle. But were there not some other Doctrines preached in those days, which contributed more to the beginning of that War, than that of the Divinity of Kings? What think you of the Doctrine of the lawfulness of Resistance then preached and printed, under the same Argu∣ments as now it is, by Mr. Marshal, Burton? &c. What think you of that Doctrine which (according to the Jesuits) taught, That the rise and Original of Government is in the People; and that as they gave, so they might re∣call it as they saw cause? You know who layeth down the same Principle, in a certain Preface— That Government is the perfect crea∣ture of men in Societie, made by pact and consent, and not othorwise; most certainly not otherwise: and therefore most certainly ordainable by the
whole Communitie, for the safety and preserva∣tion of the whole: P. 38. of Preface. To what tended this other Doctrine, That the Authoritie of the King was in the two Houses, when they had frighted away his Person? That the King was Singulis major, but Ʋniversis minor? That Episcopacy was an Antichristian Order, and to be stub'd up root and branch? That the King, Court, and Bi∣shops, were designing to bring in Popery? That our Liturgy was but the Mass-book transla∣ted? These Doctrines, with such Remonstrances, Votes and Ordinances, began that unhappy War; The Associations made in City and Country, seizing the Forts and Magazines and Royal Navy, and answering all his Messages of Peace with reproaches of his Male-administrations; This is that which you call the English Loyal∣ty. When they sent out Armies to fight him, when they had him Prisoner, and voted no more Addresses, they were, if you will believe them, or Mr. Hunt, his Majesties most Humble and Loyal Subjects still. Such as these I could as easily prove to be the Doctrines of those times, as that they are the Opinions and Practi∣ces of too many in these our days, though most absurd and dangerous, as they are now pub∣lished by too many besides our two Au∣thors.
P. 20. Pref. There is little reason to charge the guilt of the unexpiable Murther of our late Excellent King— upon Presbyterie, which was not thought of here in England till the War was begun. And p. 21. Sure this Gentleman hath read very little, or dissembleth very much. Mr. Cambden in the Life of Queen Elizabeth is full of the Projects and Practices of such as plan∣ted the Geneva-Discipline here in England; what troubles they occasioned to the Govern∣ment both in Church and State, and what de∣served punishments some of them received, as Penry and Ʋdal, &c. It is not possible but this Gentleman hath heard of, if not read the things controverted between Archbishop Whitgift and T. C. between the judicious Hooker and Mr. Travers, and Bishop Bilsons dangerous Positions. P. 21. He jumps with Mr. Baxter in his Opinion, That the Parliament in the course of the War, which was managed (says he) by such means and measures as were necessary and possible, in their distress pray'd aid of the Scottish Nation: They refused them any assi∣stance, except they would enter into their Cove∣nant— AND AFTER THE COVE∣NANT WAS THƲS IMPOSED, THEY STILL RETAINED THE ENGLISH LOYALTY, remonstrated against the Kings feared Murther, and declared out of their Pulpits against the Actors of that
detestable Tragedy. If they did preach against his Murther out of Loyalty and Conscience, why had they not preached against Fighting, and pursuing him with fire and sword, where he might have fallen as one of his Subjects? Why not against his Imprisonment? there the Cove∣nanters were the Loyal Party, the ROYAL∣ISTS were the REBELS; and the guilt to be sure (says he) belongs to the Rebel∣side, p. 21. And as it was in the beginning of that War, so it is now, and by our Authors principles so it will be ever: they that with their lives and fortunes adhere to their Prince, though he be neither Apostate or Tyrant, are pronounced Rebels; And they who fight against him, on any pretence whatsoever, are the true English Loyalists. I would not have them called the true Protestants, lest the Papists should in∣sult over them, and prove themselves more Loyal Subjects. It is another very memora∣ble speech of Mr. Hunt's, p. 171. Speaking of the Bill of Exclusion: If this Bill do not pass, they will take him for a wicked King too, and will say he hath no lawful Issue to succeed him, for his own Sins; and many other remarks of wicked∣ness they will make upon him. What he means by the word too, may be explained by the I, and we which he speaks of just before, and now of others too, that will count the King wicked, &c.
It is somewhat obscure also to guess what he means, when he says, the passing of the Bill is the onely means of the Kings Salvation from their traiterous designs; and again, p. 172. If he will follow the Counsel of that excellent Bill, he may live long, and see good days. As if he could not be safe without it. Of such obscure places, we may conjecture by those other plain ones, wherein he hath manifested how great respect he hath for his Majesty and the Royal Family. Nor indeed can we expect better things from a Republican, who speaking of our Kings Father as he calls him (sans Ceremony) makes him and his Party the Delinquents, and upbraids him with all the Calamities which a Rebellious people brought upon him: and adds, p. 55. If there were twenty Trojans derived from one Stock, that had reigned in an uninter∣rupted Succession, Two immediate Successors that should have their Reigns successively attended with civil Wars, were enough to efface their own, and the glories and merits of such Ancestors. And so if another Rebellion should succeed, (which God forbid) farewel to the glorious Fa∣mily of the Stuarts. For notwithstanding the glories of that great Prince, his unhappy death, and the admired devotions of the, the sto∣ries of the Calamities of his people (all his three Kingdoms involved in War during his Reign) (which is a lye by thirteen years) and the re∣membrance
of them will be with some men, (of the same bran with Mr. Hunt, i.e. not very loyal) a stain and a diminution of the glories of the Royal Family, p. 53. Although others, more loyal, do think that it added another Crown to them, more glorious than the other three, (i. e.) the Crown of Martyrdom. In Princes (says Mr. Hunt) their Calamities are reckoned a∣mong the abatements of their Honour; and meer Misfortunes are Disgraces, and have the same influence on the minds of the common people (as they have on Mr. Hunt's) as real faults, and male administrations. So that the Royal Martyr, who suffered so many barbarous Indignities with invincible patience and Christian fortitude, must suffer a∣nother Martyrdom in his Reputation; and the Regicides be renowned (because of their suc∣cess) as men of real Vertues, and Patriots of their Country. Careat successibus Opto, Quisquis ab eventu facta nefanda putat. I cannot perceive any instance of the least respect to the Royal Family, except that defe∣rence which he bestows on Dr. Titus Oates and Captain Bedlow, the Kings Evidence; on whom he writes a full Panegery, p. 24, 25. which he thus concludes: The undoubted truth
of their Evidence hath given them the civil re∣spect of all honest men, and will give the Doctor the publick honours of the Nation in due time. For my part, I live at too great a distance from such men, to ken them aright; and I would commend Mr. Hunt's own Rule to them that know their conversation, whereby to judge of them, p. 52. of the Preface: That their vertue of Loyalty will bear the same pro∣portion as their other vertues do to the Canon of Morality. To this Head of justifying the former War, belongs his Apologie for such as were then cal∣led Presbyterians; which he (as a faithful Ad∣vocate and Orator) still prosecutes. P. 13. Pref. Our old Puritans and late Dis∣senters (he excepts onely the Fools and Knaves sent among them, and spirited by the Roman Priests) have not disliked the Episcopal Govern∣ment. If all the Covenanters and others that disliked the Episcopal Government were Fools and Knaves spirited by the Romish Priests, we have great reason to be jealous of the present Dissenters as such; and the rather, because you tell us, p. 19. of a vile sort of Presbyterians in Scotland, (with whom some in England do conspire) who have deservedly put that name under eternal infamie by their turbulent and con∣tumacious carriage against the Kingly Autho∣rity.
Yet even for these, this Gentleman makes an Apologie. First, in respect of their scrupu∣lositie, p. 86. Though the scruples of Nonconfor∣mists be as he thinks groundless and unreason∣able, and often moves his passion against them, yet upon consideration he thinks their scrupulosi∣ty may be of God, and that some men are by him framed to it. Take courage then, all you men of Scruples, the Good Old Cause is still Gods Cause: he hath provided this your scrupulosity (saith this Stoick) as a bar and obstacle in the natures and complexions of. DEVOƲT MEN against any Innovations whatsoever, that dange∣rous ones may not steal upon the Church, for the better maintaining the simplicity and purity of the Christian Religion and Worship. Bene di∣xisti, Thoma. But thus the Predestinated Thief could plead for himself, that he was born under the thievish Planet Mercury, and could not resist his fate: Steal he must, and repent of it he could not, nor be sorry for his fault, though he were to be hanged for it: This pilfering hu∣mour was in his nature from the God of Nature, and who hath resisted his Will? The same Ar∣gument will the lascivious man, who was born under the Planet of Venus, and the Rebel and Murtherer, who was born under Mars, use in their defence, as the scrupulous and obstinate, who were born under Saturn. And so any
vice may be defended, and the whole blame transferred on God, who sent them into the world with such inclinations. But on second considerations, our Author might have told them that these wicked dis∣positions were the effects of the corruption of their natures, contracted and propagated by original sin; and that there is yet so much light from Nature, but much more from the Grace of God, as to discover, and assist them in the correction of these unreasonable and ground: less affections and passions: and not to encou∣rage them in them, by telling them they are from God, and infused into devout men, that they may put a bar to such dangerous Innovati∣ons that are stealing on the Church, and for the maintenance of the simplicity and purity of the Christian Religion and Worship. This is a New Plea to encourage them to a New Rebellion, as well as to justifie the Old. And we know what slender pretences scrupulous and obsti∣nate persons are wont to lay hold on, to de∣fend themselves in very unlawful practices, in such cases as are confessedly unreasonable and dangerous, and to which they have a natural inclination. The Vulgar need a Curb to re∣strain them, and not a Spur to provoke and haste them on. When therefore you ask (p. 86.) What affrightment all this while, either to Church or
State, from this weak and pitiful scrupulosity? Where lies the Treason or Sacriledge? Let our Author consult the History of the late War, and Experience (which some say is) the Mistriss of Fools, may resolve him. It is no more agreea∣ble to a scrupulous man about a Ceremony of the Church, to depose and murder his lawful Prince, than for a man of a nice Conscience to be impi∣ously wicked, p. 33. Pref. Yet Mr. Baxter and others will tell you, that the greatest Impie∣ties and Outrages have been committed by such men as pretended niceness and scruples of Conscience for their justification. And who they were that would strain at Gnats and swal∣low Camels, our Saviour told us long since. But to return. Upon this very Ground of a natural complexion, &c. p. 19. of the Preface, he would excuse a vile sort of Presbyterians in Scotland (as he calls them) who have deser∣vedly put that name under eternal infamy, by their turbulent and contumacious carriage against the Kingly Authority. Which yet (he there says) is not imputable so much to Presbytery, as to the barbarous Manners and rough Genius of that Nation. And is it not strange, that nei∣ther the Learning and Knowledge of that Na∣tion, which afforded some men, of all Ages, of great excellency, and which usually (emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros) doth correct the bru∣tish dispositions of men; nor the power of God∣liness
and purity of Doctrine and Worship, to which, especially in latter times, they pretended beyond all other Nations, and was proposed by them, and accepted by some of our own Nation, as the great Rule next to (if not above) the Word of God, for our Reformation; could so far reform them, as to teach them Obedience to their lawful Princes, but they must still re∣main infamous, (as our Author observes) for Disloyalty and a barbarous Treatment of their Kings? And is it not yet more strange, that we, who are of a better Genius, should learn of them, who (as you note) do boast of one hun∣dred and fifty Kings in succession in that Kingdom (and you certainly aver) that they really imprisoned, deposed, and murdered fifty at least, before the time of Mary Queen of Scots, that such an Original should be proposed to the English Nation, that their Chronicles may also be defiled with the bloud of their Kings? As for what you say (p. 20. Pref.) con∣cerning the Queen of Scots, that her prosecu∣tion was promoted by the English Bishops; which putrid Vomit the Author of Julian's Life licked up, and hath disgorged again, to make the whole Nation stink: I have said e∣nough to vindicate the Bishops from that foul Aspersion. It being designed by the Wisdom of the Parliament, and by them justified, for many Treasonable actions and Insurrections by
her practised and contrived; for which she was legally condemned, not as a Queen, nor as a Popish Successour, much less as our Queen; but as a professed Enemy to her Majestie that then happily reigned over us; from whom she actually claimed the Crown, and endeavour∣ed by force to usurp it. And she having first resigned her Crown, and came hither for pro∣tection, which she forfeited by her frequent practices of Treason, was tried and condem∣ned as the Wife of a Subject of this Land. And happie had it been for this Nation, if they had never learnt any other Regicide than this Fi∣ctitious one wherewith the Bishops are chiefly charged, for no other reason that I can di∣vine, but because they will not give consent to another more unexcusable action now. This rash Assertion of yours destroys all that laudible endeavour which you have wor∣thily attempted for the vindication of our Bi∣shops: in other matters, this is a Scandalum Ma∣gnatum with a witness; and I hope you have yet so much ingenuity, as to put your self to the voluntarie Penance of a Recantation, the slander being so notoriously false. And I am perswaded that the convictions of your Con∣science will not give you any rest, till you have made them as publick satisfaction as the injury you have done them is. I proceed now to the third Head of his
Discourse, which leads me to shew the endea∣vours used to engage the Nation in a second unnatural War: And I shall begin with that Speech of this Author, p. 52. of Postscript. The panick fear of the change of the Government that this Doctrine (of the Divinitie of Kings) occasioned, and the divisions it made among us, was the principal cause of the late War. And p. 102. That War would have been impossible, if the Church-men had not maintained the Do∣ctrine, that Monarchie was Jure Divino in such a sence as made the King absolute: and they and the Church in consequence perished by it. Now you have heard already how loudly the young Divines are accused for preaching this Doctrine. And how false soever the Ac∣cusation be, the Nation is called to stand up∣on her guard, and the Royal Standard is feign∣ed to be set up; and perhaps the Seditious partie are really listed and associated. And e∣very man is called on to declare for what Par∣tie he will engage: The Neuters are accursed; the Associators declared to be, such as retain the old English Loyaltie, after the taking of the Co∣venant; and all that oppose these, betrayers of their Religion, their Countrie, and the Laws; yea, they are told, p. 149. that they ought not to subject the Professors of the true Religion a∣gain, (as if they had once done it already) to Slaughters, Fire, Faggots, Tortures, Inquisi∣tions,
and Massacres: When the Bishops and Loyal partie were they who suffer'd these, or as great tortures as these, for their Religion and Loyaltie, from the irreligious and Rebel∣partie. But to undeceive the multitude, let them con∣sider by what arts a new War is contrived. As, 1. By slandering all such as oppose the As∣sociation, and popular torrent of Sedition and Rebellion: as, p. 27. of Preface, that the num∣ber of Addressers may be reduced to the Duke's Pensioners and Creatures. That the Addresses have been obtained by application; and the de∣sign was to make voices for the discontinu∣ance of Parliaments, and for a Popish Successor. That such as write for the established Govern∣ment and Religion, are a hired sort of Scara∣mouchy Zanies, Merry Andrews, and Jack Pud∣dings. P. 12. and impeacheth a Secretary of State as a Traytor; not considering that one such as John Milton, is the chief Engineer and encou∣rager of all Rebellion and Treason. 2. By divulging abroad, p. 22. That the Nation begins to grow impatient by the delays of publick justice against the Popish Plot: though it be well known at whose door that lies. That the dissolution of Parliaments gives us cause to fear that the King hath no more business for Parliaments, ibid. and p. 17. 3. By animating the multitude to perplex
his Majesty with new Addresses; telling them, p. 30. of Preface, So strong is the tye of duty upon him from his Office, to prevent publick Cala∣mities, as no respect whatsoever, no not of the Right Line, can discharge: nor will he himself ever think, if DƲLY ADDRESSED, that it can. And p. 34. At this time, if ever, the APPLICATIONS of an Active Pru∣dence are required from all honest men. And he himself hath given them a Precedent, in that Application which he intended it seems for the Seditious rabble— We will not entail a War upon the Nation, no not for the sake and interest of the Glorious Family of the STUARTS. 4. By acquainting the Malecontents that their number is four fifths of the Nation, who are such as love and adhere to our Government and Religion; though they are rendred suspected of destroying again the English Monarch and the Protestant Religion, p. 10. of Postscript. And therefore he doth but profane the Name of God, p. 95. when he says, God be thanked they (the Dissenters, who are imagined very nume∣rous) neither make our Grand-Jury-men, nor the Common-halls of the City for choosing the Lord Mayors or Sheriffs. 5. By Reprinting such Books as were writ∣ten in defence of the late War, and improving the Arguments for that Rebellion. 6. By his pleading for Comprehension and
Indulgence, which p. 98. he says about ten years since was designed to slight the Churches Works, and demolish her by a general Indulgence and Toleration; and now they intend to destroy her Garison, those that can and will defend her a∣gainst Popery. 7. By publishing it as an undoubted truth, and evident in it self, That the Succession to the Crown is the people Rights, p. 201. 8. By making large Apologies in behalf of those men of whom he speaks, p. 96. What ani∣mations did their people receive, to defie the Church and her Authoritie, when their Preachers despised Fines and Imprisonment, to their seem∣ing out of pure zeal against her Order! And yet he adds,—It is well know, several of them were in Pension, and no men have been better re∣ceived by the Duke than J. J. J. O. E. B. and W. P. &c. Ringleaders of the Separation. And again, p. 98. Consider how the Church of Eng∣land is used, which is truly the Bulwark of the Protestant Religion. And it is a pitiful evasion, to say that these Fanaticks are acted by the Papists; or if it were true, they were much more intolerable for that reason: and therefore I do with all my heart agree to your Method for rooting out the Popish Plot, prescribed p. 99. By sup∣pressing that contumacie that is grown so rife in the Dissenters against the Church of England, by
putting the revilers of her Establishment and Order under the severest penalties. But then, Caveat Author. To conclude, we are certainly, as Mr. Hunt calls us, a foolish people and unwise, a stupid and perverse Generation, if we shall reject that gra∣cious and gentle Government whereby God hath hitherto led and preserved us a flock, by the hands of Moses and Aaron; and exchange for a Saturn, or a Moloch, that will devour their own Children, and make them pass through the fire at their pleasure. But, From all such Men-monsters; from all Sedition, Perjurie, Conspiracie, and Re∣bellion; from all false Doctrine, Heresie, and Schism; from hardness of Heart, and contempt of thy Word and Com∣mandments, Good Lord deliver us.
THE Life of Julian INLARGED. His Birth and Parentage. JƲLIAN was Born at Bizantium, now called Constantinople. His Fathers Name was Constantius, Brother to Constantine the Great. His Mothers Name was Basilina, of a very ancient and Noble Family among the Romans. Now although the Empire was intire∣ly devolved on Constantius (the Second Son of Constantine) his two Brothers Constantine and Constans being dead; yet for securing the Em∣pire to himself, having a jealous Spirit, he con∣trived the death of his nearest Kindred, viz. Constantius Father of our Julian, Anniballianus, and Dalmatius Caesar: which our Author would impute to the outrages of the Souldie∣ry; forgetting what he tells his Reader, p. 29. That the slaughter of his Kindred was one of those
three things whereof Constantius repented him at his death. For which he rightly quoteth Naz. Orat. in laudem Athanasii, p. 389. How Julian and Gallus his Elder Brother escaped that Massacre, our Author leaves un∣certain: for having said that Gallus being ve∣ry sick, the Souldiers concluded that the di∣sease would kill him, and save them the labour; and that they thought not Julian dangerous, being but five years old: yet he would have it attributed to Constantius the Emperor, who, for ought we read, gave no Commission to spare them; and had they then dyed, would doubtless have found cause to repent of their deaths, as well as of the rest of his Kindred. That Constantius shewed kindness to his two Cousins after the Death of their Father and Ʋnkles, was no more than Nature, and espe∣cially the Religion he professed, required of him: nor could all his kindness to the Chil∣dren, expiate his Cruelty to their Father▪ But that he should cause Gallus to be slain, who is noted, p. 3. to have been sincerely pious, and that after he had given him hisConstantina. Sister in Marriage, and declared him Cae∣sar, and found him a Man of Personal valour and good Conduct and Success, (I may say of it as our Author doth) it was a rash act: and yet if it be true that he designed to Invade the Empire, not content with the Title and Au∣thority
of Caesar, it was more excusable than the Death of his other Kindred, who were never reported to design any such thing. It had been most commendable in Constan∣tius, if, as he provided a Royal Palace for the Education of his Kinsmen, so being himself a Christian Emperour, he had more carefully provided for their Christian Education. That Age had as many Learned Bishops, well skilled in all Humane Literature, as any one before or since; and yet Constantius permitted the Seeds of Superstition and Paganism to be sown in that rank Soyl, as soon as those of Christianity: and 'tis no wonder if our corrupt nature, being left at liberty, prefer that Religion which is accom∣modated to its lusts, to that which especially tends to the suppressing and extirpation of them. And if Corn and Weeds be permitted to grow together in a fertile ground, it is no wonder to see the weeds to outgrow the Corn. His Education. AS soon as he was Seven years old, he was committed to the Tuition of Mardonius an Eunuch, by whom he was put to learn Gram∣mar and Rhetorick, in the publick Schools of Constantinople. Nicocles a Lacedemonian taught him Grammar; and the famous Turn-coat
Ecebolius taught him Rhetorick. Libanius the Heathen Philosopher had a famous School at that time in Constantinople, whose Works Julian procured, and read with great delight: and in a little time becomes familiarly ac∣quainted with him, often frequenting his School; and, as the manner of the Grecian Scholars was, he adventured to declaim pub∣lickly against the Christians, and (p. 4.) our Au∣thor says he would dispute hard with his Bro∣ther in favour of the Heathen, pretending that he only tryed how he could hold the weaker side of a Question. He profited much in that sort of Philoso∣phy which Iamblicus taught, being a mixture of the Opinions of Plato and Aristotle,. of which he calls himself a zealot; and shewed great honour and kindness to Iamblicus. These were the Masters which Mardonius his Tutor procured for him, and were the Corruptors of his Youth: for being of a light and desultory Wit, and withal very industrious and inquisi∣tive after knowledge, he hastily imbibed such Principles as his Tutors instilled. He tells us himself in his Misopogon what he learnt under this Mardonius; which he relates to the Athenians. The Names of Plato, So∣crates, Aristotle, and Theophrastus, are much talked of with derision. This old Man (Mar∣donius)
having foolishly (he speaks by Irony) observed their dictates, perswaded me, being a Boy desirous to learn, that if I would tread in their paths, I should be better, not onely than o∣ther men, but than my self: And I (for what could I do else?) obeying my old Tutor, cannot change any thing, though I desire it never so much. And I accuse my self that I did open a more free admission to all the Vices of that old Man. For thus he taught me out of Plato: That Man is worthy of Honour who offends not; but he that deters others from offending, is wor∣thy of more than double Honour: The first is pro∣fitable to himself alone, the others to many: that brings the Delinquent before the Magi∣strates; and if he also joyn in punishing the in∣jurious, this is a noble and complete Citizen, and may be called a Conquerour in the conflict of Ver∣tue. This and some other Moral Vertues wherein Julian perceived the generality of Christians to be defective as to their practice, raised in him a great opinion of his Pagan Tu∣tors; and from Lectures of Morality, he pro∣ceeds to learn more curious Arts. For, After this, Maximus an Ephesian Philosopher (who was by Valentinian put to death for his Impostures and Magical Arts) taught Julian to cast Nativities, and make Divinations; and initiated him to the Mysteries of Magick. And as if he had not enough of those devilisbs Arts,
he sollicites a Journey to Athens, pretending to see Greece, and to be acquainted with their Schools: where he grew into a familiar ac∣quaintance with the best of the Heathen Phi∣losophers of that Age, which abounded with many that were excellent Moralists. A Hea∣then Writer (Ammianus Marcell. l. 22. c. 3.) says, that Julian from the very first instructions of his childhood was given to the Worship of the Heathen Gods and Idols. It is no wonder, if having such Tutors, he became zealously af∣fected to the same. This was his study while his Brother Gallus was living: and as soon as he understood of his death, which was an unnatural, barbarous action, and raised great prejudices against the Christian Religion, he was greatly disconten∣ted, and diligently inquired by those who were skilled in Curious arts what would be∣come of him. Twenty years together he dissembled himself to be a Christian, and at∣tained to great knowledge in that Religion; but rather, that he might know how to op∣pose it: for, as St. Augustine observes, (l. 5. c. 21. De Civ. Dei) Cujus egregiam indolem decipit amore dominandi sacrilega & dete∣standa curiositas; A sacrilegious and accursed Curiositie perverted his excellent wit. How∣ever, his proficiency in Christianity preferred him to be a Reader of the Holy Scriptures to
the people; and those Arguments of his which were learnedly and satisfactorily answered by St. Cyril Bishop of Alexandria, do demon∣strate his Knowledge both of the Old and New Testament, for which he was admitted into Holy Orders. Now how could Constantius expect but that Julian being put to such Nur∣ses, he should suck in such milk as they yielded? Neglectis urenda silex innascitur agris. His Apostacie is imputed to these three causes. First, To the levitie of his Nature. Secondly, To his love of Magical Arts. Thirdly, To his ambition of the Empire. When Gallus was put to death, the Empe∣rour had such informations that Julian con∣spired also against him, that he resolved to put him to death also: but by the intercession of Eusebia the Empress, he was sent for to ap∣pear at Court, and by her intercession and fa∣vour, was not only preserved, but within a short time declared Caesar: and the Emperor, to ingratiate him the more, gave him his Sister Helena to Wise. Before we give an account of his Actions while he was Caesar, it will be convenient to give the Reader
A Character of his Person and Disposi∣tion. HE was of a middle Stature, his Hair soft, and hanged down; his Beard long and sharp; a full and rolling Eye; comely Eyebrows, and a streight Nose; his Mouth somewhat large; his Under-lip seemed divi∣ded; his Neck fat; his Shoulders broad and large; and from the Head to the Foot, his Members were proportionable and well joyn∣ed: so that he was made both for Strength and Activitie. Gregory Nazianzene, who knew him at A∣thens, gives this description of him: That his Neck inclined forward, his Shoulders often in motion; that he had a wandring Eye, and furious Aspect▪ his Feet unstable; his Nose and Lineaments of his Face were ridiculous, and signified scornfulness; in his Apparel sor∣did; his Laughter was loud and frequent; his Grants and Denials were without reason; his Speech slow and interrupted; his Questi∣ons hastie and imprudent, and his Answers no better; one following upon another without Gavitie, good Order, or Method. Upon con∣sideration of this Physiognomie, the Bishop thus
exclaims: What a mischief doth the Roman Empire nourish! for the inconsistencie both of his Manners and Behaviour, and the great com∣motion of his Mind, made me to give this predi∣ction of him; and as I foretold of him to those that were with me before he had acted any thing, so I found him to be by his Actions afterward: and I wish I had been in this a false Prophet, for that were better than that such a Monster should exist, and fill the World with such evils as never were in any other Age, though there were many Deluges, Conflagrations, Earthquakes, and Cruel men, and prodigious Beasts of divers kinds. Some Writers give him a different Chara∣cter from others: That in Courtesie and Cle∣mencie he was comparable with Titus; and as much exceeded his Brother Gallus in those virtues, as Titus exceeded Domitian: in for∣tunate successes against the Germans, they e∣qual him with Trajan; in Temperance and Modestie, to Marcus Aurelius; in Justice, with Antoninus; and in Knowledge, with the ancient Philosophers. Vir egregius (saith Eutropius) & Rempublicam insigniter Mo∣deraturus: A person of excellent parts, and like to rule the Empire with excellent Modera∣tion.
His Actions while he was Caesar. WHen he was about the age of 23, Con∣stantius declared him Caesar, at such time as the Barbarians had spoiled Gaul; the Emperour being doubtful to carry on the War himself. Marcellinus (l. 15.) saith, that daily Messengers brought him tidings of the deplored condition of the Gauls, whose Coun∣try was over-run with the Armies of the Bar∣barians without any resistance. For remedy whereof, he residing in Italy, and not willing to expose himself to the hazards of that War, having made Julian CAESAR, sends him to relieve that Countrie. But Julian being ignorant of Martial Affairs, and considering what dangers he was sent to encounter, looks on himself as one designed for Death rather than Honour. Neither of us (saith Julian) were pleased with this Honour: not Constantius, who gave it unwillingly; nor he that received it against his will: for which he calls the Gods to wit∣ness. And at that very time when the Pur∣ple Robes were put on him, he uttered this verse:
and told his Friends that he should gain no∣thing more by his Honour, than to die in a great Enterprize; and that he was sent to the Gauls, Germans, and Hercynian Wood, to fight as a Hunter with wild Beasts. Marcellinus says the same, that it was a com∣mon report that Julian was chosen not so much to relieve the distresses of the Gauls, as that he might perish in those cruel Wars; he being then unskilful, & scarce enduring the noise of Arms. As he marched before his Army in Militarie Accountrements, This (saith he) is right as the Proverb speaks, A Pack-saddle on a Cows back. It hapned that as he was exercising in the Fields at Paris, the Pins that joyned his Buck∣ler fell out, and the pieces flew about his ears: which some taking for an ill Omen, he holds up the handle, and bid them not be dismay'd; for what he laid his hands on, he held fast. Yet did this young man not onely defend that part of the Country which was yet free, but expelled the Barbarians from those parts which they had possessed, and in a short time regained many ancient Cities; and in one battle at Strasburg, overthrew Seven of the most potent Princes of Germany, and sent Cho∣donomarius the chief of them to Constantius at Rome: He also subdued the Almains, took their King Badomarius, and cleared the bounds of the Empire from all its Enemies: and this he
did (saith Aurelius Victor) with a few Soul∣diers, against infinite Armies of the Ene∣mies. But these Victories of his did so exalt him, that he believed that the Soul of Alexander was infused into his Body (as Socrates relates). His Souldiers also had so great an opinion of his Valour and Conduct, that they all resol∣ved to proclaim him Emperour: which though in an Apologie to Constantius he says was done against his consent; yet as well his ambitious Spirit, as his future Actions, demonstrate it to have been his design. Which Constan∣tius being informed of, commands him to return: And this he willingly obeyed; but carries with him his whole Armie, to secure him from the rage of the Emperour. The Emperour also prepared all the Force he possi∣bly could, to give Julian battle. To which Julian was encouraged by his Southsayers, e∣specially by Aprunculus an Orator in Gaul, who had instructed him in the knowledge of the Intrails of Beasts, and flying of Birds; and from the Liver of a Beast inclosed in a double Caul, foretold Success and Victory to him. When he came to Vienna, an old Woman that had lost her sight, hearing that Julian was come, cried out, that it was he that should repair the Temples of the Gods. About this time he sent to the Senate an Apologie for him∣self,
accusing Constantius of many faults and miscarriages; which notwithstanding, the Se∣nate by Tertullius their Praefect answered his Messenger, Autori tuo Reverentiam Rogamus; We have a great respect for your Master. It hapned that Julian being about to take horse, the Souldier that lifted him up fell to the ground. At which accident he said, in the hearing of many, that he was fallen who had raised him to his Dignitie. And this (saith Marcellinus, p. 189.) was done at the same in∣stant when Constantius died in Cilicia. Of whose death, Theolaiphus and Alligildus brought him speedy Notice, declaring that Constantius by his last words named him his Successour. Am. Marcell. l. 22. c. 1. Though the contrary be not only affirmed by Gregory Nazianzen, but confirmed by the battel that was intended between them; of which Julian gives this account to his Uncle, Epist. 13. calling his Gods to witness, that he never in∣tended the death of Constantius, but rather wished for his life; and that he came with his Army against him, onely to obtain the easier terms of Peace: or, because he was condemned as an Enemy, he came prepared to decide the quarrel by a battel, if he could not otherwise make his peace.
Of his Actions while he was Emperour. JƲLIAN being without any opposition setled in the Imperial Throne, sought to gain the affections of all sorts of people by acts of Clemencie and Justice: And though he had been long since an Apostate from the Christian Religion, yet did not appear so, till after some time: in his Epistle to the Alexan∣drians, he says, he had lived Twenty years in the Christian, and Twelve years in the Pagan Re∣ligion, p. 200 of his Works. He entred on the Government as a Lamb, however he had the Appetite of a Lion, to devour the Church of Christ: but he kept on the sheeps clothing, that he might with more subtilty worry that innocent flock. He fre∣quented the publick Assemblies of the Christi∣ans, and re-called those Orthodox Bishops from Exile, which Constantius, being himself of the Arian Perswasion, had banished; thereby to lay an Odium on Constantius. And it hath been observed, That not long after Constantius declared against the Deity of the Son of God, the Empire was taken from him, and given to Julian. Julian professed it to be his Opinion, That
no man ought to force another to be of his Opini∣on; and charged the people not to injure the Christians, or reproach them, or draw them to sa∣crifice against their wills. Sozom. l. 5. c. 4. And many Outrages committed by the Heathen upon the Christians, were done without his order. The∣odoret. l. 3. c. 6. But as it is known that he did not persecute the Christians with fire and Sword, as Dioclesian did; yet he contrived more mischievous ways to destroy Christianity it self, than others did to destroy the professors of it: and as one probable means to accomplish it, he summons the Bishops of the several Facti∣ons, enjoyning them to do nothing to the pre∣judice of the Empire; and on those terms per∣mits them to enjoy their own Opinions, and dif∣ferent Modes of Worship. Eo modo (saith St. Aug. Epist. 166.) nomen Christi de terris perire putavit, si Sacrilegas dissentiones liberas esse per∣misit; Thereby to keep them in a balance till he had setled his affairs, or to permit them to destroy one another, as in Constantius time the Arians had begun, and to save him the la∣bour. He seemed averse from putting any to death for their Religion, not so much perhaps through any innate clemency, as through a devilish Po∣lity: for he had observed, that the Church multiplyed under the greatest Persecutions; and the Faith, Fortitude, and invincible patience of
Christians, appeared admirable to their Ene∣mies: so that he envyed them the glory of Martyrdome. To this purpose he wrote an E∣pistle to Ecebolius, declaring his mind concern∣ing the Galilaeans, as he called the Christians; That none of them should have any force offered them, or be compelled into the Temples, nor be reproached by the Pagans: and p. 213. writing to the Bostrians, he minds them How he had re-called such as were banished, and by an Edict restored their Goods which were forfeited. And though he practised the ruine of the Christians, yet he seemed to have a reverence of their Re∣ligion: for when he assumed the Title of Pon∣tifex Maximus, he wrote to his Idol-Priests, and tells them, That the reason why the Temples of their Gods were so much forsaken, and the Chri∣stians frequented, was their different behaviours: The Christians delighting in works of mercy, pro∣viding their Hospitals for the Poor, the Widows and Fatherless,. but his Priests were barbarous and cruel, inhospita∣ble to strangers or their own poor. And to his reproof adds an exhortation, that they would imitate the Christians. And to the people he writes, That they should learn of the Christians to reverence their Priests, and obey their Magi∣strates and Governours. And he perswades the Priests not to gad abroad without leave of their Superiours, and communicatory Letters; and
such as did notoriously offend, he would have them suspended for a time from their Communion in things sacred, and partaking of their Sacrifices. Of this he speaks at large, in his 49 Epistle, p. 202. And although he were a bitter Enemy to Athanasius, concerning whom he by an ex∣press Edict to Edicius, Praefect of Egypt, gives command to banish him, not only out of the City of Alexandria, where he had won over many Noble persons to the Christian Religion, and caused the Pagan Temples to be quite de∣serted; but also out of all Egypt: yet did he hold a good correspondence by Letters with divers Christian Bishops, particularly with George an Arian Bishop, whose Library after his death he charged Porphyry to preserve in∣tirely for his use, p. 176. As also with Aetius another Bishop, exhorting him to come and live with him, p. 164. But he had still a ha∣tred to their Religion, though he loved them for their Learning and peaceableness; to which he endeavoured to oblige them by kindness, being yet afraid to exercise cruelty towards them. And that he might avoid the Name of a Persecutor himself, he gave countenance and incouragement to the Jews in their opposition of the Christians; and gave them leave to rebuild Jerusalem, of which Amm. Marcell. l. 23. c. 1. & Eusebius, l. 3. ch. 17. write thus.
Julian, desiring to propagate the memorial of his Empire by some great work, intended the re∣edifying of the Temple at Hierusalem, commit∣ting the work to Alipius of Antioch, who was assisted by the Praefect of Judea. But when they began to dig the foundations, terrible Fire∣balls issued out of the Earth, destroyed many Workmen, forcing them to desert the work. With this Heathen Writer Eusebius agrees, and re∣lates more at large, That by an Earth-quake the old foundations were cast up, which many came from far to behold; and that there came down fire from Heaven, which consumed all their Tools and working Instruments, for a whole day together. And that the night following, the forms of Crosses were visible in their Garments, shining like the Sun-beams. Yet those hardned Jews, notwithstanding these three Miracles which forced many of them to confess that Christ was an Omnipotent God, believed not. He had indeed so invincible a prejudice a∣gainst the Christian Religion, that though he were convinced of the learning and peaceable∣ness of the Christians, yet could not his heart be moved to embrace it. When that excel∣lent Apology of Apollinaris was presented him in behalf of the Christians, he returned to them with contempt: I have read, I have considered, and rejected it. Yet although he did connive at and tolerate many indignities
and violences against the Christians, and made some Edicts against them, they did multiply and increase under him; as Titus Bishop of Bostria remonstrated to him, that their num∣ber was nothing inferiour to that of the Gentiles; and in Antioch, in Alexandria, and in his very Army, the greater part were Christians. And although his designs were as bad as wit and malice could make them, I do not find that he wrote any of his Laws in bloud, nor in a Judiciary manner did execute any upon the account of their Christianity: which we must ascribe wholly to the Providence of God, who though he set this wicked Prince o∣ver them, as a punishment for their revolt from the true Faith into Arianism, and for their Divisions and Cruelties practised among themselves; this common Enemy being a pro∣bable means to unite them both in faith and love: yet the Divine Clemency, who hath the hearts of all kings in his hands, permitted him not to make that havock of the Church which he intended. And Athanasius was a true Prophet, when he told the Suffering Christi∣ans that Julian was Nubecula cito transitura, a cloud that threatned a Storm, but would be soon blown over. And ought not we also, who as yet conflict onely with our own fears, acquiesce in the Goodness of God, who may yet pre∣vent
not onely those distant evils which we fear, but those real mischiefs also which we are presently and desperately running into? Either the evils we fear may not come; or if they do, they may be speedily removed; and by the blessing of God, may be Sanctified by our amend∣ment, in a greater love of the Truth and of one another. While Julian was meditating against Chri∣stians, his vain-glory spur'd him on to a War against the Persians, intending to have added one Title more to himself, (viz.) Parthicus. And although he were disswaded from it by Salustius, and other his best Souldiers, (Amn. Marcell. l. 23. c. 4.) as also by those Southsayers in whom he placed most confidence; yet would he by no means be diverted from that War; which he carried on with such rashness and wilfulness, that we may justly number him with those of whom it is said, Quos perdere vult Jupiter, dementat prius. He was in his March presented by a Com∣pany of Souldiers with a great Lyon wounded to death; which portended the death of some great King, saith Marcellinus: but he took no notice of it. A Souldier also as he had wa∣tered his two Horses, was struck dead, toge∣ther with them, by Lightning; which was in∣terpreted as an ill Omen: yet on he goes to∣wards
Persia; and as soon as he had landed his Army in Persia, he caused his Ships to be burnt, reserving onely a few of the least of them to serve as a Bridge over the Rivers that might hinder his March: which much offended his Souldierie, as arguing a distrust of their valour, and cutting off all hopes of re∣treat in their greatest necessitie. It hapned that in the first. Onset which was made by the Per∣sians, Julian had the better, and thereupon appointed a solemn Sacrifice to Mars; for which ten white Bulls are prepared; but nine of them died before they could be brought to the Altar, and the other ran away; but be∣ing brought back, was sacrificed; but reven∣ged his death by such ominous signs as highly incensed Julian, and made him resolve and swear by Jupiter never to sacrifice to Mars again. So that here was another Apostacie of Julian's from one of his chief Gods, the God of War. The grand Battalia of the Persians being at hand, Julian prepares for it; and in the preceding night he told some of his friends, that the publick Genius which he saw when he was saluted Emperour in Gaul, appeared to him in a sad posture, and sorry habit, passing by. He saw also an Exhalation in the form of a Torch falling to the ground; which he was afraid had been the Star Mars which threat∣ned
him. His Aruspices being consulted up∣on this, disswaded him from that Battle, at least for some hours: But he refused; and as soon as it was day, put his Army in order for a fight. The Persians were as early as he; and falling on the Rear of the Roman Armie, put them to some distress: which Julian hear∣ing of, made such haste to succour them, that he took onely his Target, neglecting any o∣ther Armour; and by his seasonable assistance recovered the fault, and repulsed the Persians; and with hands lifted up, urged his men to pursue them, he himself being at the head of them, and on the very heels of his Enemies. In this Conflict he received his mortal Wound; a Javelin slightly wounding his Arm, pierced into his Side, and stuck in his Liver. From what hand it came, we have had occasion to enquire already; and as for the report that he pluck'd it out, and threw it in the Air, with a Vicisti Galilaee, I find no great authoritie for it among the Writers of that Age. His wound being searched and dressed, the pain abated; and calling for his Arms and Horse, resolved to enter again into the fight: but his strength failed him; and hearing that the place where he was wounded was called Phrygia, he remembring that it was foretold that he should die in Phrygia, despaired of life, and about Midnight calling for a draught of cold Wa∣ter, he drank it, and shortly after died.
His dying Speech. THe time of departing this life is (my Companions) now at hand; which as an honest and well-meaning Debtor, I gladly repay to Nature; not, as some belie∣ved, with reluctancie and sorrow; for by the common Opinion of Philosophers I am sufficiently instructed in how much more blessed condition the Soul is than the Bodie; and am satisfied, that when one passeth out of a worse into a better estate, he ought to rejoyce, rather than to be troubled: consi∣dering also, that the Celestial Gods reward the most pious men with death, as the grea∣test reward of all others. I also am assured that it hapneth to me after the same man∣ner; lest I should fall under some heavie burthens, as I undergo, or do any thing un∣worthie of my self: having yet ever found by experience, that sorrows and pains as they domineer over Cowards, so are easily overcome by Valiant persons. Neither doth it repent me of my Actions, nor the re∣membrance of any Wickedness afflict me, either committed at such time as I lay in
the shade and in corners as I could, and studied vertue; or since I came to the Government. I think I have kept my self blameless and without blemish, as one de∣scended from the Gods above. —In times of Peace governing with moderation, not without good consideration making either Offensive or Defensive Wars, though the issue were not always answerable: For the Celestial Powers alone have the Soveraignty of Events; concluding with my self, that the end of Government is the advantage and safety of good Subjects. I have ever been (as you know) more inclined to Peace and Tranquillitie by the whole course of my actions; opposing Lasciviousness, as that which corrupts both things and man∣ners; and whithersoever my Mother the Commonwealth, how imperiously soever, called me, though to never so dangerous a Post, there have I stood immovable, being accustomed to despise all fortuitous events. I will not be ashamed to confess, that I have heretofore understood that I should die in War: and therefore I adore and praise the eternal Divinity, that I perish not by any Conspiracie, nor languish through the pain of a Disease; nor am I condemned to death, (he thought it might have been upon his Bro∣ther's death) but in the middle course of
my flourishing Glory, I have deserved so renowned a passage out of this world. He is equally to be esteemed a Coward, who desireth to die when he ought to live, as he who shuns death when it comes convenient∣ly. Thus much may suffice to have spo∣ken, my strength now failing me. Con∣cerning my Successor I wittingly say no∣thing, lest through imprudence I should pass by a worthie person, or by naming one I conceive fitly qualified, if another should chance to be preferred, bring him into im∣minent danger; but as a dutiful Son of the Commonwealth, I wish her a good Gover∣nour in my room. Having spoken this, he perceived his At∣tendants to weep, whom he gravely rebuked, affirming it a pitiful mean thing to bemoan a Prince that was a friend to Heaven and the Stars. And they being silent, he entred in∣to a subtile discourse with Maximus and Pri∣scus, two Philosophers; concerning the subli∣mitie of Souls; till such time as the Wound gaping, and the Tumor of the Vessels inter∣cepting his Breath, having called for a draught of cold Water, he died the more easi∣ly, about Midnight, in the 32d year of his Age, and the second of his Empire; having been Caesar Six years. He left no Child be∣hind him; his Wife being dead in France be∣fore
he came from thence. He was buried in the Suburbs of Tarsus by Procopius, to whom he gave order for it: and Zosimus saith his Tomb hath this Epitaph: , . Of his Vertues. I Shall comprise these under the Heads mentioned by Marcellinus, l. 25. c. 5. (viz.) Temperance, Prudence, Fortitude, and Justice: all which (saith that Author) he so studied and attained, as if they had been but One. As to his Temperance in respect of Chastity, he was so unspotted, that after the death of his Wife in France, he never medled with any woman; nor was he accused of the least immodesty while he was young, and in his full strength, by those that were of his Bed-chamber. To which vertue his spare dyet and short sleep very much contributed. His dyet was always so slender, as if he intended to return again to his Books. His Supper was usually a little Gruel, such as a common Souldier would refuse, l. 24. c. 2. which he took standing, and presently went to view his Guards and Sentinels, and then returned to his Study, scarce allowing
himself so much solace as might content the necessities of Nature. What was provided for him as an Emperour, he seldom tasted of, but distributed it amongst his poor Soul∣diers. He says in his Misopogon, that he had been taught from his youth to wage war with his belly. And never frequented Theatres or Games; which he never beheld but with as much un∣easiness as others did with delight. He usu∣ally lay onely on a Palate spread on the ground, and would scarce eat enough to sa∣tisfie Hunger; abstaining from Feasts and pub∣lick Meetings, saying, No man ought to be e∣steemed as temperate at home, who was dissolute abroad, and took pleasure in the Threatres. His garments and manner of dress was very plain and neglected, and far from curious or court∣ly fashions. Dost thou (saith he) desire to see the Circensian Games? you shall find them most e∣legantly described by Homer; take the Book, and read. Such instructions he says he had from his Tutors, and them he followed with great pleasure, p. 79. He was extremely delighted in the society of learned Men and good Books, for which he often professed he could willingly leave his Em∣pire. What intercourse he had with the chief Philosophers of his time, appears by his E∣pistles to Libanius, Iamblicus, Eumenius,
Themistius, Elpidius, and Maximus. This last, though one of the worst of them, com∣ing to visit him, of which he was informed while he sate in Judicature, he speedily laid a∣side his business and his Robes, and went forth in a familiar manner to meet him and im∣brace him. To the rest, in his Epistles he desired their presence or their Books; and stiled himself, Their most dear Brother. For his Prudence. This was a Maxim with him, That it was a shame for a wise man, having a Soul, to seek for commendation from any thing be∣longing to the Body. His proficiency in all manner of learning, gave him great insight as well to Martial as Civil Affairs; which he so mana∣ged, that though he adventured on many great and hazardous attempts, yet he mostly came off with good success. He could by his Eloquence, as by a Mercury-Rod, appease the Tu∣mults and Seditions of his Souldiers; and would threaten them, that if they continued their Mutinies, he would betake himself to a pri∣vate life. Again, he shewed another instance of his Prudence in remitting many Taxes, rather than to extort them from the poorer sort of people: nor did he exact on the Rich, affirm∣ing, that his treasure was safest in the custody of his good Subjects. One instance of his Prudence was this, that
he would suffer himself to be reproved for any indiscreet action; being conscious to himself of rashness and precipitancy in many particulars. Marcell. l. 25. c. 6. Praefectis proximis{que} permit∣tebat ut sidenter impetus suos aliorsum tendentes, at{que} decebat Monitu opportuno fraenarent mon∣strabat{que} subinde se dolere delictis, & gaudere correctione. He professeth that he used deliberation in all his affairs, especially of Judicature: You know (saith he to Ecdicius Praefect of Egypt) how slow I am to condemn any one; and when I have condemned him, how much slower I am to pardon him. P. 120. And of his prudent con∣duct in all his affairs, this is a convincing Ar∣gument, that during his Reign he was nei∣ther disturbed by Sedition at home, nor inva∣ded by any of the barbarous Nations from a∣broad. His Justice appeared also in many notable instances: for he rather shook the Sword than struck with it: and though he made himself terrible, yet was he never cruel; but sought by the punishment of a few, to restrain the vices of many. He pardoned many that had sought to take away his life. Thalassius an enemy to him and his Brother Gallus was forbid the Court, which encouraged his enemies to ac∣cuse him; but Julian perceiving it to be of Malice, told them, that Thalassius had injured
him, and he must have satisfaction before them: and upon hearing he was reconciled to him, and he discharged him from his Adversa∣ries. When one accused a great Citizen for a Traytor, hoping to be rewarded out of his E∣state, Julian ask'd him what the condition of the man was: he answered, he was a rich Burger, and had made him purple Cloths against the Insurrection. If that be all (saith Julian) you shall carry him a pair of purple Shoes too; and let him know, how little success he can hope for from such things, without greater power. He would say of himself, That Justice which in former times had left the earth, was returned again, l. 25. c. 6. And if we believe Marcelli∣nus, although he would sometimes inquire of what Religion the parties litigant were, yet he would do nothing partially against any for their Religion. As for his Fortitude, besides his patient en∣during of extream cold and heat, he would en∣counter his Enemies hand to hand; and by ex∣posing his own Person, would keep his Soul∣diers from giving ground to the Enemy; which he often did both in Germany and Persia, slay∣ing divers Enemies with his own hand. But he had a better kind of Fortitude than this; namely, that which more becomes a Man, to conquer his own Passions, to bear
with Reproaches, to endure cross events with patience. As for me (saith he) I resolve to bear whatever falls on me from above with a stout mind; for this is the property of good men, to do their duty, and to be of a good hope, and to ac∣commodate themselves to what ever fatal necessi∣ty shall impose, p. 218. And as men of true valour and magnanimity are seldom cruel, he expressed a natural clemency in all his actions; those against the Christians, towards his later end, only excepted; which yet I cannot per∣ceive to be executed, but upon some great pro∣vocations by the rash and ungovernable among the vulgar sort of Christians. Of which the Historians of that time given many instances. But all these vertues were sullyed with that one vile act of his, in becoming an Apostate from the best Religion, after that he had pro∣fessed it for Twenty years together, and attain∣ed a competent knowledge therein. His Vices. AS his Vertues were great, so were his Vi∣ces; and that which was most predo∣minant, was his levity and unsetledness of mind. For having been false to his Redeemer, he was never true to any of his false Gods. He was so displeased with Mars, the God of War,
that he solemnly vowed never to sacrifice to him more. He was talkative to excess, and boasted of his own Atchievements; Popularity and vain-glory being that which he especially aimed at. Marcellinus, who was a Heathen, a great friend and observer of his actions, says, l. 25. c. 6. That he was rather Superstitious, than a de∣vout observer of any Religion. He offered costly Sacrifice, rather to honour himself than his Gods; and though given to Divinations, yet contemned such as boded ill. So resolute and self-willed he was in the business of Persia, that against all good advice, and ill presages, he cast himself away. He shewed himself unmerciful in this one Edict, that he forbad the Professors in Rheto∣rick and Grammar to teach Christians, lest they should wound the Heathen by their own darts. Among his Edicts, those are especially noted which he set forth against the Christians; As first, his forbidding the Children of Christians to be brought up in the knowledge of Philo∣sophy, lest, as is noted by Socrates, they might be better enabled to confute the Heathen So∣phisters. 2. His forbidding Christians to bear any Office in his Guards, or Government in his Provinces. 3. His Edicts for seizing the Chri∣stian Churches, and imposing Mulcts on such as would not Sacrifice to his Pagan Gods. As
for Sanguinary Laws, our Author observes that he enacted none. Greg. Nazianzen, who knew Julian, hath sufficiently recorded his Vices in his Stelliteu∣ticks; from whence our Author hath taken his History. But as I would not believe all as truth, which some deliver in Panegyricks of their Heroes; so neither all that is said in such Orations against Professed Enemies. Of his Works. ALthough we might wish that Julian had never known Letters, because of those virulent Satyrs which he wrote against Christi∣anity; yet the Poison wherewith his Writings do abound, having excellent Remedies pre∣pared against the venome of them, by the Learned Fathers of that Age, such as Greg. Naz. and St. Cyril; there being also some re∣markable passages concerning History and Christianity interspersed, they may be read with some benefit by Learned Men. He says of himself, in an Epistle to Ec∣dicius Praefect of Egypt, in which he desired him to send the Books of George an Arian Bi∣shop of Alexandria; Some delight in Horses, others in Birds, others in wild Beasts; but I from my Childhood have been a great lover of
Books. His proficiency in variety of Learn∣ing will appear by what is now extant, al∣though it is supposed that he wrote many things before he was Caesar, that are now lost, as several Orations sent to Iamblicus, the loss, whereof he bewayls in an Epistle to him yet extant. My opinion is, that Julians Vices were real and deep rooted, that he had but the umbrage and appearance of Vertue; which he therefore retained, that he might make them serve his Pride, Popularity, and vain-glory. After he came to be Caesar, he redeemed what time he could for his study, dividing the night into three parts: one for sleep, another for his Books, and the third for his Military Affairs; and usually he would pen one of his Orations in that part of the night. Suidas gives this account of his Writings. First, his Book call'd the Caesars, containing a short and sharp account of them all, from Augustus to his own time. Secondly, his Sa∣turnalia, and discourse of Three figures. Third∣ly, his Misopogon, written against the Antio∣chians; and another Tract shewing the origi∣nal of Evils: another against Heroclitus, shewing how to live Cynically; and many E∣pistles of several sorts, of which 63 are now extant. He wrote his Misopogon to revenge himself upon the Antiochians, who had abused him in
words, calling him Monkie, Goats-beard, and Butcher, for killing so many Bulls for Sacri∣fices: and that which most provoked him, was the Impress upon some Coyn, viz. A Bull lying upon his Back upon the Altar; which the Antiochians interpreted to signifie that the World was turned up-side-down by Julian: For these reasons, he upbraids them with their Intemperance, and their fondness of Plays and Theatres; Secondly, for their Reli∣gion, which he calls Impiety, though they wor∣shipped God and Christ instead of Jupiter and Apollo: Thirdly, the iniquity of their Magi∣strates, who countenanced the avarice of the Rich, to the impoverishing of the People. For these things he blames them, speaking as of himself: And when he comes to apologize for himself, he confesses that his life was void of all Pleasure; that he was too religious and severe in Judicature, for which he prays their pardon; imputing these faults to his Master, by whom he was taught from his youth to live temperately, religiously, and justly: and that he had spent his youth amongst the Gauls, a rough and warlike people, ignorant of delicacies. The sum of this accusation we have in this Syllagism. He that lives contrary to the manners of o∣ther men, is deservedly accused by them. Julian liveth contrary to the manners of the
Antiochians, in contemning Pleasures, and restraining Impiety and Injustice, which they allow and defend. Therefore he's justly accused by them. To which if we add one Syllogism more, you have the sum of that whole Book, viz. He that bestows benefits upon ungrateful men, is a Fool. Julian hath bestowed benefits on ungrateful men, in commending, cherishing and in∣creasing the Antiochians, Therefore he is a Fool. Concerning his account of the Caesars, So∣crates in his Ecclesiastical History, lib. 3. c. 1. says, That he blamed every one of them, not sparing Marcus the Philosopher: And Zona∣ras in his third Tome, observes his ingrati∣tude to Constantius, blaming him for his pro∣digalitie; feigning that Mercury asking him what was the propertie of a good King, he should answer; To have and to consume much. The Books now extant are these: 1. His Orations in praise of Constantius the Emperour, and of Eusebia his wife. 2. In praise of the Sun, and of the Mother of the Gods: Against unlearned Dogs: To Heraclius con∣cerning the Sect of the Cynicks; and a Con∣solatory Oration at the departure of Salust. His Caesars: his Misopogon, and sixty three
Epistles besides that to Themistius and the A∣thenians. But the most pestilent of all his Works were those which he wrote against the Christian Religion, which are mentioned and answered by St. Cyril Bishop of Alexandria, in Ten Books, consisting of 362 Pages, in the sixth Tome of his Works, set forth in Greek and Latine by Johannes Aubertus; printed at Paris 1638. to which, for his full satisfaction, I refer the Reader THE CONCLUSION. IT appears by what hath been said, That Julian was a perfidious and detestable Apo∣state: A malicious and subtile Persecutor; who designed much more against the Christians, than God permitted him to practise. But as there is an open and declared Apostacie and Opposi∣tion of the Truth by professed Enemies: so is there a secret and real revolt from the Truth, and persecution of its Disciples, by some that profess themselves Friends to the same. And in our own Age we have known some, not on∣ly of the Roman, but other Perswasions, who
may be parallel'd with, and in some circum∣stances exceed Julian. For Julian, being a Great Prince, had the unhappiness of being bred in forein Countries among subtile Pagans, who tempted him to their impieties in his youth: There are some who have had their whole Education among lear∣ned and sincere Professors of the Christian Faith, and yet revolt from it. Julian for Six years together faithfully served the Emperour in his Wars, to the great hazard of his Life; O∣thers, even in times of peace, study to involve their Prince in unnatural Wars, to the endan∣gering of his and their own Lives. Julian had a power to have executed his malicious designs, but was restrained: Others live under a just power, and enjoy Protection and Peace; yet their perverse Wills admit of no restraint. Julian employed his Wit in writing against his Christian Subjects; Others employ theirs in writing against their Christian Governours. He wrote Panegyricks of a Constantius, who had contrived his death: Others write Sa∣tyrs and Libels against their Princes to whom they owe their Lives. In a word, the greatest aggravation of Julian's Apostacie, was, that he had been a Lecturer of the Holy Scriptures, the truths of which he renounced, and wrote against them: And there are some who have been long in the Order of Priesthood, that
have so far revolted from their Profession, as to write point-blank against the plain and most necessary practical duties of the Holy Scriptures, And whether Julian or such as these be the greater Apostates, I leave to the Judgement of the Impartial Reader. FINIS.
