P3519 R18078 12212115 56324
THE PRISONERS OF NEW-GATES CONDEMNATION. Declaring every Verdict of the whole Bench at the Sessions House in the Old Bayly. April 22 With the Jesuits and Fryers being censured by the Parliament, five Fryers being examined by a Committee in the Court of Wards, With their Con∣fessions at the same time, Also those 18. that were suspected to adjoyn with the Irish Rebels, with a Pilgrim, and four more Irish souldiers. Likewise a Relation of him that killed Sir Henrie Paget, and many other Fellons. With the Names of every particular one. Wherunto is annexed, more Exceeding true and joyfull News from Ireland, Describing a great and Bloudy Battell fought in the Neweries, by Sir Henry Tichbourn, Sir Charles Coot, and Cptain Marro, with 3000. men, against 10000. of the Rebels, April 17. 1642. Imprinted at London, for H. Blunon. 1642.
THE PRISONERS OF New-Gates Condemnation. NEw-Gate hath not bin more re∣plenished with Prisoners these many years then now, there being very nigh 300. prisoners committed to that infamous Castle of Misery. But not to deviate too far, or to trespasse on the Readers patience with a tedious and preliminary discourse, I w ll abbreviate Hypotheticall super∣fluities, and insist upon the intended subject. But as the atracity of the crime, so the persons ought to precede: where∣fore
I will begin first with the 7. con∣demned Jesuits, these Popish Priests were heretofore condemned according to the Law, and Justice of the Realm, being apparently found such pernicious enemies to the state: but the Kings mercy being graciously extended to them, they obtained a Reprieve from His Majesty; Wherupon did arise a tu∣multuous mutiny among the other Prisoners, who refused to dy without the Jesuits: but afterwards they were mittigated in a paci∣fied tranquillity. Notwithstanding the Parliament petitioned to His Majesty, that Execution might be impo∣sed on them; but the King would not condis∣cend therunto, till His further pleasure: where∣fore they have continued secure in New-gate e∣ver since, one man being solely ccepted, viz. Goodman, who dyed last Good Friday, and at once deceived both Gregory and Tyburn. But since the Parliament have repetitioned to His Majesty, that they may be now executed, in regard they were such obstacles to their assi∣duous proceedings: His Majesty replyed, that if they were the obstruction, and hinderance of Reformation in the Church, hee desired that
they might be forthwith executed, without any further delay. The Names of the Iesuites. Rivers, Canon, Winfall, Norton, Haman, Coleman. The 18. Irish men, that were suspe∣cted to be Rebels, being formerly exa∣mined before the Parliament, all the Servants, Sea-men, and Souldiers, were remitted, only the Master of the ship, the Captains, Lieutenants, and Ancients were detained, who still continue in the Prison: but they have not come as yet to their Examination before the Court; wherfore it is to be expected; the Parliament themselves will censure them. The 10. that lately were committed to New Gate, five of which were Fry∣ars, four souldiers, and a Pilgrim, were examined before the Parliament: the Fryars were examined last Wednesday
was sevennight, before a Committee in the Court of Wards, who demanded of them their intents, in comming over to Jreland, and to what effect: four of which very peremptorily denyed, and said, that they came over with occasi∣ons of Merchandize, &c. but one of them betrayed the rest, and affirmed, that they were Fryars, and came over into Eng∣land to save souls for Heaven. The other 5. were carryed down to Westminster last Saturday was a seven∣night, before the same Committee in the Court of Wards The Master of the ship being called first, did show a Commission un them for his going; they then asked him, vvhither he vvould take the Oath of Allegiance, vvhich he vvas vvilling to take; but vvhen they asked him of the Oath of Supremacie, he replyed, that he was an ignorant man, and did not un∣derstand what it meant: three of the other could not speak one word of English, wherfore the Master did inter∣pret
what they spake: it seems by the exposition of the Master of the ship, that they have bin in service under the Prince of Orange half a year, they were taken Captives at Flanders, they served in France two years, and half a year in Spain, and now come into their own Country: this was their true and Re∣all Confession before the Committee. One Robert Butler, living formerly at the Bever Tavern in St. Giles in the Fields, who killed Sir Henry Paget, as was supposed in his own defence, was called before the Court last Thursday, but his Case is removed by the Lord Paget into the Kings-Bench. One Francis Robson is cast for his life, for taking 100.l. from a Gentleman, scuffling in company, &c. Ame Hall is cast for her life, being taken for a Fellon. One Sparrow likewise is cast, for sus∣pition of taking a Chest of Plate out of an House.
More exceeding true and ioyfull Newes from Ireland. Loving Brother: ON the 4. of this month, I received your Letter, being sorry to hear such bad news from you; and wheras you writ to me, to send you word how passages went with us here, I thought it convenient, to send you these Oc∣currences, following. Vpon the 17. of this present month, there was a great and bloudy battell in the Neweries, fought between 3000 men of our side, under the Command of Sir Henrie Tichbourn, Sir Charles Coot, and Captain Marro, against 10000. of the Rebels, coducted by the great Rebel Mondormo, and after a long and tedious Battel, they put the Rebels to flight, kild 2000. of them, and woun∣ded the Lord Mondormo: of ur side were slain 400. they are intended to fight a pitcht Battel a∣bout the 25 day of this month. We had tydings brought to our Army, April 12. that Sir Phil my O-Neal hath got a great army, intending to give Battel against us in the Neweries. Captain Mar∣ro received a Letter from Colonel Gore, in the North of Ireland, relating how they had defeated six Regiments of the rebels forces, but my Lord of Munster hath had some losse there. So I rest, your loving Brother J. Gilbert. Ordered by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, that the Lord Howard of Char, shall attend upon the King, and present some Reasons unto His Majesty. John Brown Cler, Parl.
