V589 R218012 99829640 34081
A True Discovery TO THE COMMONS OF ENGLAND, How they have been Cheated of almost all the Gold and Silver Coyn of this Nation, WHICH Hath been, and is daily Tran∣sported into Forraign parts. AND How the people of this Nation are, and have been abused by light and Clipped English money, and the means shewed for the pre∣vention thereof. Humbly presented to the Parlia∣ment of the Common-wealth of England. BY, THOMAS VIOLET A true lover of his Countrey. LONDON, Printed by W. B. and are to be sold by W. Sheires at the sign of the Bible over against the North-door of Pauls 1650.
A true discovery how the COMMON-WEALTH OF ENGLAND, Have been cheated of their Treasure, and means shewed for prevention thereof IT hath been daily pra∣ctised by some particu∣lar Merchants, both Native and Strangers, to Transport the Trea∣sure of this Nation, to the great prejudice of the State; who for their own private gain, have not pared to damnifie the Common∣wealth (so highly) that their Persons nd Estates cannot give a full satisfa∣tion for the great mischief done, and practised by them to this Common∣wealth, and without a strict Examina∣ion, and exemplarie punishment of he offendours, or some of the chief of hem, these mischiefs will never be revented, (and the Common wealth e still undermined by those Moles,
to the unspeakable dammage thereof) and for that some, through ignorance, do not understand and conceive the great dammage which may come to the Common-wealth, by the suffering these abovesaid abues to continue, and others more craftie and subtile, both Gold-smiths and Merchants, that are Transporters of Gold and Silver, and practisers of several high frauds and abuses upon Coyn and Bllon, have the confidence (or impudence) to make arguments for defending the Transgressours. Now for the informa∣tion of some in their judgements, that have desired a true account, what Laws are now in force in this Nation for prevention of these mischiefs; what Orders and Laws in Franc, Hlland, and Flanders, for the regulating of their Mints, Money, and Bllion; what punishments and restriction upon the offendours. I have procured the Ordinance, and Placcaets of Frane, Hollnd, and Fladers to be translated, have abbre∣viated them for your information; and quoated some Laws of this Nation now in force, as hereafter follow. And if you please to make the Law, now presented to the House, stricter
than it is now drawn, I humbly con∣ceive you will do the Common-wealth the greater benefit, considering the present condition of the Common∣wealth. Transporting of Treasure hath been Felonie, 4. Henry 7. cap. 13. and 17. Edward 4. this Statute to endure for twentie years. I humbly conceive the Common-wealth hath now as much reason to look to keep the Treasures in the Nation as they had then, consi∣dering all things. That you would be pleased to give one Moyetie at the least to any person or persons that will, or can discover the Offendours: that so by this reward, all persons may be invited to discover the Offendours all over the Nation, and the same rule followed which was in 14. Rich. 2. cap. 12. where Commissi∣ons by Act of Parliament, were grant∣ed throughout the Realm, to inquire of such as had conveyed the Money of England out of the Nation; in doing whereof, great sums throughout the Nation will come to the State, and the Offendours will remember the Pro∣verb, sweet meat must have sower sauce, when they shall be enforced to pay back to the State, that which they have
defrauded them of, and will prevent them and all others hereafter, for to take the boldness to get themselves fortunes by any of the aforesaid indi∣rect courses, which so highly tend to the dammage of this Common-wealth. By these deceits, Commerce is spoild, Traffick decayeth, those things that are needfull for mans preservation grow dear, the handie-crafts work ceaseth, the work-men betake themselves to some other places, and the Commonaltie, to speak all in a word, is brought to Pover∣tie, (as is Gravely observed by the Ma∣ster General, and Councel of the Mint in Flanders, 2. October 1647. in their Declaration, clearly demonstrating, That the carefull and punctual keep∣ing of the Placcaet of the Mint, is ve∣ry necessary, and withall profitable to all persons of what state, qualitie, or condition soever; shewing, that if the Placcaet be not observed, but that money should be paid out above the true value through these disorders they shall never be able to keep their Treasure within their Countrey. And in their Declaration shewing most judicially, the great mischief that befall a Nation by enhauncing and raising their Money, being no rea
cure for the Common-wealth, but ut∣terly destructive to all sorts of people, even from the Prince to the poor La∣bourer, to any Free-State or Com∣mon-wealth, to all Merchandize and Commodities: all which considerations, although very potent, yet do not of∣tentimes come into the minds and comprehensions, not onely of the Common people, but also of those to whom the imployment of Publick Of∣fice have given more judgement and credit in mannaging of affairs them∣selves, and who dare to spread it a∣broad, that there is no harm nor evil in enhauncing the Coyn above its true va∣lue and worth, because they can put it away at the same price as they receive it; not taking notice by the way, that by raising and augmenting the price of money, doth or must by consequence, augment and encrease the price of all Merchandizes and provisions propor∣tionable, whereby of necessitie must follow, that if the Moneys be aug∣mented and heightened, the Landlords and Creditours receive so much less; the Merchandize, Victuals, and all o∣ther Wares grow presently dearer; the Publick Treasure either Excise or Customs are abated, by so much as
you enhaunce or lessen your Moneys, for it is not the Denomination of a high price of Gold or Silver sets the value, but it must have weight and fineness proportionable to what you call it, or else you go upon a wrong ground; As for example, in Scotland they call Thirteen pence halfpenie, a Mark; and Twentie pence, they call Twentie shillings; this denomination of a great value gives not the intrinsi∣call value. I caused these men following to be Fined in the Star-chamber for tran∣sporting Gold and Silver, and Culling and Melting down the currant heavy Coyn of the Nation. The 25th of Jan. 12th Car. Charles Franke 4000l Robert Ellis 4000l Isaac Romeere 3000l Jacob Delew 1000l Roger Fletcher 1000l Richard Cockram 1000l John Parrat 2000l
The 17th of Febr. 12th Car. Peter Hern 2000l John Terry 2000l Timothy Eman 2000l Isaac Brames 1000l Henry Futter 500l Henry Sweeting 500l John Perrin 100l The total of the said Fines amount to the sum of 24100l. Sr. John Woollaston Knight, and Willi∣am Gibs Esquire, both Aldermen of the City of London, being informed a∣gainst in this Information, by the late Kings then Attorney Generall; pro∣cured the late Kings Pardon, and so were discharged. And Petr Fountaine who was in∣formed against for transporting of Gold, procured his Pardon upon pay∣ment of 1100l. And all these I did bring to a Tryall all at my own Charge. That besides the fourteen offendours
sentenced in Star-Chamber and Par∣doned, as aforesaid, there are many o∣ther Merchants, Goldsmiths and o∣thers, that have transported Gold and Silver out of the Nation, that have sold Gold and Silver at above the price of the Mint, that have furnished much light Gold, English and Forraign, and great quantities of Gold and Silver to Merchants and others to transport, that have culled and melted down the weightiest current Silver Coyns, as shillings, sixpences and halfcrowns, all which offences are against the com∣mon Laws of the Nation: And the wis∣dom and policie of State hath, upon free and generall Pardons at Parlia∣ments, exempted it out of the free Pardon, thereby the more to terrifie and restrain men from venturing in that kind, to transport Gold or Silver, or to melt down the current Silver Coyns of the Nation. That divers Gold-smiths of London, are become Exchangers of Bullion of Gold and Silver, and buy it of Mer∣chants and others, pretending to carry it to the Mint; but indeed they are the greatest Instruments for transport∣ing that are; and in a manner, they are onely those who furnish transporters
with English and Forraign Gold, Spa∣nish money, Rix-dollers, Pistollets, Cardacues; culling and melting down the current Silver Coyns of this Realm for Plate and Silver-thread: and no doubt, when a true representation of the abuses of such Gold-smiths, Fi∣ners, and Wire-drawers, as hath been formerly, and is daily practised by ma∣ny of them, shall be made appear; I doubt not but the Parliament will think fit to take the same into consi∣deration, and provide some means to restrain them from doing the Com∣mon-wealth that dammage, as formerly hath been done. That some of the Gold-smiths make it their use and practice to buy light English Gold of shop-keepers and o∣thers, which by the Laws of this Na∣tion, wanting beyond remedy, ought to be bought as Bullion, and upon the sale, ought to be defaced, and new Coyned in the Mint: But they take another way; for they sell all this Gold to transport, though it want 4. 5. or 6. grains above the allowance, and that a 20s. peece will not make 19s. to be Coyned in the Mint; yet the Gold-smiths will not abate above 2d. or 3d, and sometimes but 1d. in
the piece, let the Gold want what it will; by which means they out-give the Mint: And the Gold which the Gold-smiths buy of the Subjects, thinking it is to carry to the Mint to be new Coyned to pass in current pay∣ment, they put it into a dead Sea, ne∣ver to be made use of in our Common-wealth: For weekly, French and Eng∣lish have bought up this Gold, let it be as light as it will, at higher prices than the Mint are allowed to give by their Indenture, to the value of ma∣ny hundred thousand pounds; for by the Gold-smiths rule, the Mint is al∣wayes last served, as being the worst Chapman, and giving least for it; for after all hands are full, both for tran∣sporters, Plate-workers, Finers, and Wire-drawers; then that, which they cannot vent otherwise, cometh into the Mint; which the Officers of the Mint know very well: and if Gold and Silver never came into the Gold-smiths hands, (which Merchants sell, to them, believing they carry it all to be Coyned) far more Gold and Silver would come into the Mint, than now doth. And for this last 5. years, sum Gold-smiths have given for English Gold
20s. 6d. 21s. 21s. 6d. and 22s. for a Twenty shillings piece, which for the most part have been bought of them by Merchants, strangers and others, and Transported out of the Nation, so that now you may Receive five Thousand pound in a Payment and never a piece in Gold: If this ought not to be looked after and the offen∣dours brought to Justice, I shall hum∣bly leave it to the Parliament to con∣sider. Also, many Thousand of Dollers and pieces of Spanish money they furnish Merchants yearly with that Trade for Norway and Denmark and other parts, and Transport Silver for those parts, to the great weakening of the stock of this Nation, and hinderance of the sale of our wollen commodities, which (before that pernitious way was found out) those Countries vented much of. Besides the hinderance of the sale of our commodities, the State is hindered of their Custom; for the Merchants drive a trade inward and outward, and so pay the State no custom; For in∣stance Hambrough-Merchants bring great quantities of Rix-dollers from Hambrough and other parts of Germa∣ny, and pay no Custom, because the
State hath ever made Gold and Silver free to be imported without Custom, which the Merchants usually sell to the Gold-smiths, and the Gold-smiths for the most part sell to the Merchants that trade in Norway and Denmark: which Dollers are closely packed in some part of the ship, and so no Cu∣stom paid, either for bringing in the Silver, or sending it out; and no com∣modities, in a manner, other than Sil∣ver, are transported into those parts by the said Merchants, considering the quantity of their return; For what they want in goods exported from hence, they must make up in money: If great returns of commodities from Norway and Denmarke, and few com∣modities exported from hence, the Ballance must be made up with Silver; for no Nation will give us commodi∣ties; but there must be a ballance for goods imported, by goods exported, or by Treasure. It is to be feared, that the industry of many ages cannot replenish the Nation with so much Gold, as hath been transported out of it within these few years; for it is an infallible rule, that where Gold and Silver is over-va∣lued, thither will it be Transported by
Merchants and others, for it continu∣ally resorts where it is most made of, and if you seek to raise it here, the re∣medy is worse than the disease; for then you take from the Gentry, and all setled Revenuers, as much of their means as you raise the current money; for if Gold should be raised in Eng∣land, for example, the 20s. to 26s. as was in France, either higher or low∣er, you should buy no more at your Market for 26s, than you could before for your 20s. and contrariwise, if your 20s. were but 14s. you should buy as much for your 14s. as when it passed at 20s. so that whensoever money is raised, the loss falleth most upon the Nobility and Gentry, and certain Re∣venuers, who lose so much out of their inheritance, which they have let out in Lease, as money raised. All Merchants that trade for Spain, know, that when the West-India fleet commeth not into Spain, the Trade for that year is lost; and no money, no Trade. If this be an infallible rule for Spain, which suffers so much for the forbearance of bringing in of trea∣sure for one year, and is supplied the next out of the Indies, and till their Fleet came home, no dealing with
Merchants; I do most humbly pre∣sent, how much more it doth con∣cern this Nation, which hath no West-Indies to supply the Treasure trans∣ported, to provide, and carefully keep in the Nations stock, which once trans∣ported, cannot be drawn back, but upon unreasonable tearms; which will impoverish all the Gentry to an in∣estimable value; and as long as it re∣maineth out of the Nation, all Tra∣ding and Commerce decayeth, the Subjects are unable to pay Taxes, and other Duties, and it is one of the greatest mischiefs that can befall the Common-wealth. 1. These reasons amongst many o∣ther, I humbly presented to the Parlia∣ment, 12. April, 1643. which if they had been then taken into considerati∣on, had kept many Millions of money in the Nation. But by the subtility of two Aldermen, whose pardon I had got from the late King, I for my reward was committed to the Tower for bringing up a Letter from the late King, though I had a Warrant from the House of Commons, and a War∣rant from my Lord General Essex, for to goe to OXFORD, and the Committee at Darby-house knew of my
going to OXFORD, for the late Kings Letter, which I desired Sir Da∣vid Watkins before ever I went, to have him acquaint the Committee of both Nations at Darby-house of my bu∣siness, and some other of the House of Commons, and that I would not go without their leave, which I had from them by him; and Master Rily the Scout-master of London, procured my pass from the House of Commons. But the truth was, the Presbyterian Partie ruled then all, and they were resolved to make their Bretheren of Scotland rich, and had a design to Cir∣cumvent this Nation, both of all their Gold, Money, and Moveables, which for a great part they have done, as I will make it appear; and therefore a∣ny that did speak against transporting Treasure, or knew so much of their Tricks as I did, must be a Malignant, an enemy to the Covenant, and so I was kept 3 years, and a 11 Moneths prisoner in the Tower, almost 3 years of that time close, because I should tell no Tales; and my Estate given a∣way without hearing, and Sequestered to my dammage, to the value of above 8400l. Besides the infinite ways the Pres∣byterians
found out for to enrich their Bretheren of Scotland, which all the Nation know. I shall declare one, which was so usorious & destructive to the Nation, as never the like practise was before put on this Nation, nor I believe, scarsly upon any other, under the colour of Friendship, League, and Covenant, and this to be done upon their dear Bretheren of London, and that was briefly this. The Scots Com∣missioners procured an Ordinance, that no Ships should bring Coals from New-castle, as appears at large by the Ordinance. When this was done, They must be the onely men must bring us Coals from Scotland; whereas before our dear Bretheren brought us Coals for nine, and ten shillings the Tun, aad sould them delivered at Lon∣don at that price, as will appear by all the Woodmongers books; they ha∣ving by the subtilitie of their Faction, got all their Trade for Coals for the City of London, and other parts of the Nation, into their hands, then the Ci∣ty shall pay for their Brotherly assist∣ance: For since the Ordinance for re∣straint of fetching Coals from New-Castle, until New-Castle was reduced to the Parliament, Scotch Coals was at
thirty, and fourty shillings the Tun; so that they sould them after they had Monopoliz'd the Coals into their own hands, at four times the value they could, and did constantly before af∣ford to bring them from Scotland. Then they had their Factours here, to buy up all the Hangings, Bedding, Pewter, Stools, Chairs, Houshould-stuff, Pictures, and all manner of Lum∣ber, which was sould to the value of many hundred of thousand pounds, out of the Citie of London and Nation, for half the value, and by them, in∣stead of Ballast carried to Scotland, and this can be witnessed by thousands of people, who have to their total undo∣ing suffered in this kind, and are never likely to see their goods, nor never to be Masters of such again, without they, or their Children will take the pains to go to Scotland and fight for them: by this way they may recover their Goods, or their value again. I shall humbly desire the Parliament to take notice after what Rate the Brotherly Assistance from Scotland, came in to help their Bretheren, even, after the Rate of sending one hundred pounds worth of Coals to London to their dear Bretheren, to make their
return worth eight hundred pounds in a moneth, or six weeks time, as is ap∣parent, and can be witnessed by thou∣sands of people, now they read this. Which after this Rate, a poor Scotch∣man might with one hundred pound, within the compass of one year, cheat this Nation of ten thousand pounds, and Transport it all in money. And this hath been done by many of them, to the value of many hundred of thou∣sand pounds. And because I Petitioned the Parlia∣ment, to look to the Transporting of the Treasure, by which means, they would have been prevented in sending the Treasure of this Nation into Scotland, I must be Sequestred, Im∣prisoned in the Tower, and held a Ma∣lignant. But I humbly hope the Parliament will give me the hearing for my just defence; and when they shall by ex∣perience find, that this I say to be true, and that I discover the nest of them that have Robbed this Nation, they will do me right, and unlose me from Oppression, and restore me to my E∣state.
Hereafter follow the Laws in Holland, Flanders, and France, for the regulating their Bullion and Money. Placcaet & Ordinance. Concerning the general course and regu∣latig of the Mints ad Moneys, as also concerning the Exchange and Ex∣changers, Rfiners, Gold-Smiths, and others in the Ʋnited Provinces, 1586. ARTIC. XI. ANd as for the Gold and Silver-Monies, whose value is valued by this Ordinance, We forbid every one to present, pay away, or receive the same at a hither rate, h is here Or∣dered, upon the forfeiture of such Monies, or the worth of it, in case the Fact be not preently discovered, and besides, upon the forfeiture of ten Golden Angelors the first time; for the second time, twentie Gole An∣gelors; and for the third, four times as much and besides, Atrary pu∣nishment according to the hmonness
of the Fact. And We understand the same forfeitures and penalties, to take place, as well upon the Receiver, as the payer away, unless one of them, presently after the Receiving, or Pay∣ing away, do present himself to an Of∣ficer, in which case the denuntiator, ei∣ther Receiver, or Payer away, shall be freed or quitted of the abovesaid pe∣naltie and forfeiture; and besides, to enjoy the third part of the same forfeit and penalty. ARTIC. XIV. So that we expresly forbid, and in∣terdict every one, to over-buy, or over∣sel, Change, or Chop any Species of Monies, rated by these presents, ei∣ther in taking, or giving upon the same, any profit, gain, or advantage, after what manner soever, upon the same pain and penalty, as abovesaid, against those who shall Receive, or Pay away the same, at a higher rate than that of the Ordinance. ARTIC. XV. We forbid also, every one to Cull any Gold, or Silver-Monies, and so by this means, to sort the weightie and good ones from the light, and bad
ones, to Pay away the light ones, and make their profit of the weighty, upon penalty as abovesaid. ARTIC. XVI. And as for the Stuff, and Materials of Gold and Silver, being in Mass, or sweepings, We forbid to buy, or sell them at a higher rate, than according to the Rule of this Ordinance, upon penalty of confiscation of the above∣said Materials; and moreover, to forfeit double the worth of them, at the charge as well of the buyer, as of the seller, for the first time; for the second time, twice as much; and for the thrid time, four times as much; and afterwards Arbitrarie punish∣ment. ARTIC. XVII. We expresly forbid henceforth to Transport, or cause to be Transported out of the abovesaid Province, to∣wards any strange Mints, any Gold or Silver-Monies, and also any Materials, in Mass or Monies, also any Materials in Mass or Ingots fit to Coyn Monies of them, upon forfeit of Confiscation of the abovesaid Monies and Materi∣als, or the worth of them in case they
were already Transported; and be∣sides this, upon penalty of one hun∣dred Golden Angelors, upon every Mark of Gold, and twenty Angelots for every mark of Silver, and of more or less proportionably for the first time for the Second time, upon the same so feit and penalty; and more∣over to undergo bodily punishment, and if they have not wherewithall to pay the abovesaid forfeits and amercia∣ments, they shall be bodily punished according to the manner of the Fact, under which penalty and amercia∣ments, We understand are compre∣hended, all those who had assisted, and had a hand in the abovesaid Trans∣portation, or conveying them away, alhough the Monies or Materials did not belong unto them. ARTIC. XX. Moreover, We forbid every one to File, Cut, or Wash with strong Water, or Cement, or any otherwie, any Gold, o Silver Monies, nor to Sauder, Gid, Piece, or Nail the same, or any way to make the same ligher o heavier, upon the forfeit of life and goods, where Confiscation taketh place.
ARTIC. XXII. We forbid henceforth every one▪ to Melt any Gold or Silver-Moneys of her Majesties of Englands stamp, valu∣ed by these presents, upon penalty of life and goods, where confiscation ta∣keth place: And the Moneys of Gold which are found to be too light by three Grains, or otherwise Clipped, Washed, Nailed, or Saudered, shall be brought to the Exchange, after the old custom. Placcaet and Ordinance for Flanders at Antwerp, the fourth of October, 1585. ARTIC. XIII. ANd to hinder the Transporting of the good and true Moneys, We orbid all and every one henceforth, to uy or sell any Species of Gold and ilver-Moneys, to give any profit or ain for it, upon penalty of the Seller, o forfeit the Pieces which are sould, r shall be sould, and besides the buy∣r, as the seller, to forfeit threescore ounds of the abovesaid good Moneys,
for the first time; and twice as much for the second time; and for the third time, four times as much; and besides, they are to be Arbitrarily punish∣ed. ARTIC. XIV. We also forbid all, and every one, to Weigh, Clip, File, or make choise of any Species of Gold and Silver, fo to make any profit with Melting, o Transporting of them, upon penalty of Criminal punishment, besides the loss of the abovesaid Pieces. ARTIC. XV. Furthermore, We forbid, and inter¦dict well Expresly; that no one o what quality, degree, or condition so∣ever, shall henceforth endeavour t Transport, or carry into any strang Mints, or into any other than our ow any Gold, or Silver-Monies of ou Stamp, or others tolerated by thi Our Ordinance, nor also any othe Monies, being clipped, or declared Bu¦lion, Melted, or in Mass, or otherwis nor also any other stuff, fit to Coyn M¦nies of them, upon forfeit of the ¦bovesaid Gold and Silver, and beside of two hundred Golden-Reals, for
very Mark of Gold, & twenty Golden Reals, for every Mark of Silver, and of more or less in proportion for the first time that this shall happen; and for the second time, besides the abovesaid forfeit, to be bodily punished, and o∣therwise as occasion shall serve. And if so be, that any person have transported any sum of Monies, without being taken in the fact, We will nevertheless, that whensoever it shall be perceived, and di∣scovered, they shall proceed against the transgressours by execution of the said pe∣nalties, even as if they were taken in the same Fact, well understanding, that in∣stead of Confiscation of the Species, they shall be bound to pay the price, and estima∣tion of the transported Monies, and be∣sides, the double worth of them, and al∣so to be criminally punished. We will and command also, That those who shall have helped to pack, or secretly convey, and transport the above∣said Monies, either in Mass, or Species, although the abovesaid Monies did not belong unto them, they shall be bodily, or Arbitrarily punished, according to the qualitie of the Fact and persons. The Policie and Laws of this Realm, have alwaies aimed at, and intended the
Increase and Augmentation of Money, especially that of Silver, and this divers waies. I. By providing, against Exportati∣on of it. 9. E. 3. c. 1. 38. E. 3. c. 2. 17. E. 3. 21. 5. R. 2. c. 2. 2. H. 4. c. 5. 2. H. 6. c. 6. 17. E. 4. c. 1. Made Felonie 19. H. 7. c. 5. 3. H. 8. c. 1. II. By providing, against the melting it down, to make Plate or other Manu∣factures of it. 9. E. 3. c. 3. 17. R. 2. c. 1. 17. E. 4. c. 1. 2. H. 6. c. 13. III. By providing, that if any Mo∣neys through time, or any other pra∣ctise, became uncurrant, then the same to be converted into Money again, & not be diverted from Coyn. E. 1. Sta∣tute de monet parva Rastall Tit. Mo∣ney. IV. By providing, That none should give a price for Bullion, or Coyn∣ed Money, above the rate of the Mint, or what the same is currant for: for it is not to be expected that any Bullion, either of Gold, or Silver, shall ever be brought to the Mint, when the owner may have a greater price, than at the
Mint, either to be Transported, or to be converted to Make Plate, or o∣ther things: This agreeth likewise with the policie of Spain, which though it be the Spring, and Fountain from whence the greatest Streams of Silver have been derived into other parts, yet Silver there, will alwaies yield the seller six pence, or one Real more upon the Mark at the Mint, than to be sold to any other for any purpose whatsoever, concurring likewise with the practise of other States. That all these Acts are defective, and not effectual to the ends abovesaid, for the reasons following. The Acts against Transportation; some extend not to Gold, as 9. E. 3. c. 1. Others have effect onely upon the Money that is Transported, and that comes too late, and is seldom or never known, as 38. E. 3. c. 2. 5. R. 2. c. 2. 2. H. 6. c. 6. 17. E. 4. c. 1. being now discontinued. Those that extend to the Shipping of it, &c. viz. 2. H. 4. c. 5 19. H. 7. c. 5. and 3. H. 8. c. 1. Give the whole for∣feiture to the King, and no part to the
Informer, whereby they are not at all made use of, no man being willing to be at charge to prosecute another, do∣ing no good to himself. None of those Acts do give suffici∣ent forfeitures to restrain the Offences, as hath been manifested by experi∣ence. Lastly, they have not given any means for discovery thereof, without which, the Offendours will not be de∣terred from finding out close and se∣cret ways to adventure and practise against them, when opportunity of great gain, and hope of concealment, shall invite and encourage them there∣unto. And for the now Act drawn and pro∣pounded to be passed. BEsides the frame and bodie of it, comprehending, and fully ex∣tending to all the waies and means of the abuses, the same for the forfeit∣ures. Is drawn from the example and president of 18. Eliz. c. 9. against transportation of Leather, Tallow, and raw Hides, and others in the Queens times, and the late Ordinance 1647.
Against transportation of Wooll, Ful∣lers-Earth, &c. The Clauses touching the proced∣ing by Information, &c. are the same with the like Clauses of the said Ordi∣nance for Wooll, 1647. And the Clauses to encourage the Instrument and others to discover the Offences, wherein themselves are ly∣able to the penalties, are framed in Imitation, and by the President of the said Act of 18. Eliz. And the other Ordinances and Edicts of other King∣doms and Estates, that give like ex∣emptions and encouragements to such, as though guilty themselves in the second degree, shall reveal and dis∣cover others more principal Offen∣dours, taking likewise from them the confidence they would have, that the persons they imployed should conceal their Offences, whereby they will be much deterred from hazarding and ad∣venturing upon the practise. And the Clause touching the Com∣mission, and examination of Witnesses for discovery, &c. And to commit them in case of their refusal to be Ex∣amined,
is exampled by the 13. Eliz. c. 7. The Act against Bancrupts, & disco∣very of their Estates; There being greater reason and equity, for the dis∣covery of fraud, concerning the Com∣mon-wealth, than concerning any pri∣vate person. In an Ordinance & Placcaet for the generall Regulating of the Mint, published at Brussel, the 18 of March, 1633. is inserted. ARTIC. XXV. WE declare, That although any of our Subjects or others, who shall have Acted any thing contrary to this Ordinance, and were not taken in the Fact, yet notwithstanding, af∣ther they shall be convinced of the said transgression, they shall be pro∣ceeded against, with condemnation of the said penalties and amerciaments; well understanding, that instead of forfeiting the said monies and materi∣als, they shall be condemned to pay the worth of them.
ARTIC. XXVI. And if it happeneth that the just quality and quantity of the said Speci∣es, Bullion, or Materials cannot be precisely known or verified, We will, that such transgressours be punished according to the heinousness of the fact, being left to the discretion of the Judges. ARTIC. XXVII. Which we intend shall take place, in regard of those who shall be convin∣ced, to have paid away, presented, or received any forbidden Moneys, at a higher price than by this present Or∣dinance is declared, although the said quality & quantity of the same, could not be precisely verified. ARTIC. XXVIII. We have Authorized, and Autho∣rize by these, all Officers, for to seize upon, and break open, the Packs, Let∣ters, and Portmantles of the Messen∣gers, or others whom they shall know or suspect to bring in any of the for∣bidden Species, or Materials, or to Transport, or convey out of our said Lands, any of our Species, and that in
the presence of those, to whom the said Packets are sent to, or do belong, if so be they are residing in that place; as also in the presence of one of the Magistrates of the said place, onely to know the name of those who caused the said Gold and Silver to be Trans∣ported, and to no other end. ARTIC. XXXVII. We also Order, that all those that shall be found to have Counterfeited, Coyned, Stamped, Prest, or cast in the sand, any Monies, of what manner stuff, or Mettal soever, shall be executed a false Moniers, in a kettle with boyling Oyl, and water, & with Confiscation of all their Goods. ARTIC. LV. If so be any one be convinced, that he had pickt, or chosen out, or caused to be chosen out, any of the said valu∣ed Species, for to keep the heavy ones for his profit, and to pay away the light ones to the dammage of the Commonaltie; We will, that he, be∣sides the said Forfeits and Amercia∣ments, shall be banished out of Our said Lands, for the space of ten years.
ARTIC. LVI. In case that any of the particular Masters of Our Mints, or Exchangers, were convinced of the said abuse, or that they should have presented, or paid away any of the said Clipt, or o∣ther forbidden Species, after that they had received the same for Bullion, or not Currant, then shall they be banish∣ed for ever out of Our said Lands, and their Goods Confiscated. ARTIC. LVII. And because the price of the Spe∣cies is commonly regulated according to the price of the Gold and Silver Materials, Therefore we have forbid∣den, and forbid every one of what quality and condition soever, to buy or fell any Gold or Silver Materials, or Species declared for Bullion, or not Currant, at a higher price than the Or∣dinance of Our said Mint permitteth, upon penalty of Confiscation of the said Materials, and the worth of them, at the charge as well of the Buyer, as Seller, for the first time; for the second time, sour times as much, besides the Confiscation and Forfeit, and of other Arbitrary correction.
ARTIC. LXIII. We Order also, that the Brokers, who did assist and help to conclude or treat upon such parcels, either in re-regard of money given upon exchange, or upon use or obligation, either in pay∣ment of the sold merchandizes, or o∣therwise, shall be publickly whipt and banished out of our said Lands, for the space of ten years. ARTIC. LVI. And as We have understood, and are truly informed, that a great part of the irregularity concerning the said Placcaets, is risen and occasioned, by reason that many Merchants and Fa∣ctours, will not buy the works and ma∣nufactures of the work-men, and han∣dicrafts-men, unless they will receive the Gold and Silver at such a price as they will give it them; or when they have almost bought the goods, they give the Merchandize back again to the Sellers, if they will be paid according to the price Ordered in Our Placcaet: Therefore We will, that such oppres∣sours of the poor Commonalty, shall be rigorously proceeded against, and punished, by apprehension of their
persons, and that they, their Proces being summarily, and criminally form∣ed, and found guilty of what is above∣said, shall be banished for ever, and their Goods Confiscated, or instead hereof, to be condemned in a great sum of money, according to the hei∣nousness of the Fact; of which Confis∣cation and Americiament, the halfe shall be given to the Plantiff, or disco∣verer. ARTIC LXX. In like manner shall be punished those with the same Forfeits & Amer∣ciaments, who shall have received, paid away, or presented any clipt Money, or declared for Bullion, with protestation, or declaration, that it is for to deliver them into our Mint, or to the Ex∣changers, unless they had presently cut them in pieces, or deformed them, or caused the same to be done by o∣thers. ARTIC. XCI. We declare, that although it be, that any of the Transgressours do ob∣tain favour and pardon from Us, or from Our Councel. We do not in∣tend, nor We will not, that therefore they should be quitted, and dischar∣ged
from the parts of the said forfeits and Amerciaments, granted by Us to the Officers, Callers in question, and Plantiffs, or Discoverers respectively; but such favour and pardon onely to take place, for as much as belongeth unto Us. ARTIC. CV. We Order well expresly, all Our Fiscals and Officers, to take their con∣clusions, and all Our Councellors, Ma∣gistrates, and other Judges, to give their Sentences in conformitie of this Our present Placcaet, without using any moderation of the penalties and amerciaments therein contained, un∣der what pretext soever, nor also any compensation of charges, to the preju∣dice of the Officer founded in the principal, upon penaltie of Our indig∣nation, and for to answer for it in their own persons, without that they shall plead any Ignorance, or the general transgression. Which excuses, We do not intend shall avail, or help them in any manner of way: but Our intenti∣on is, that they shall be punished, be∣cause of their negligence and conni∣vence.
This Ordinance and Placcaet of the 18 of March 1633, is again con∣firmed; and all Magistrates and Officers are required to do their ut∣most endeavours to see it strictly ob∣served in all points. Published at Brussels the 26 of August 1643. In an Ordinance and Placcaet for the Regulating of the Mint; Published in Brussels the last day of May, 1644. is inserted. ARTIC. xi. VVE have also forbidden, and forbid by these presents, every one of what qualitie or conditi∣on soever; as well our Subjects as others, to Transport any Gold or Silver from henceforth out of our Lands, di∣rectly or indirectly, or cause the same to be Tarnsported, either Minted or Unminted; as also in Mass, Ingots, or Bullion; without having obtained of us before-hand express leave and con∣sent for to do the same, upon penaltie of forfeiting the Gold, Silver, and Bullion, and to pay besides the double of their worth, and upon forfeit of the
Merchandizes, if so be the abovesaid Gold, Silver, or Bullion shall be found to be packt in them; as also of the Horses and Waggons of those, who shall willingly and wittingly have brought and conveyed the same. ARTIC. xv. And if any one be found and taken to have Transported or caused to be Transported out of our Lands, any Moneys by Us valued, or other decla∣red Bullion, or any materials of Gold and Silver, and have delivered or caus∣ed to be delivered the same into any strange Mints; We will, that such per∣sons shall be proceeded against, sharp∣ly and rigorously by imprisonment of their persons, and that they, besides the forfeits of the said Species and materials, and four times the worth of them for the first time, shall be ba∣nished out of our abovesaid Lands, for the space of five years; and for the se∣cond time, for ever. ARTIC. xvi. And those who willingly and wit∣tingly have assisted for to pack and Transport the abovesaid Moneys or Materials, shall be punished according
to pleasure, or banished according to the qualitie of the person. Other Countreys you may see strictly provide against these offences; and it will never be mended here, if you make not as strict Laws as they. In a Declaration of the King of France, for the Regulating of the new price set upon the Light and Clipt Species of Money: likewise for the observation of the prices of Gold and Silver imployed for the Gold-smiths work. It is also expresly forbidden to melt the Money, and to Transport them or other materials of Gold and Silver out of the said Kingdom, Printed at Paris 30th of October. 1640. FOLIO 8, 9. VVE expresly forbid, that all materials of Gold and Sil∣ver, either Coyned or Uncoyned, shall not be bought or sold at a higher rate than is expresly set down in this Placcaet, which doth contain the true value that must be paid for the Mark of Gold and Silver.
FOLIO 13. We expresly forbid every one, of what condition or quality soever, to Transport out of our Kingdom, any Gold and Silver Coyned or Uncoyned nor any other Gold-smiths work, upon penaltie of forfeiting the Materials and Merchandizes, and other things wherein they shall be found to be packt up in; besides the penaltie of fiftie pounds and bodily punish∣ment. Now that general Laws and Statute in England from time to time have pro∣vided against Transporting of Gold, or melting down the currant Coyn, and buy∣ing Silver and Gold at above the price of the Mint, appeareth by these follow∣ing, viz. Stat. 9. Edw. 3d. Both forbidding the Transporting of the Gold of the Nation, and the melting down the currant Silver Coyns, by Gold-smiths or others into plate. Stat. 14th. Rich. 2d. cap. 12th. Commissions made through the Realm, for to enquire of such as had conveyed the money of England out of the Nati∣on, to the prejudice and dammage of the King and Realm. Stat. 17th. Rich. 2d. cap. 1. There
shall be no melting of the currant mo∣ney to make any thing by Gold-smiths or others, upon pain of for∣feiture. 2d. Hen. 4th. cap. 4th. No person to Transport Gold or Silver, either in Coyn or Bullion, upon pain of forfeit∣ing as much as they might. 4th. Hen. 4th. cap. 10th. No Gold-smith or other person to melt down the currant Silver Coyns of the Nation, upon pain of forfeiting four times the value. 9th. Hen. 5th. cap. 1. All Statutes heretofore made touching the good and lawfull government of Gold and Silver, and not repealed, to be in force. 2d. Hen. 6th. cap. 6th. Upon a grievous complaint made in Parlia∣ment, that great sums of Gold and Sil∣ver were Transported into Flanders and Burdeaux out of this Kingdom, it was ordered and enacted, that no Gold or Silver should be Transported out of the Realm. And because it is supposed, that the money of Gold is Transported by Merchants-aliens, It is ordained, that the Merchants-aliens shall find securi∣ty with sureties in the Chancery, that they shall not Transport Gold or mo∣neys
out of the Kingdom, upon pain of forfeiting the sum or the value; and if any do contrary, and that duly proved, and he so doing be gone over Sea, then his pledges shall pay the State his said forfeiture; whereof he that the same espied, and thereof gave notice to the Treasurer or the States Councel, shall have the fourth part. 2d. Hen. 6th. cap. 12th. To the in∣tent that more money be brought into the Mint, it is ordained, that neither the Master of the Mint, not Changer for the time being, neither sell no cause to be sold, nor alien to no other use, but apply the same wholly to Coyn, according to the tenure of the Indenture made betwixt the State, and Master of the Mint. 4th. Hen. 7th. cap. 13th. Item, Where in a Parliament begun and holden at Westminster the 16th. of Ja∣nuary, the 17th. of Edw. 4th. No per∣son to carry Gold or Silver either in Bullion or Coyn, nor Jewels of Gold, but such persons as be dispensed with by the Statute of Hen. 4th. upon pain of Felonie, to be heard and determin∣ed as other Felonie is; the which Statute to endure from the feast of Easter the 18. of Edw. 4. unto the
end of seven years next ensuing: Since the which 7 years expired, the Gold and Silver Coyn of this Realm hath and daily is conveyed into Flanders, Normandy, Britany, Ireland, and other parts beyond the Seas, as well by Merchants-strangers as by Denisons, to the great impoverishing of the Realm, & greater is like to be, without remedy thereof be hastily provided. The King our Sovereign Lord, the premises considered, by the advice of his Lords Spirituall and Temporall, and the Prayers of the Commons in the said Parliament assembled, and by the Authority of the same, have or∣dained and enacted and established, that the said Statute made in the 16 year of Edw. 4. be and stand a Statute good and effectuall, with all the premises in the same observed and kept, and put in due execution, from the feast of the Purification of our La∣dy, which shall be in the year of our Lord 1489. to endure to the end of 20 years next ensuing. 1. Hen. 8. cap. 13. An Act made, that whosoever shall carry any Gold or Silver or Jewels out of the Realm, shall forfeit double the value, the one half to him that shall seize it, or therefore
sue by action of debt at the Common-Law. This Act to endure to the next Parliament. 5. And 6. Edw. 6. cap. 19. An act touching the exchange of Gold and Silver, that whosoever gives more for Gold and Silver than it is or shall be declared by the Kings Proclamation, shall suffer imprisonment by the space of one year, and make fine at the Kings pleasure, the one moity to his Majesty, the other moity to be to the party that seizeth the same, or will sue for it by Bill, Plaint, or Information or otherwise. 1. A Proclamation against giving for light Gold more than is currant, 21o July, 17o Jaci. 2. A Proclamation against melting English money, 18o Maii. 9o Jaci. 3. A Proclamation against buying and selling Gold and Silver, at higher prices than the Mint, 14o Maii. 1o Jaci. 4. A Proclamation against Tran∣sporting of Gold, 23o Maii. 10o Jaci. 5. A Proclamation against profit for Gold and Silver, and melting En∣glish money for Plate; Wast in Gold and Silver, 4o Febi. 19o Jaci.
6. A Proclamation against Tran∣sporting Gold and Silver, and melting down the currant Coyns of the Nati∣no, 25o Maii. 3o Gari. From all which Statutes and provi∣sions it may be gathered, that the cur∣rant money and Bullion of the Nati∣on, is the Subjects, onely to use be∣tween man and man, but not to abuse: for no man by the Law can buy or sell them by way of Merchandize at high∣er rates than they are Proclaimed; if he do, he is finable by the Law: he that washeth, clippeth or lesseneth the currant Coyns, commits Treason: He that exports the Treasure of the Nati∣on, either in Bullion or currant Coyn, being taken, loseth them: he that melts down the currant Gold or Silver of the Nation for Plate or other Ma∣nufactures, commits a forfeitute; and Transporting of Treasure hath former∣ly been made Felony, as by the seve∣rall Statutes and Laws to this purpose appeareth. By these and divers other Laws and Statutes, our Predecessours have en∣devoured the retention and preserva∣tion of the Coyn and Treasures within this Nation, but could hitherto never effect it.
Nor will these mischiefs ever be stopped, till their be Commissions by Act of Parliament according to former presidents, when the Nation was de∣frauded of their Treasure as now it is, strictly to enquire of the offendours, and bring them to Justice. For of late, the easie escape of De∣linquents for these offences, hath given the boldness to offendours to go on: and Time, the truest Schoolmaster, hath taught all ages to know, that lit∣tle penalties could yet never interpose betwixt the Merchant and his profit. Whereas this Parliament, by their Ordinance 6. of Sept. 1647. did decrie all Clipped, Fyled, or diminished Mo∣ney (by means whereof great qunti∣ties were sold to some Gold-Smiths) who have made it a Trade to deal with Receivers of Publick Cashes, Grasi∣ers, and severall other Persons (and insted of melting of these Moneys down) some Gold-smiths have issued these Moneys out again in payment, whereas at the Tower these Clipped Moneys would make but five shillings the Ounce-Troy, these men have ven∣ted out these Clipped Moneys to di∣vers il-affected people at five shillings six pence, and five shillings eight
pence, and six shillings the Ounce, who have dispersed the said Clipped Moneys so bought from Gold-smiths up and down the Nation again, to the great enriching of themselves, and defraud∣ing of the good people of this Nation, by buying up this Clipped Money since the Ordinance 1647. at the least twenty times over, and venting it for currant again (which had been help∣ed, if there had been but six words put into the Ordinance (which was, to have required all persons exchanging any Clipt or uncurrant English money with any Gold-smith or others, upon for∣feiture of double the value, to see it cut in two peices, or so defaced, that it should not be passable after.) I hum∣bly present this defect of that Ordi∣nance, that it may be looked after and amended, and I humbly desire, that the Act against Transporting Treasure now committed, may be enacted with such vigour, that the Common-wealth may have the reall benefit, and the offenders brought to exemplarie Justice. There hath been twenty Millions of Money Coyned within this twenty five years, as will appear by the Mint-Books, and almost all of it Transported out of the
Nation, the Gold all gone, the currant silver culled out, the weightiest melted and transported: and that Silver-Mo∣neys which remains, is but little, and all culled Gold is made as pretious in this Common-wealth as Diamonds. What inconveniences will arise by the indirect dealing of private men in this particular to the Common-wealth, I shall humbly leave it to you to consider. In the year 1643. It was humbly offered to this Parliament, to have the offendours discovered, and to bring them to Justice, and this mischief stopped; but by the great Interest of the offendours, that had then power in this Nation, the Proposition was slight∣ed, and these mischiefs ever since day∣ly practised, to the unspeakable dam∣mage of this Common-wealth: for it is far easier to keep the Treasure in the Nation by making strict Laws against Transportation, than when it is gon to bring it back, as too late experience will make this Common-wealth feel: but you have the power to call these offendours to a strict account, if you pass the Act fully to enable all people to make their discoveries, how, and i what manner other Nations do punis these offendours: you have already pre¦sented
out of their Placcaets, This evil is grown to such a height, that both our own Laws put in the strictest execution, and the Customs and Laws of other Countries added to them for this particu∣lar, with the greatest diligence of expert men, to make the search for what is past, and to prevent these mischiefs for the time to come, will be little enough: and to make this discovery is a service of more Importance to the Common-wealth, than at first sight can be apprehended. This is a certain rule, no great acti∣on in any Common-wealth or State can be done but by Money, which all ages have held to be the Sinews of War, and Garland of Peace; and what occasions we have to use it both for commerce and safety, is humbly left to you to consider; and in all well re∣gulated States it hath ever been ac∣counted a great service to discover the offendours and abuses practised upon the Treasure of their Nation: and to prevent the growth of these mischiefs is the work of every faithfull lover of his Countrey; And he or they that shall be against the discovery of these offences and offendours, may amongst judicious men be justly suspected to be Parties themselves.
And though some Merchants and other Interested Persons (may for their own Interest, either for their profit (or fear of Punishment for what they have done) speak themselves, or get others to oppose the Act against Transporting Treasure to pass the House, or procure it to be so altered, as it shall not be effectuall to give a full cure to the Common-wealth of the great inconveniences it is now under, by severall abuses practised upon Coyn and Bullion. To give a cure to the Common-wealth of these great inconveniences, and also to take away the great ob∣structions of your Mint, which will never be done till this Act pass; and if it were more stricter, it would be more beneficial to the Common-wealth, especially in these times, when you have so many occasions of Money, by bringing in presently very great sums of Money to the State by the punish∣ment of the offendours. You have here, with all humility, set down to you, the ways and means where∣by your neighbour-Countreys use to pre∣vent these mischiefs, and to punish the offendours for what is past, with several old Statutes of this Nation: out of which
if you extract the quintessence, and make a sharp and vigorous Law, and require all your Officers and others to put it in full execution, you may in a short time cure this Common-wealth of these dangerous diseases, which if you let it go on, will prove a Gangrene. I humbly beseech you to take no∣tice, there hath been within seven years Coyned in ten days, more mo∣ney in the Tower of London, than hath been Coyned near upon this three last years: now if you suffer Treasure to go out of the Nation every day for want of a Law, to give all people power to discover and examine the offendours, in a short time you will not have any money left in the Common-wealth; (for experience in all ages shew, that little and slight penalties can never stop some Merchants from their profit) so they get to their private, they care not what mischiefs the Common-wealth suffers: (for a Common-wealth without plenty of money, looks like a great House unfurnisht, and bare Walls is no handsome sight) and you will find there will not be money left to pay your just Taxes, Customs and Excise, and to main∣tain Trade and commerce, if you clear not the obstruction of the Mint, and take
some effectual course to set i no work: & this Act is but a preparation and ground∣work to cause your Mint to go: and till t pass, you will never see your Mint flou∣rish: for to allow any man to out-give the Mint for Bullion, is, to shut up the Mint, for all men will vent their Trea∣sure, where they can have the greatest price, & not to make a way for the open∣ing of the Mint at this time, especially when you have such occasions of Mo∣nie. I shall humbly leave it to you to consi∣der the inconvenience; The Gold-Smiths when they were before the Honourable Committee, by their Councellour Mr. Recorder, and Mr. Vinstanly, being demanded by the Commitee, what they could say why an Act should not pass for disco∣very of such as had Transported the Coyn and Bullion of the Nation? did by their Councel, and by Sir John Wolla∣ston, Alderman Viner, and the rest, de∣clare their willingness to have the offen∣dours brought to punishment: The like they did for all such as Culled, or mel∣ted down the Currant coyn of this Na∣tion for their own private profit, or such as bought up the light Clipped English Money, decryed by an Ordi∣nance
of Parliament the 6. of Sept. 1647. and did not deface it, but contrary to this Ordinance, did vent it again into several parts of the Na∣tion, and pay it away to the deceit of all the people of the Nation. Upon this answer to the Committee, it puts me in mind of a custom, which is usu∣all in all mens houses, If Glasses be broke, or any other mischief done, No-bo∣dy did it: But upon a Commission of enquirie, many times it is found to be Some-body. But to the question that was asked, the Gold-Smiths by the Ho∣nourable Committee, cōcerning buying Gold and Silver above the price of the Mint, they pleaded, The trade was an ancient Trade, that if they were re∣strained to a Price, they, and their Fami∣lies could not subsist, that they could not buy Silver, but some time the market was ot 5s. 1d. 5s. 2d. and 5s. 3d. and Sir John Wollaston said, That he, and divers others, had given 5s. 4d. nay, 5s. 5d, for Sterling-Silver for their trade, and for confirmation of the truth of this, he did appeal to his Bretheren, Alderman Viner, and Alderman Nowel, and the rest of the Gold-Smiths at the Committee, and none of them did denie it Now I shall humbly offer to your considerati∣on;
First Sterling-Silver will make but 5s. in the Mint, and it is delivered out of the Mint, after it is Coyned, at 5s. 2d. the Ounce. If the Gold-Smiths give 5s. 5d. for this Sterling-Silver, how can any be brought into the Mint? nay, how is all the heavy Mo∣ney Culled and melted down, and none left to pass but Light and Clip∣ped? And this is the true ground why many Gold-Smiths are Cashers to Merchants, and keep servants to re∣ceive mens Monies, without any re∣ward, onely that they might cull, and weigh out the heavy silver, and Melt it or Transport it beyond the Seas, for their own private gain, to the high de∣ceit of the Nation. There is nothing in this Act doth restrain the due and orderly Trade of a Gold-Smith, when it is well weighed and considered. But that which is their usual Trade, now discovered to be so highly destructive to the Nation, ought to be restrained. The Bakers may as well Petition against all pillo∣ries, or against my Lord Major, for weighing their Bread, as the Gold-Smiths justly except against the re∣straining them, for giving for Gold & Silver, above the price of the Mint.
They see it, that it is the Law o the Land, in the 5. and 6. Ed. 6. c. 13▪ It is the daily practise of France, Hol¦land, Flanders, as appears here by their Laws. Clothing is the Staple of the Land, and ought most to be cherished; yet the Law propounds for the Regu∣lating of the weight, the length, and breadth. Brick-makers, Woodmongers, Meal-men, and divers other Trades, are restrained and regulated, and yet all these Trades receive protection and countenance in their orderly working of their Manufactures, from the Com∣mon-wealth. There are people which believe, That if there had been a real intenti∣on to give a stop to the Transporting of Money, it had been done before; though for my part, I am not of that o∣pinion: There was (say they) notice of it nine years agoe when the Presbyterie had the power: And seven years ago, the grievances of the Transporting of Gold and Silver, with several other a∣buses, was by me at large presented to the Parliament, and the same mischiefs foretold, which is now come to pass; that without it were looked after, and a strict Law made against it, to discover the Offendours, there would not be a∣ny
Gold or Silver left in the Nation. And this hath prooved too true, for many millions of Gold and Silver have since been Transported, to the un∣speakable dammage of the Common-wealth. And upon seizure of several great quantities of Gold and Silver, by Mr. Watkins, chief Searcher of the Port of London, which was shipped to be trans∣ported; the Order of the Parliament, the 1. of Septemb. 1647. was made to the Committee of the Navy, to see to prevent it. After all these Certificates made by the Officers of the Mint and Customs, and the Committee of the Navy, for the speedy putting so good a work in execution, all which, I have hereafter set down. The Councel of State was pleased to make a Committee of themselves; and after many great and serious con∣sultations, drew up the draft of an Act of Parliament, with their desire to the Parliament to have it pass with all ex∣pedition, for the Service of the Com∣mon-wealth. There are others, more unhappy, which say, Now the Steed is stoln, shut the stable door: Now there is no more
Gold left to Transport, to what pur∣pose doth the Parliament make an Act against Transporting Gold? this should have been done before, for how can we maintain Commerce, pay Taxes, when our English Gold is fourty times more plentifull beyond the Seas, than it is in England, and almost all the Sil∣ver Coyn of the Nation Transported, and scarse any left, but Clipped, and light money. And some people are so Impudent to believe, that there are some Mem∣bers of Parliament guilty of trans∣porting money, or else this Act should not have stuck so long upon their hands. Others there are, that have Trans∣ported money, and committed many abuses upon the Coyns of the Nation, that hope they shall have their par∣dons for what is past, though they have Transported almost all the Gold and Silver of the Nation, that now if they would, they can offend no more; and they have done the Com∣mon-wealth that dammage, that a Mil∣lion of Money cannot give them satis∣faction. These I humbly conceive, ought to be made restore their unjust gain, which will deter any others
hereafter for doing the like. And there are that say, Look how al∣most all men have sped that have certi∣fied against Transporting money, or look't to stop the same. Hath not Sir Robert Harlow, and M. Cogan been put out of their places in the Mint? Hath not M. Walkins, M. Tomes, Sir Thomas Daws, and M. Holloway been put out of their places in the Custom-house? Were not you Thomas Violet Impri∣soned in the Tower four years, because you should not tell the truth, and let the Common-wealth know for all that time, most of their Money and Trea∣sure was sending out of the Na∣tion. I shall add something more to this. I have observed what the State hath gotten by putting out these men; and I found, First, That upon the putting forth of the old Officers of the Mint, in M. Swallows place, who was the Clark of the Irons, and Surveyer of the Melting-house for the Mint; a place of great skill and trust, there is now a Clark put in, to execute that place, that can neither write nor read; and other Officers put into the places of the old ones in the Mint, that were ut∣terly ignorant of the Mysteries of man∣aging
that Office: And one of the greatest Obstructions of the Mint, comes through the ignorance of the Officers, and their want of correspon∣dence and acquaintance with such as usualy have brought money from be∣yond the Seas. The old Officers of the Mint, were masters in this Mystery, which is not so soon learned as men think. And for some of those that have been turned out of their places out of the Custom-house, if the Act were passed for the Committee of Trade, there would quickly be presented the practises of some of the Officers of the Customs, and Petitions for a redress of many a∣busess practised by some of them, and a Review Petitioned for, to know up∣on what grounds many of the old Offi∣cers were turned out of their places, being never charged with any offence, but onely forced out to make way for others to come into their places; some of the old Officers of the Customs be∣ing turned out of their places, onely because of their activity in stopping the Gold and Silver of the Nation for being Transported; and this is M. Edward Watkins his case, and others put into his Office, that seizes Gold
and Silver before it is forseited, and when the Merchant recovers it again by Law, the Searcher that made the seizure takes the Kinsg-Bench, and so the Merchant may go seek his Money, to the great dammage of the Mer∣chant. But according to former Presidents, all Officers of the Customs, were to put in security for the just performance of their trust to the State, and no Offi∣cer was to receive the Customs, and Moneys of the Common-wealth in any Port of this Nation; nor to make any seizure before he had put in security to the Lord Treasurer, to make a true Account of what moneys and goods comes to their hands, which I (having more thā probable reasons) do believe the Collectours, & other Officers of the Ports, have not done, to the great dammage of the Common-wealth, and prejudice of the Merchants. If seizures be unjustly made, and the Merchants recover their goods or moneys by a Verdict at Law, & after all their charge and hazzard; not to have their goods and moneys again. This discovery I have put in for the service of the Com∣mon-wealth, it being a cause judged in the Checquer this last Tearm, that
for the future such abuses of the new Officers of the Customs might be prevented. I have to some men replied this Act; it hath been delayed by the Parliament, onely by the multitude of other business, though I must confess there are very few businesses of the Commonwealth can take place before this, but that all people should see when the Parliaments busines was a little over, how zealous in deeds (and not in words) they would be, for to punish these great Offendours, and to make them pay back the unjust gain, which moneys should be imployed for the publick, and so save the Nation Taxes: that I was confident there was not any Member in the Parlia∣ment was guilty of Transporting money, or if there were, they durst not be seen to justifie so wicked an Act, but would be glad to be quiet in a whole skin; and truly If I did know any of them, I would not med∣dle with them, without the Act did po∣sitively injoyn me to do it. It hath been objected to me, by some Gold-Smiths and others; That I my self have been a trāsporter of money, and melter down of heavy Coyn of the
Nation, and a furnisher of Gold and Silver to transport out of this Nation, and a buyer of Gold and Silver above the price of the Mint. I deny it not, and my Answer to them is, An old Deer-stealer is the best keeper of a Park. And though I had the late Kings par∣don, I had it not but it cost me dear; I paid at one time to his Pri∣vy Purse, two thousand twenty shil∣lings pieces in Gold, and I am out at this day by his command, in making the discovery of such as Trans∣ported Gold, ninteen hundred and threescore pounds, both which sums, I have been out of Purse fifteen years: I would not have the greatest Offendour (that is a Gold-Smith) by my consent, pay so great a sum. And this is my Answer to them, to that objection. I would have them by my exam∣ple leave off so destructive a Trade to the Common-wealth, as furnishing the Transporters with Gold and Silver, Culling and melting down the currant Coyn. If I had not been convinced in my conscience, that it was bad, I would have followed that Trade still, I had as good an Estate, as most of the Gold-Smiths to do it. I had as
good Credit, and I left my Trade as fairly, for I challenge all or any man in London, that can say I did not pay all men ready money to every penny and farthing I ought, when I gave over my Trade, and the best Alderman of London can do no more; It is inci∣dent to all men to Erre, happy is he that repents, but to persist against the light of a mans Conscience, is done by the strong Instigation of the Divel. I do humbly present further, that their hath great mischiefs happened to this Nation and their Army in Ireland since this Parliament, by the Indirect dealing of some Merchants and Gold-smiths in London, who contracted with some of the adventurers for Ireland, to sell them Rials of Eight and forraign Coyns, giving them some small time, but the poor Souldiers that received these moneys in Ireland, lost above twenty pound in the hundred by the moneys so paid them; for first the Gold-smiths culled out all the weighti∣est, and delivered none but Light and Clipped, and than the coursness of the Silver which was Bead money, and adulterated in the West Indies in the Mints, sometimes sixpence, sometimes
more upon every piece of Eight, as is well known to some Gold-smiths and Merchants, so that by the baseness of the Allay & want of Weight, their hath been at the least twenty pound in the hundered loss to the Souldiers: If he would make any return of it to his wife or children in England, as many of them found by sad experience. The Gold-smiths are the general Cashiers for some of the Principal Merchants in the Citie, and this rule the Gold-smiths observe when they receive moneys, to take none that is Bad or Clipped (but let any man send to them to receive moneys, they shall have great quantities of Clipped mo∣ney mixed in their moneys they re∣ceive, and some of it constantly will escape the tellers eys) which Clipped moneys the Gold-smiths buy of seve∣ral people for Bullion, but never Coyn it, the rest that they cannot put off here in London, they have their Agents vent it to Grasiers and other people in the Countrey all over the Nation, by which means in many Towns and Ci∣ties of this Nation, they are so pestered with Clipped money, that their is little else stirring in payment, to the un-unspeakable dammage of the receiver,
who cannot pay it in London, but sell it to the Gold-smiths, sometimes at twenty five and thirty in the hundered abated: which is by the Gold-smiths returned down into the Countrey next week after; So that this abuse is like a Horse in a Mill it turns round and is a cheat put upon all people of the Na∣tion, and without a strict Act of Parlia∣ment against it, will not be pre∣vented. All these abuses aforesaid, are so high and Transcendent (that the of∣fendours ought to be used as men usually use Wolves and Foxes) for if private Murther be so penall) much more is publick Murther (now money is the Life, Bloud, and Soul of the Common-wealth, without it no great action can be undertaken) for the service of the Nation) and those that Transport it or adulterate it in Weight, may well be esteemed as the greatest enemies to the Common-wealth, therefore that you would be pleased to give all encouragement to all people, both in the Sea-ports of this Nation, and in the Citie of London, for the discovery of the Transporting of Gold and Silver, and such as cull out the heavy Silver Coyn of the Na∣tion,
and such as have bought Gold and Silver above the price of the Mint for to Transport: for as the affairs now of this Nation stand, you cannot have a greater disservice done to the Com∣monwealth, and you will find the Commissioners and Officers of the Cu∣stoms, certifie to the Commissioners of the Navy in Sept. 1647. their desires in their fourth Article, that a greater allowance should be given to such as discover the Transporters of Gold or Silver, than by the Statutes in that Case is provided, and the Statute in 1. Henry 8. cap. 13. gives double the value, the one half to him that shall seize it, or therefore Sue by action of Debt at the Common-Law, and by this draught of the Act, their is but one Moyetie of what shall be proved to have been Transported given to the Prosecutour. What forraign Nations do, you have here the Presidents of France, Holland, Flanders, and what former ages here in this Nation have done, you have in 14. Rich. 2. cap. 12. by Act of Parliament Commissions made through the Realm, for to enquire from the beginning of his Reign, which was for fourteen years, of such as had con∣veyed
the money of England out of the Nation, to the dammage of the Realm: and without you make the like Com∣missions, the Common-wealth will be brought to extream poverty. Here are annexed two Certificates of the Officers of the Mint, and Com∣missioners and Officers for the Customs, grounded upon an Order of Parlia∣ment, and an Order of the Commissio∣ners of the Navy, viz. Die Mercurii, 1. Sept. 1647. ORdered by the Commons in Par∣liament assembled, That it be re∣ferred to the Committee of the Navy to consider of, and take some effectu∣all course to prevent the Transportati∣on of Bullion out of the Kingdom: and speedily to report what they have done herein to the House. H. ELSYNG, Cler. Parl. Committee of the Navie 2. September, 1647. THe Commissioners and Officers of the Customs with Master Watkins the head Searcher, are desired to con∣sider
of some course to be taken to pre∣vent the Transportation of Bullion out of the Nation, according to an Or∣der of the House of Commons hereun∣to annexed; and to certifie the same to the Committee. Giles Green. THe Commissioners and Officers for the Customs, having together with the head Searcher, in the Port of London, in pursuance of the directions of this Honourable Committee above mentioned, perused sundry Statutes yet in force, relating, as well to the restraint of the Exportation of Bulli∣on, as the Regulation of Merchants-Strangers in their way of Trade, do humbly conceive. 1 That if the Statute of 2. Hen. 6. cap. 6. enjoyning Merchants-Strangers, to give security in Chancery, not to Transport the Money or Plate of the Realm. And the Statute of 3. Hen. 7. cap. 8. enjoyning them to employ the money they receive, in the Merchan∣dize of this Nation. 2 And that to the Statute of 5. Rich. 2. cap. 2. and 2. Hen. 4. cap. 5. The Parliament would be pleased, First to declare who shall be reputed Aliens:
for that since the sitting of this Parlia∣ment, the Children of Aliens born in this Kingdom, are reputed Free-born Subjects, and do enjoy their Privi∣ledges accordingly: which in former times was not allowed till the third descent. Secondly, To declare by Or∣dinance that the Estates of him or them that shall Export money or Plate, shall be immediately Seque∣stered. 3 To impose a severe Penalty upon the Master of such Ship or Vessel, up∣on which any money or Plate shall be found above his ordinary charges, he being privy thereunto. 4 To allow to such as shall discover or find out, any Bullion or Plate, en∣deavoured to be Transported, a greater share and proportion, than by the Statutes in that case is yet provided. 5 And to settle some way of punish∣ment for such as shall resist, or abuse Officers sufficiently Authorized in their endeavours this way on the States behalf. The said Commissioners and Offi∣cers, do humbly conceive, That it would be a good means to deter such, who by all secret means do dayly en∣deavour the Exportation of the Coyn
and Bullion of this Kingdom; and much prevent the Exportation thereof. All which, nevertheless they humbly sub∣mit to the Wisdom of this Honourable Committee. Tho. Dawes Coll. John Holloway Comptr. R. Carmarden Super. Vis. Edw. Watkins Searcher. W. Toomes Super. Vis. Gen. Walter Boothby. Rich. Bateman. Sam. Avery. Christoph. Pack. Charles Lloyd.
The Officers of the Mint in the ower of London, whose names are here under written, in pursuance of the directions of the Honoura∣ble Committee of the Navy, in relation to their Order dated the 3. of De∣cember present, do humbly conceive, and certifie as followeth. THat to prevent great abuses pra∣ctised upon the Coyn and Bullion of the Nation, which is Transported out of the Nation; as also to prevent the Culling and Melting down the currant money of the Nation: and for the discovering of such a have of∣fended to be brought to justice, to deer others from ating the live abues for the futur, do humbly c¦ceive. That according to the President
the 14. Rich. 2. cap. 12. a Commission be granted to make enquirie through the Realm, of such as had conveyed the moneys of England out of the Na∣tion, and to make enquirie after all such as Melt, and Cull out the heavy currant money, contrary to the Statute of the 4. Hen. 4. cap. 10. none to Melt the currant Silver Coyns of the Nati∣on, upon pain of forfeiture four times the value. That 2. Hen. 6. cap 12. It is ordain∣ed, that neither the Master-Worker of the Mint, nor the Changer for the time being, neither sell or cause to be sold, nor Alien to no other use; but apply the same wholly to Coyn, ac∣cording to the tenure of the Inden∣ture of the Mint, made between the Kings Majesty and the Master of the Mint: to declare by Ordinance, That what Gold-smith, or Changer shall buy Gold or Silver, and convert it to any use to Transport, shall forfeit the value. To declare by Ordinance, that ac∣cording to the 5. and 6. Edw. 6. cap. 19. an Act touching the Exchange of Gold and Silver. That whosoever gives more for Gold and Silver than it is, or shall be declared, shall suffer Imprisonment
by the space of a year, and make Fine at the pleasure of the State. The Mint cannot be employed, nor the Tran∣sporting of Treasure stopped, if some course be not speedily taken to disco∣ver these great abuses. And already, almost all the Gold is Transported out of the Nation: and the Silver follow∣eth it apace, as is prudently insisted upon in the late Petition of the Citi∣zens of London, to both Houses of Parliament. We humbly conceive, that the making of this discovery through∣out the Nation, of such as have, or shall Transport Gold and Silver into parts beyond the Seas, and of such as have, or shall Melt down the cur∣rant Gold and Silver Coyns of the Nation, o have, or shall buy Gold and Silver a aove the pice o the Mint: the practise of which al uses, if not timely prevented,  likely to bring peedie destrctio to the Trade of this Kigdom▪ which is Preidented Anno 4. . 2.  2. when the Nation found the same mischief as we now suffer under, by Transporting of Treasure. And Ano 5. and 6. Edw. 6. cap. 19. by giving for Gold and Silver above
the price of the Mint. As it will be a service of great importance to the Publick affairs, and bring great ad∣vantage to the Trade of this Nati∣on; so it will draw with it a very great charge. Which if Master Watkins will undertake, he will de∣serve well to be encouraged. Ne∣vertheless, we humbly submit the premises, to the Wisdoms of this Honourable Committee. John St John Warden. Robert Harley Master. Henry Cogan Comptr. December 20. 1647. THese Gentlemen by reason of their places in the custom-house, and Mint within the Tower of London, and their long experience in Merchandize and Trade of this Nation; I humbly conceive their Certificates will leave a great Impression upon the Parliament, and on the Honourable Committee that are appointed to report this Act, that what these Gentlemen have certi∣fied, hath been done upon a great deal of consideration, and upon great ex∣perience, with all their best skill and judgement for the service of this Nati¦on
in this most weighty Business, it tending so highly to the safety and welfare of the publick (and the delay of passing this Act in its full force and vigour) will one day be found to be highly destructive to this Nation and that the design hath been set a foot, and prosecuted to hinder the Act for passing, is done by some people that have made themselves fortunes by these wicked practises, and though they dare not speak against the Act, yet they labour to stop it and delay it, or to procure the altering of it that it may be uneffectual, to give a stop these mischiess which I hope they shall never be able to effect; I would have these men to know Justice is slow, but it is sure, and I am assured they will be discovered and brought to Justice when they least think of it, forbear∣ance will be no payment, and this Act will bring their dark actions to light when it is passed the House: Besides these former Certificates, the Act now committed was drawn up by a Com∣mittee of the Councell of State, and I was required to attend the Right Ho∣nourable St James Harrington in Ja∣nuary last, being on of the Committee for taking away the obstructions of the
Mint, which I did accordingly, and thereupon by Order of the Honourable Committee, for removing of the ob∣structions of the Mint, I was desired to send into Holland for several Coyns of forraign Gold and Silver, and se∣veral Placcaets and Weights, and some of the said Gold and Silver I have delivered to Doctour Gurden to make Assayes of, for the service of the State, the remainder I have ready to deliver to any, that will see me paid upon the delivery, I having demanded money of Doctour Gurden divers times, who ls me, he will procure money, but hath not as yet paid me for what I de∣livered him: and if I should not be paid for the Gold and Silver I writ for from Holland, the same price as by my friend I paid for it in the Bank in Hol∣land, their would be a great loss re∣dound to me to Coyn it here (and lose the Exchange; The Exchange from Holland, when I writ for these Species, running at about thirty two shillings Flemish. I do humbly desire the Honourable Committee for obstructions of the Mint, to call to the old Clarks of the Mint for an acompt of what they have done about the Assayes made of
forraign Coyns, and I humbly desire you to consider, how much it were for the service of the Nation, both in point of Honour, Profit, and safety to set your Mint on work. Which upon the peril of my life, if you pass the Act as it is recommend∣ed from the Councel of State, I will find out wayes to set your Mint pre∣sently agoing, or lose both my Estate and Life: I would not make this pro∣fer but that I am sure of it, it is well known to all the Officers of the Mint, I know as much of Mint business as a∣ny of them here do, and for the Gold-smiths I am sure they think I know to much: and the Merchants have found it, that I know what many did and do here, and what their Factours did and do beyond Seas, and to be Master of this secret, cost me many a hundred pound, besides many years time and pains, and by my intelligence in the Sea-ports of this Nation, I have caused the Transporters of money to be Fined at four and twenty thousand one hun∣dred pound, and now as I have laid this business, they shall be discovered all over this Nation, if I should offer this, and could do the like service in any other State, I humbly conceive
I need not petition twice, but it would be accepted at the first time, and the delay of passing this Act moves me not at all for my own particular, but for the Common-wealth. I shall never forget Sir John Coke his rule to me, and hee was Secretarie of State to the late KING, That he never knew a patient, and a vigilant man lose his business, if it were just, for at one time or another, that man will find an opportunity to do it; and truly, by ob∣serving this rule, I have passed through great business, and some, of much dif∣ficulty; for all which I humbly thank God, and attribute it to his mercie. There is another cause of great wast of the Treasure of the Nation, which is the great quantity of Flanders Laces, and French Laces, both in the Thread, and in Silk, which are imported into this Nation, to the value of many scores of thousand pounds a year, which Lace is stole in without paying any Custom, being subtilly packed in Commodities of great Bulk. But what the State loses by the Cu∣stom, is nothing in Comparison, what it looses in stock: for the Returns of this Lace is for the most part sent over in Gold and Silver of the currant
Coyns of this Nation. Neither is this Mischief all the hurt that cometh to the Commō-wealth, for this Lace is made by them in France and Flanders, that can afford it far cheaper than any of our poor can do here; for generally it is made in Re∣ligious houses, in their Nunneries, which Nuns generally bring in to the Religious houses their Dowries when they are admitted, and as long as they live, they are well provided for all manner of necessaries to live very handsomly, both for their dyet and apparrel, being left to their voluntarie choise after their Religious Exercises is done, to spend their time as they please. Now many of them being excellent Needle-women, spend their time in making Cut-works for their Altar-Cloths, Black Laces for Scarffs, and Flanders Laces (as they are called) though many of them are made in France. These the Nuns make, and sell great quantities of them into England, which money, is all Returned into the use of the Monasteries, these Nuns thinking they merit most, that can get their Monasteries most money by their labour.
And truly when I have been in company of some fine Dames in Lon∣don, that profess much; I have told them of their Laces and Gorgets, that if they did know whom they made rich by such vanities, they would lay by the fashion, and give that money they spent in Flanders Laces to the poor, and not be instruments of making Nuns & Monasteries rich beyond Seas; and I have desired them to think how contrary their work was to their Hus∣bands: their Husbands are destroying Bishops Houses and Lands, and Deans and Chapters houses, and Lands here in England, being Reliques of Popery, and their Wives by buying up of the Nuns Laces in England, with the Returns of that Money, which they produce here, are a building Nunneries, and Religious Houses in France and Flan∣ders. I humbly desire all the English Gen∣try, that are wearers of Lace, both men and Women to consider seriously what I say: it is of concernment. I take God to witness, I have heard French-men, and Dutch-men say to me, above twelve years ago, that have dealt in Cut-work Laces, and in Flan∣ders Laces, both black and white here
in London, that they did believe there was above five hundred thousand pounds in a year Transported in Gold and Silver into France and Flanders, onely in Return of Forreign Cut-works, and Flanders Laces, both Black and white; and I believe in my conscience they spoke truth; and to this day there is extream excesses in these vanities, which as your affairs of the Common-wealth stand, highly concern you to look to prevent it, for I humbly desire you to consider, the Nation flings away so much stock in money; for Flanders Lace is of no use but to keep up pride and vanities; Gold and Silver Lace makes somthing upon the Return, one hundred pounds worth may make about fourty pounds when you have done wearing of it: But for thred and Silk Laces, that which cost one hundred thousand pound, when they are worn out, will not make the Common-wealth one penny. I do humbly desire you to consider of a strict Law against importing any forreign Laces, or selling them in Lon∣don; the forfeiture of the Laces is nothing, for that it will not be disco∣vered, once in one thousand times. But
I humbly conceive, it must be made Felonie for any to Import Flanders, French, or forreign Laces or Cut-works, and loss of any Shop-keepers Estate that shall knowingly sell any forreign Laces, either Flanders, or any o∣ther. By which means you will prevent the Transporting many hundred thou∣sand pounds of Treasure in a year, and you will stop the Trade of making Nunneries Rich by our money: And if the Gentry will wear Laces, let them on Gods name put our own poor on work, and not forreigners; and by this means, you will give relief to many poor Gentelwomen, which through the calamities of the War are almost starved, and they are ashamed to beg, and they would be glad to make Lace, if any would employ them. There is also a great and excessive waste of the Gold of this Nation, in the vanity of guilding of Charoches, which is come to that extravagancie, that if a Bainian of the East-Indies, or a Chinoes of China, or any other strange Nati∣on should come to Hide-Park in an af∣ter-noon, he would report in his own Countrey such stories, as your Jesuits reporteth of Perue, and Mexico, upon
the first discoverie of the West-Indies; That there were towns that all the houses were covered over with Gold and Sil∣ver: So would an Indian report the Gentry's Wealth of this Nation; That they were drawn through the streets of this Citie of London in Charoches co∣vered over with beaten Gold. But I shall tell you what a French-Merchant said to me this Sommer in Hide-Park, as we were talking of the great quantities of English Gold, which hath been Transported into France and Flanders, and other forreign parts; Saith the French-Merchant to me, I have heard you often complain of all the English Gold, being transported beyond the Seas, and now we are again speaking of it, I will demonstrate to you presently, that all is not gone, for you see how many guilded Charoches here are, then laugh∣ing, he told me, you see Sir, how you are mistaken, all your Gold is not gone, but if you had said, almost all the English Gold is transported beyond the Seas, that I would have granted you, for you have the shell of the Gold to guild your Charoches, and to make you fine things, but we in France have the kernel of your Gold, and thus much I grant you. But we in France, and Holland, and Flan∣ders
have not all, we are more conscio∣nable, good Monseur Violet. I was forced to bite my lip, for I could not deny but that he spake truth. There is another great wast of Gold and Silver in this Common-wealth, and that is, the making of Gold and Silver Thread and Lace with∣in this Nation: there are some things may be said for it, and some things against it; I shall impartially put down some things what I know in this business, for I had the principal care of regulating that Manufacture of Gold and Silver Wyer and Thread, for five years together in the late Kings time, and paid him about four thou∣sand pounds yearly for it, and now it is under the regulation of the Commis∣sioners of Excise, and I am confident doth not make the tenth penny to the State, as I paid to the late King; be∣sides I was enjoyned to look to the just standard of the Silver, and to the substantial making of the Manufacture, which now is totally neglected, and the Common-wealth cheated in the courseness of much of the Silver, and in the sleight making of it. If the Manufacture of the Gold and Silver Thread, was brought in from
beyond the Seas, then would the State have the Custom, there being a great Impost and Custom laid on it, which would be a considerablederable Reve∣nue to the Common-wealth. The Common-wealth in the stock of their Treasure would be augmented, for all Gold and Silver Thread makes a Re∣turn to the melting pot, and so in∣creases the stock of money in the Na∣tion; besides, that is an advantagious Trade, which for the Returns of our Commodities and Manufactures of England brings us Returns in Silver. There is replied to this, the setting so many thousands of poor people on work, which will starve if the Manufa∣ctures of Gold and Silver Thread, were brought in from beyond the Seas, or if the State should prohibit the wear∣ing of Gold and Silver Thread and Lace. Indeed this is of great consi∣deration, and ought to be considered on. But then if they will have leave to make it here, it should be done with such restraints and limitations, as the Treasure of the Nation should not be wasted nor impared, the Currant money of the Nation should not be culled out to make Gold and Silver Thread, as many hundreds of thou∣sand
pounds have bin since the making of this manufacture, which was but begun to be a Trade in London within less than fourty years; also there should be a restriction of the number of the workers, not to increase as they have done, and the Wyer-drawers should be a distinct Corporation, and Officers appointed to look after their due and Orderly working, and an account kept for the State, of what Silver and Gold is spent every year in the Manufacture, and the Companie of Gold Wyre-drawers enjoyned to bring in the va∣lue in Bullion from beyond the Seas, as they wast in this Manufacture; for without doing of this, the Trade is wholly destructive to the Common-wealth, and there can be no just plea, for to allow their Trade to conti∣nue. I humbly conceive the Common-wealth is not in a condition to suffer fifty thousand pounds a year in Silver, to be brushed and blown away out of Gold and Silver Lace: If those that work the Manufacture will not See to Import Silver from beyond the Seas, and be bound not to work Silver with a Core of Copper, and sell it for good Silver, for which cheat I have caused
some of them to stand in the pillory, when I had the mannaging of that ma∣nufacture; and also that the Wyre-drawers be bound, not to make any Spangles, Wyre or Thread, under ster∣ling, which heretofore hath been their daily practise, and I believe is conti∣nued still. M. Jackson the Assay-master of Gold-smiths Hall, by direction of the Lords of the Councel, made many score of Assays of Gold and Silver Spangles, Lace, Wyre, and Thread found and taken in Silk-mens shops, which were adulterated, and under the Standard, and this Manufacture will never be justy made, if there be not a government setled by a Corporation, and then the Trade might be so man∣naged by their contracting for Bullion from beyond the Seas, that they may get a great Manufacture here; but I humbly desire the Trade may be dri∣ven with forreign Silver, imported, and not with the Stock, or Coyn of the Na∣tion. I do humbly declare unto you, that being required to attend the Commit∣tee of the Councel of State, about the Act now presented to the Parliament, I did see, and was privie upon what
grave consideration every branch of the Act now depending before the Honourable Committee, was framed and put down by the Committee of the Councel of State, before ever it was recommended to the Parliament; and I do humbly desire for the Service of the Common-wealth, if any altera∣tions be made in the Act, those that drew the draught of the Act, may be required to attend the Committee to give their reasons for the whole Act, or any part of it; for upon the effectual passing of this Act, much doth depend for the safety of this Nation, and it is of a higher concernment to the Nation than I can express; and I humbly con∣ceive, there ought to be no respect of private interest, where the safety of the Nation is so highly concerned. I humbly desire the Honourable Committee, that the Certificate of the Officers of the Mint may be taken into your serious considerations, there being very few men in the Nati∣on, can speak so much upon their own experience of these abuses concern∣ing the Treasure of the Nation, as these Gentlemen, the Officers of the Mint have certified, which ever since their Certificate, hath been found in
every part to be true. The Mint standing still & neglect∣ed, the Treasure that hath been Im∣ported, was never brought into the Mint, but Exported out again; by which means for the private gain of a few men, the Nation is ruined and Im∣poverished, and a Trade Inwards, and Outwards driven without paying of Custom, and the Stock of Treasure of the Nation almost all Exported in these times, now there is so much oc∣casion for money, to the admiration and astonishment of many lovers of the Common-wealth, that truly un∣derstand the secrets and Mysteries of Trade. And what mischiefs these doings will in the end bring upon this Com∣mon-wealth, is deeply apprehended by many wise men, and can have no stop but by a vigorous Act to bring the Offendours to Examplary Justice, whose Fines and Compositions, throughout the Nation, will amount to many scores of thousands of pounds to the State, for the payment of pub∣lick debts, if Commissions of enquiries according to former presidents be granted by act of Paliament through∣out the Nation, to enquire for the last
ten years of these abuses. If in declaring what hath passed at the Committee, and of other Trans∣actions, be not usual, I shall, and do humbly desire to have my pardon, for if my silence might not have endan∣gered the Common-wealth, this that I have said should never have come to publick view, for I know how to keep Secrets as well as some other men. I have read of one that was born dumb, and so continued for many years, seeing one comming to kill his father, cryed out, Go save my Father, and so gave timely warning for his Fa∣ther to prevent the danger. A happy speaking of the child for the father. Truly I count the Obligation to my Countrey, above the Obligation to my Father. I have seen this danger many years coming upon the Nation. Though I am but young, and Ignorant in other business, I am sure there are few, if any in the Nation, that have had those ways and means to find out, and dis∣cover these mischiefs, as I have. I know and apprehend more, than I
will or can express. The great mischiefs Transporting Gold and Silver, brings on this Nati∣on, I apprehend. The condition of your Army, which must be burthensom, if they have not money to pay for their Quartering, I apprehend the danger and dam∣mage. The necessity of Trades-men, and Handy-Crafts men will be put to for want of imployment, upon the scar∣city of money, making all Trade to decay, I apprehend. The sad condition of poor people, who will be enforced for want, to part with their clothes, their bedding, their dishes they eat their meat in, I apprehend The danger the want and poverty of the poor will bring upon this State, if there be not ways found out to bring in Money into the Nation, I do very sadly and seriously apprehend the inconveniences. And therefore I cry, God save the Common-wealth. God put it into the hearts of the Parliament, to see to keep that little money we have yet left; and to find
out, and punish those that have cheated, and robbed the Common-wealth of their Treasure, and to stu∣die ways how to bring in money into the Nation, for if this be not done speedily, in all probability, greater inconveniences than I dare write, will come on the Common-wealth. Much more I could say, but if these Reasons before recited, nor the Cer∣tificates of the Officers of the Customs, and the Certificate of the Officers of the Mint, and several Reasons of some Aldermen of the Citie of London, for the stopping of the Transporting of Gold and Silver, and the Citie of Lon∣dons Petition to the Parliament, pre∣senting the great inconveniences Transporting Treasure hath brought upon this Citie of London and the Na∣tion; I humbly say, if all these will not prevail, I have doe: For if I should write a Volume as big as Sds Chronicle, I cannot give more clearer satisfaction of the necessitie of passing this Act. If God hath decreed this Nation shall be couzned of all its Treasure, and the Offendours not questioned, nor diligent enquirie made after it, and
such means as our Ancestors and o∣ther Nations (having far less occasion for money than we have) do daily pra∣ctise; to prevent these mischiefs, and discover the Offendours, I shall with all humilitie submit to Gods Provi∣dence, and rest satisfied. I have clearly discharged my duty to my Countrey, in declaring this busi∣ness to the Common-wealth, that so they may know the true Reasons of the scarcity of Gold and Silver in the Nation, and the dammage they su∣stain by the want thereof, and how the Mint comes to be obstructed, that almost no money hath been Coyned for these three last years. What is here said, is with all hu∣mility presented to the Parliament for the service of the Common-wealth, by a faithfull lover of his Countrey, being desired to state my Reasons by some in Authoritie for passing the aforesaid Act, I hum∣bly obeyed it, and humbly con∣ceive (if it were made stricter than it is) it were far better for the Com∣mon-wealth: For Transporting Treasure heretofore hath been made Felonie, when the Common-wealth,
I humbly conceive, had not so much occasion to see to keep their Treasure in the Nation, and their Mint going, as now they have. London, July 15. 1650. Signed, Thomas Violet. FINIS.
