D290 E1917_3 99868795 170564
AN EXACT HISTORY of the several Changes of GOVERNMENT IN England, From the horrid Murther of King CHARLES I. to the happy Restauration of King CHARLES II. WITH The Renowned Actions OF General MONCK. Being the second Part of Florus Anglicus, by J.D. Gent. London, Printed for Simon Miller at the Starre in St Paul's Church-yard, 1660.
ENGLAND'S CONFUSION During its Interregnum.
A General View of the various Governments in England since the Murther of Charles the first, 1. England Govern'd by Oligarchy, from 1648. to 1653. 2. Under Oliver Protector, the grand Ty∣rant, from 1653. to 1658. 3. Under Richard not above seven Moneths. 4. Under Fleetwood, Lambert, Vane, Haselrig, and the Rump of the Long Parliament. Lastly, The Actions of Re∣nowned General Monck, the chiefest Instrument under God of restoring his Sacred Majesty Charles the second to his Crown and Kingdoms.
TO THE READER. Reader, I Doe here present thee with a true, though unparal∣lel'd History of all the several Revolutions of Government in Eng∣land, for the space of twelve
years, since the Martyrdom of our Gracious Sovereigne Charles the First of ever blessed memory, exe∣crably murthered to make way for the Usurpation of ambitious Cromwell; who after some time took the Office of Supreame Magistrate upon himself, and kept it during his Life by Tyranny and Oppression; when summon∣ed by Death, he bequeathed it to his Eldest Sonne Richard,
who either by cowardize or folly, permitted himselfe to be sup∣planted by his neer Relations. When in stead of one Ʋsurper, England groan'd under an Athenian tyranny, and from that to worse, till at last such a horrid, dismal blackness had overcast the whole Kingdom (the Sword being drawn at one blow to cut off Magistracy and Mini∣stry) that it had been utterly destroyed, had not Almighty
God raised up that great, and ever to be Renowned to all poste∣rity General Monck, the chief Instrument appointed by the Great God for the redemption of poor England from bloo∣dy and violent men, by resto∣ring a Free-Parliament (the undoubted birthright of every English man) and hath like∣wise, as in duty bound (by Gods blessing) setled us under the Lawfull and happy Govern∣ment of our dread Sovereign
Lord King Charles the se∣cond, whom God hath so miraculously preserved from the jaws of his blood-thirsty enemies, and reserved him to this present time, that England might once again enjoy her pri∣mitive beauty and lustre; and have her Kings as at the first, and her Coun∣sellours as at the begin∣ning. Since then we are through all these miseries, revolutions and
changes, by Divine Providence restored to a settlement: Let it be the care of every English man, as it is my hearty wish, that we fall no more into those snares, which formerly en∣trapped us, but unani∣mously resolve our selves into a constant Duty and Allegi∣ance to our Sovereigne Lord the King: For thus and thus only can we flourish. J. D.
Courteous Reader, These Books follow∣ing, are printed for Simon Miller, and Sold by him at the Starre in St. Paul's Church-yard. Small Folio. DOctor Lightfoot his Harmony on the New Testament, which will shortly be re-printed with large Additions. The civil Wars of Spain in the Reigne of Charls the fifth, Emperor of Germany, and King of that Nation, wherin our late unhappy differences are paralleled in many particulars. A general History of Scotland, from the year 767 to the death of K James, &c. By David Hume of Godscroft. The History of this I∣ron Age. Mr Paul Baine on the E∣phesians Eighteen Books of the Secrets of Art and Nature, by John Wecker D. in Phys. The Queen of Arragon, a Play: In fol. In Quarto large. Jo. Barklay his Argenis, Translated by Sir Robert le Grise Knight, by his Late Majesties special Command. Quarto Small. An Eperimental Treatise of Surgery, by Felix Wortz. Abraham's Faith, or the good Old Religion, &c. By John Nicholson Minister of the Gospel. The Anatomy of Mor∣tality: By George Stroad. Three Treatises: 1 The Conversion of Nineveh, touching Prayer and Fast∣ing. 2. Gods Trumpet sounding to Repentance. 3. Sovereigne preservatives against distrustful thoughts and cares: By Will. Attersoll Minister of Gods Word at Iefield in Sussex.
Aynsworth on the Cantic. Paul Baine, his Diocesans Trial. Gralle against Appolinius. A Treatise of Civil po∣licy, &c. By Samuel Ruther∣ford Professor of Divinity of St Andrews in Scotland. Politick and Military Observations of Civil and Military Government, containing the Birth, En∣crease, Decay of Monar∣chies, the carriage of Prin∣ces and Magistrates. Mr Pinchin his Merito∣rious price of mans Re∣demption, cleared. Astrology Theologized, shewing what nature and influence the Starres and Planets have over men, and how the same may be di∣verted and avoided. Wells his Souls Progress. Christ tempted, the De¦vils Conquered; Being a plain Exposition on the fourth Chapter of St Mat∣thews Gospel: By John Gumbleden Min. of the Gos. The Saints Society. D. Stoughtons thirteen choice Sermons, with his Body of Divinity. The Reasons of the dis∣senting Brethren concern∣ing the Presbyterian Go∣vernment, together with the answer of the Assembly of Divines. Camdens Remains. The Harmonious Con∣sent and Confession of Faith, &c. The Argument and Con∣fession of Faith, of all the congregational Churches of England agreed upon at the Savoy, 1659. The Description of the Universal Quadrant, &c. By Tho Stirrup Mathem. The whole Art of draw∣ing painting, limning and etching: collected out of the choisest Italian and Germane Authours, by Alex Brown Practitioner. Large Octavo. A Treatise of the Di∣vine Promises: By Edw. Leigh Esq;. Florus Angliens, with the Lively Effigies of all the Kings and Queens, since the conquest, cut in brasse. The Reconciler of the Bible, wherein above two thousand seeming contra∣dictions
are fully and plainly Reconciled. Evidences for Heaven, containing Infallible signs, and real demonstrations for Assurance of Salvation, published by Edm. Calamy. The Life and Reign of King Charls, from his Birth to his Death, by Lambert Wood. The Night-search, the second part: by H. Mill. A view of the Jewish Re∣ligion, with their Rites, Customs and Ceremonies. Usefull Instructions for these Evil times; held forth in 22. Sermons, by Nich. Lockyer, Provost of Eaton Colledge The Nullity of Church-Censures, or Excommu∣nication, not of Divine In∣stitution, but a meer hu∣mane Invention: Written by the famous Tho. Erastus, and never before English∣ed. Small Octavo. Ed. Waterhouse Esq; His Discourse of Piety and Charity. Panacea, or the Uni∣versal Medicine; being a Discourse of the Admira∣ble Nature and Virtues of Tobacco: By Dr. Everard and Others. A view and Defence of the Reformation of the Church of England, very usefull in these times. Mr. Pet. du Moulin, his Antidote against Popery; published on purpose to prevent the Delusions of the Priests and Jesuites who are now very busie among us. Herberts Devotions, or a Companion for a Chri∣stian, containing Medita∣tions and prayers usefull upon all occasions. Extranem Vapulam, or the Observator releved from the violent but vain assault of Haman Lestrange Esq;, and the back-blows of D. Bernard an Irish Dean: by P. Hoylin D.D. Ovid de Pento, in English. The Loves of Clirio and Lozia a Romance. Mr. Knowles, his Rudi∣ment of the Hebrew Tongue.
A Book of Scheams or Figures of Heaven, ready set for every four Minutes of times, and very usefull for all Astrologers. Florus Anglicus, or an exact History of England, from the Reign of William the Conquerour to the death of the Late King. Linguae, or the Combate of the Tongue, and five Senses for Superiority: a serious Comedy. The Spirits Touchstone; being a clear discovery how a man may certainly know whether he be truly taught by the Spirit of God, or not. The poor mans Physici∣an and Chyrurgion. Physicall Rarities, con∣taining the most choice Receipts in Physick and Chyrurgery, for the cure of all Diseases Incident to mans body: By R W lliams. To which is added the physical Mathematicks: By Hermes Tris-Megistus. The Idol of Clowns, or the Relation of Wat Tiler's Rebellion. The Christian Mode∣rator, in 3 parts. The Golden Fleece, or a Discourse of the cloath∣ing of England. Dr. Sibbs his Divine Meditations. Vigerius Precepts of Idio∣tismes. Grotij Poemata. Three Books of M. Mat∣thews Minister at Swansey in South-wales. 1 The Messiah Magnifi∣ed by the mouthes of Babes in America; or Gains and Gamaliel, a helpfull Father, and his hopeful Son. dis∣coursing of the three most considerable points. 1. The great want of Christ. 2 The great worth that is in Christ. 3. The good way that is chalkt out by Christ 2. The New Congre∣gationall Church, prov'd to be the old Christian Church, by Scripture, Reason, and History. 3 The Reading Church-member Regularly call'd back to Christ and his Church. A physical Dictionary. An exact History of the several changes of Govern∣ment
in England, from the horrid Murther of King Charles the first, to the happy Restauration of King Charles the second, with the Renowned Acti∣ons of General Monck, by J. D. Duodecim. Dr. Smith's practice of physick. The Grammar War. Posselius Apothegmes. Fasciculus Florum. Crashaw's Visions. The Juniper Lecture. Helvicus Colloquies. The Christian Souldier, his Combate with the three arch-enemies of man-kind, the world, the flesh, and the devil. Seasonable advice to the Apprentices of the Honou∣rable City of London, touching their duty to God, and their Masters. Heinsius de Crepundiis. The History of Russia, or the Government of the Emperour of Muscovia, with the manner and fashions of the people of that Coun∣trey. Drexeliu's school of Pa∣tience. Drexelius his right In∣tention of every ones acti∣on A School or Nurture for Children, or the Duty of Children to Parents, very usefull for all that in∣tend to bring up their chil∣dren in the fear of God. Viginti Quarto. The New Testament. The third part of the Bible. Sir Richard Bakers Me∣ditations and Prayers for every day of the Week. Playes. The Ball. Chawbut. Conspiracy. Obstinate Lady. The London Chanticlers: a Comedy foll of various and delightfull Mirth, ne∣yer before published.
FLORƲS ANGLICƲS, The Second Part. CONTAINING Englands Oligarchicall Government from the Death of CHARLES the I. to the Protectorship of OLIVER. PART I. NO sooner had the fatall Axe severed England and her Li∣berties, by severing King Charles his head from his bo∣dy, but the Parliament, the better to maintain what they had now so farre prosecuted, make Proclama∣tion,
That none under penalty of being deemed guilty of high Treason, should presume to pro∣claim, declare, publish, or any way promote the Prince of Wales Sonne to the late King, or any other Person to be King or Chief Magistrate of England, or of any the Dominions belonging to them; by colour of Inheritance, Succession or Election, or any other claim whatsoever, without the free consent of the people in Parliament, &c. This Proclamation though it came not forth in full till the second of February, yet was in part proclaimed on the very day of the Kings be∣heading. They likewise the more to ensure their Go∣vernment, and to carry it on with the more plausibility, publish an Act of State for the al∣teration of Writs in England, Ireland and Wales, as that in stead of King, the Name, Stile and Test, & Custodis Libertatis Angliae Authoritate Parliamenti be used, and none other, and all Writs, &c. should run so, of which all concerned in the Law were required to take notice. Yet they provide, that all Pa∣tents granted by the late King should still stand in full force and vertue. The Houses likewise take upon them a more then Papall power, and because he Priest could indeed absolve them, they are resolved to ab∣solve themselves and all those engaged with
them, by an Act repealing the Oath of Alle∣giance and Supremacy. Sr Lewis Dives, Sr Robert Stuart of Irel and the Lord Loughborough, Collonel Poyer, Collo∣nel Laughorne and Duke Hamilton, having escaped out of severall Prisons, of which the last out of Windsor Castle, a strict search was made for them, but in vain, except Duke Hamilton, who was the next morning retaken in an Inne in Southwark. The Lords House perceiving that by reason of his Majesties death, the Judges gave not that assistance to them which was usuall, by reason his death had extinguished their power as Judges, desired that eighteen of the Commons might be sent to conferre with nine of the Lords, but it would not be assented to. The House of Commons having executed their King, the Nobles are an eyesore to them, they therefore resolve to take away as many of them as they can bring within their reach; they resolve to begin with those they have already in hold; and the Commission of the High-Court of Justice for his Majesties Triall being expired, they create a new one consisting of sixty three persons, of which any fifteen had power to act; for the triall of Duke Hamil∣ton as Earl of Cambridg, Earl of Holland, Earl of Norwich, Lord Capell (who attempted an
escape but was retaken at Lambeth;) and Sir John Owen; and in order thereto they like∣wise vote the adjournment of Hillary Terme, which (because the Judges had not power) they do by their Proclamation of the second of February. And now they take into consideration the reception of their numerous fellow members which by the arbitrary force of the Army had been excluded, and at last they vote, That none should be admitted into the House who had voted that his late Majesties Concessions were a ground for Peace, and for the firm settlement of these Nations. The Parliament having cut off one of those three Estates by which the Nation had so long been governed, think likewise of abolishing the second, that they alone might have the whole power; therefore upon considerations of the House of Lords, in what capacity they should stand; they vote, 1. That they would make no farther addresses to them. 2. That they would receive none from them. 3. That an Act be drawn to abolish that House as dangerous and useless. Thus is the whole basis of that Go∣vernment, which had continued in England so many hundred years, overthrown in ten dayes, and the two ancient grand Estates of the Land cut off.
Having abolished one Government, they proceed to consider of the establishment of another, but agree only in a negative Vote, That there should for the future be no Govern∣ment in England either by King or House of Lords. They break the old Great Seal, and cause a new one to be made, which is delivered to the keeping of three Commissioners, viz. Mr Keeble, Mr Whitlock and Mr Lisle. They likewise consider of Oaths to be administred to the Judges, who thereupon meet, and upon debate six of them are content to continue in their employments, provided the fundamen∣tall Laws of the Land be not altered, which were, viz. Chief Justice Rolles, and Justice Jer∣man of the Kings Bench, Lord Chief Justice St John, Justice Phesant of the Common Pleas, Lord Chief Baron Wild, and Baron Yates: and in order to these Judges satisfaction in their forementioned scruple, the Parliament by their Declaration of the ninth of February do declare, That they are fully resolved to main∣tain, and shall and will uphold, preserve and keep the fundamentall Laws of this Nation, for and concerning the preservation of the lives, pro∣perties and liberties of the people, with all things incident there unto; with the alterations touch∣ing King and House of Lords already resolved in this present Parliament for the good of the
people, and whatsoever shall be further necessary to the perfecting thereof, and by it requiring all Judges, Justices, &c. to execute and administer in their respective Offices and Trusts, &c. The House order a Committee to consider of such Persons as they should think fit to be Justices of the Peace throughout the Nation: they likewise order another Committee, to consider of Persons whom they might judg fit to constitute a Councell of State, whose num∣ber should be forty, whereof only five Lords, or not above. And whereas before they had only repealed, they now wholly make void the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy. Thus though the Parliament are endeavour∣ing all means to make themselves as secure and firm in the Government as they can, yet are the people generally discontented; those who formerly affected them (now sensible of the inconveniencies like to ensue the cutting off of their Prince) as much disaffect them, so that there is generally plotting in all Countries, which makes the Parliament send forces into severall Counties to keep them in awe, whilest the Royalists in Pomfret Castle still hold out, hoping some relief may arise from those so uni∣versall discontents. But let us from England pass a little into Scotland, and we shall find that the Kings
death is much more resented there: at the first news of his Condemnation, they proclaim a solemn Fast, with Prayers to God for his de∣liverance; but upon the news of his Execu∣tion, such was their sorrow, that the whole City of Edenborough seemd a flood of tears. The Parliament upon this exigence are con∣vened, and putting it to the vote, it passed (nemine contradicente) that his Eldest Sonne should be proclaimed King, and accordingly a Proclamation was drawn, which because of some niceties in it, not usuall in things of this nature, I think fit to insert as followeth; viz. The Estates of Parliament presently convened in this second Session of the second trienniall Parliament, by vertue of an Act of the Com∣mittee of Estates, who had power and authority from the last Parliament for convening the Par∣liament, considering that forasmuch as the Kings Majesty who lately reigned, is contrary to the dissent and protestation of this Kingdom, remo∣ved by a violent death; and that by the Lords blessing there is left unto us a righteous Heir and lawfull Successor Charles Prince of Scotland and Wales, now King of Great Brittain, France and Ireland; We the Estates of the Parliament of the Kingdom of Scotland, do therefore most unanimously and cheerfully, in recognition and
acknowledgment of his just right, Title and succession to the Crown of these Kingdoms, hereby proclaim and declare to all the world, that the said Lord and Prince Charles, is by the providence of God, and by the lawfull and right of undoubted succession and descent, King of Great Brittain, France and Ireland, whom all the subjects of this Kingdom are bound hum∣bly and faithfully to obey, maintain and defend according to the Nationall Covenant, and the solemn League and Covenant betwixt the King∣dome, with their lives and goods, against all deadly enemies as their only righteous Soveraign Lord and King. And because his Majesty is bound by the Law of God and fundamentall Laws of this Kingdom, to rule in righteousness and equity, to the honour of God the good of Re∣ligion, and the wealth of his people; it is hereby declared, That before he be admitted to the ex∣ercise of his Royall power, he shall give satis∣faction to this Kingdom in those things that con∣cern the security of Religion, the unity betwixt the Kingdoms, and the good and peace of this Kingdom, according to the Nationall Cove∣nont and the solemn League and Covenant; for which end we are resolved with all possible ex∣pedition to make our humble and earnest addresses to his Majesty: For the testification of all which, we the Parliament of the Kingdom of
Scotland, publish this our acknowledgment of his just right, Title and succession to the Crown of these Kingdoms, at the Market-Cross in Eden∣borough, with all usuall solemnities in like cases, and ordain his Royall Name, Portract and Seal to be used in the publike writings and Judicatories of this Kingdome, and in the Mint-house, as was usually done to his Royall Prede∣cessors; and command this Act to be proclaimed at all the Market-Crosses of the Royall Burghs within this Kingdom, and to be printed, that none may pretend ignorance. God save King Charles the second. This was done by the Parliament, the Lords in all their Robes; the Cross was richly hang∣ed, the Chancellor brought up the Proclama∣tion, read it to the King at Arms who pro∣claimed it; there being an universall joy in the City; and their great Guns from the Ca∣stle sending peals of the same into the adjacent Countries. The solemnity being past, care was taken for the sending Messengers to acquaint his Majesty with the business; Sr Edward Douglas was chosen to go and acquaint him with it, to desire him to take heed of evill Councellors, &c. that there should very spee∣dily a more full address be made to him. In the mean time a Fast is proclaimed, and supplica∣tions
made, that God would prosper their ad∣dresses to him for the good both of the Kirk and State. The Lords and the whole Parlia∣ment in the mean time put on mourning for the death of his Father. But to return to England again: The be∣headed old King Charles was February 12. thirteen days after his death buried at Windsor (in the same Vault where Henry the eighth was interred (without any manner of solem∣nity, the Bishop of London Dr Juxon and some few others attending him to his Funerall. The Parliament not thinking that they are not yet secure enough, whilest they have only power over mens bodies, endeavour the like over their souls. They therefore Enact, that every Citizen of London, at the time of their ad∣mission to their Freedome, should take the en∣suing Oath, viz. You shall swear, That you shall be true and faithfull to the Commonwealth of England, and in order there unto, you shall be o∣bedient to the just Government of the City of London: You shall to your best power maintain the peace, and all the due Franchises thereof, and to your knowledge and ability do and perform all Acts and things belonging to a Free-man of the said City. They likewise Enact, that the said Oath, Mutatis mutandis, be taken by e∣very Free-man in every City, Borrough, and
Town Corporate, in England and Wales, at the time of their admission to Freedome, as afore∣said. The Extraordinary Ambassadors for the States of Holland, (having had audience and promise of Redress for the injuries done to their Ships, provided the wrong-doers could be found out) being on departure, many thanks and civilities having past between them and the House; they Order two Members to give them a solemn farewell, who accompanied them to Gravesend. The Army again Petition the Parliament, in prosecution of some desires formerly presented to them, viz. 1. To make and establish such wholesome Laws (in the native Language) as may preserve the Interest and Liberties of this Commonwealth. 2. That Tithes may be abo∣lished. 3. That no punishment be inflicted upon any man for the Exercise of his Conscience. 4. That all that had to deal in the publick Trea∣sury be called to account; and that free Quar∣ter be taken off. 5. That all Persons whatsoever may have a free and equall Administration of the Law. 6. That Persons imprisoned for Debt, having nothing to pay, may be released; and that such as are able and shelter themselves in prison, be forced to pay. 7. That all Persons in prison for pretended words, &c. be brought to
triall, and if found innocent, have satisfaction for false imprisonment. 8. That Provision might be made for the Poor of the Nation. 9. That constant Pay may be provided to prevent free Quarter. 10. That the Arrears of the Army might be paid out of the Kings, Deans, and Chapters Lands. 11. That their want of Horses might be supplied. 12. That care might be taken for prevention of clipt Money. 13. That the Articles of Warre might be miti∣gated. 14. That the Souldiers might not be put to the execution of civil Orders, as seizing on unlicensed Books, distraining of Moneys, or the like, so that the people may not complain of their intrenchment on their Liberties. These were February 19. 1649. drawn up by the Army, as their humble Petition and Ad∣dress to the Parliament; but we need not think it strange that every common Souldier should have liberty to propose what was necessary to be done in the Government, since they had perfectly the whole power in their hands, and had first by the fetches of some of their Com∣manders, excluded and extirpated all other power, to give life and being to this shadow of a Government, this little finger of a Parlia∣ment, and yet ten times heavier to the Nation, then the whole loynes of its legal Magistracy. But to return to our purpose, the Parliament
(for so in their own language we must call them) order the Triall of Duke Hamilton, (who though he was no Englishman, yet was arraigned under the Name of Earl of Cam∣bridge, thereby to subject him to the English Law) together with the Earl of Holland, Lord Capell, Lord Goring, and Sr John Owen, the two first of which were afterwards beheaded in Pallace-yard, and the two last meeting with more favour from them, were suffered to de∣part beyond Seas. A Councell of State being setled by the Par∣liament, they met at Derby House, where some Propositions of the Parliaments in order to their unanimous Proceedings, were tendred to them, viz. the approbation of the Proceed∣ings with the late King, the House of Lords, the present Alteration and some other. These were by them received, with some dislike to some of the particulars, and their dislike being mentioned in the House, was referred to a Committee. The Prince Elector Palatine makes his Ad∣dresses to the Parliament, with returnes of thanks for their former favours, and desires that 5600lb due of his last years Pension might be paid; that the Pension of 8000lb per annum might be continued; and that he might have the Pass of the House for himself, Fami∣ly,
and forty Horse to go home. The first and last desires were granted, and the Summe due Ordered to be paid him; but the Conti∣nuation of his Pension put off to further consi∣deration. The Parliament and Councell of State agree upon an Attestation, to be taken by every in∣dividuall Member of the Councell of State, which ran as followeth, viz. I A. B. being of the Councell of State, do Testifie that I do adhere unto this present Parliament, in the maintenance and defence of the publick Liberty and Freedome of this Nation, as it is now De∣clared, and to the Government for future in way of a Republick without King, or House of Peers: And I do promise in the sight of God, that through his grace I will be faithfull in the performance of the trust committed to me as a∣foresaid, and therein faithfully pursue the In∣structions given to this Councell by this present Parliament, and not reveal or disclose any thing in whole or in part, directly or indirectly, that shall be debated or resolved on in Counsell, with∣out command or direction in Parliament, or the Order and allowance of the major part of them, that shall be present at such debates or resoluti∣ons. In confirmation of the Premisses I have hereunto set my hand. To which Attestation, the Clerk of the Parliament is Ordered to see
that every individuall Member of the Councell of State do Subscribe. And now comes out the Protestation of the Parliament of Scotland, against the Proceedings touching his Majesties Life and Person, which because it was of so eminent concernment, I shall here insert the most materiall Circumstances, viz. That by their Letter of the sixth instant (viz. January) they represented unto you what endeavours have been used, for taking away of his Majesties life, for Change of the fundamentall Government of this Kingdome, and introducing a sinfull and ungodly Toleration in matters of Religion; and therein they did express their sad thoughts and great feares, of the dangerous consequences that might follow thereupon; and further they did earnestly press, that there might be no proceed∣ing against his Majesties Person, which would certainly continue the great distractions of the Kingdomes, and involve them in many evils, troubles, and confusions; but that by the free Councels of both Houses of the Parliament of England, and with the advice and consent of the Parliament of Scotland, such course might be taken in relation to him, as may be for the good and happiness of these Kingdomes, both having an unquestionable interest in his Person, as King of both, which duely considered, we had reason to hope should have given a stop to all Proceedings
against his Majesties Person. But they under∣stood that after many of the Members of the House of Commons have been imprisoned and se∣cluded. and also without and against the Consent of the House of Peers, by a single Act of this Par∣liament alone, power being given to certain Persons of their own Number of the Army, and some others, to proceed against his Majesties Person; in order whereunto he was brought upon Saturday last in the afternoon, before this new Extraordinary Court. Wherefore they do in the Name of the Parliament of Scotland, for their vindication from false aspersions and calumnies declare; That though they are not satisfied with his Majesties Concessions at New∣port in the Isle of Wight, especially in the mat∣ters of Religion, and are resolved not to crave his Majestes restitution to this Government, before satisfaction be given by him to this King∣dome; yet they do all unanimously with one voice (not one Member excepted) disclaim the least knowledge of, or accession to the late Pro∣ceedings of the Army against his Majesty; and sincerely profess, that it will be a great grief un∣to their hearts, and lie heavy upon their spirits, if they shall see the trusting of his Majesties Per∣son to the Honourable Houses of the Parliament of England, to be made use of to his ruine, so far contrary to the declared intentions of the
Kingdome of Scotland, and solemn professions of the Kingdome of England; and to the end it may be manifest to the world, how much they abomi∣nate and detest so horrid a design against his Ma∣jesties Person, they do in the Name of the Par∣liament and Kingdome of Scotland, Declare their dissent from the said Proceedings, and the taking away of his Majesties Life; and protest that as they are altogether free from the same, so they may be free from all the evils, miseries, confusions, and calamities, that may fol∣low thereupon to these distracted King∣domes. In thus much is contracted the large Letter of the Scottish Parliament, to which the Par∣liament in short answer; That as to the al∣teration of the fundamentall Laws of the Land, and allowing liberty of Conscience in Religion, if Scotland had not the same power of liberty; as they did not go about to confine them, so they would not be limited to them; but (leaving them to act in relation to theirs, as they shall see cause) resolve to maintain their own Liberties, as God should enable them. In relation to the putting the King to death, they had done it upon serious consideration of the miseries both they and the Nation had suffered, by the Misgovernment and Tyranny of that man of sin (as they term∣ed him) that they doubted not but God would
prosper them in it. That if Scotland would not now with them assert its Liberties, but e∣spouse that quarrell, they would reap no other advantage by it, but a lasting Warre (and the miseries that attend it) or the intailing of a per∣petuall slavery under a Tyrant and his Issue, to them and their posterity. These jarrings at length produced a bloudy Warre betwixt the two Nations, to the devastation and almost utter ruine of Scotland, as the sequell of the Story will show. The Parliament Order the Army to march Northward. The Parliament now more fully ordered that no Member whatsoever, who had absented himself from sitting in the House since the 31. of December, 1648. should be re-admitted into the House, but should be utterly secluded and barred from sitting; except such as had been imploy∣ed in the service of the Parliament. They then consider of wayes for raising of Money to serve their Occasions; and in order thereto, appoint a Committee to consider of the Re∣venues of the late King, Queen, Prince, Bi∣shops, &c. and how they may be improved to their greatest advan∣tage. Collonel Popham, Collonel Dean, and Collonel Blake, who are to go with the Fleet, are ordered to go down immediately, and
nine pound a day appointed for their mainte∣nance: The Lord Warwicks Commission of Admirall of the Seas, and Warden of the Cin∣que Ports being null'd, and that power put into the Hands of the Councell of State, who have devolved it upon those three afore∣mentioned. In the mean time those who stand out in the two Cityes of Dublin and London-Derry for this Parliament, earnestly entreat relief, be∣fore that Ormond, Inchiqueen, and Owen-Roe, who were very near Compositions, should joyn, which would go near to ruine all. They therefore desire, that eight thousand men formerly promised them, might come over, which would either hinder the malevolous Conjunction threatned, or be a good Barri∣cado against them; however they promise to hold out as long as possibly they can. The Earl of Lothian, Sr John Chesley, and Mr Glendonning, who came as Commissioners from the Parliament of Scotland, to this of England, not having received any satisfaction in relation to their Instructions, or the Desires of the Parliament of Scotland, being some∣what angry, but loath to express their Choller by word of mouth, after their departure from London, send back a Letter by a servant to the
Parliament, (in the Name of the Parliament of Scotland) enumerating all their Declarati∣ons, the breach of all their Covenants, Oaths, and Protestations, for contiruance of the late Government, and how much they had gone contrary to all of them, in what they had now done to King, Lords, &c. desiring them to do their first work, which if they did not as they, that then they would wash their hands of all the misery, that was like to ensue. This so netled our Parliament, that they immediately imprison the Messenger; and besides the gi∣ving secret Order for the securing the Subscri∣bers, they put forth a Declaration against the Paper, arguing it to contain much scandalous and reproachfull matter, against the just Laws and Government of this Nation, to the high dishonour thereof: That it was a design in the contrivers and subscribers of it to raise Sediti∣on, and lay the grounds of a new and bloudy Warre. They therefore Declare, that all Per∣sons whatsoever residing in England, or Ireland, or Scotland, that shall adhere to the said Sub∣scribers, in pursuance of the Grounds by them laid in the said Paper, are Rebels and Traitors to the Commonwealth of England, and shall be proceeded against as Rebels and Traitors. They likewise Order that a Letter be sent with a Copy of that Paper to the Parliament of
Scotland, to know if they will own or justifie it. The Parliament are so necessitated for Mo∣neys, that they are resolved to let no way slip for the raising of it, the ancient Standard in the Palace-yard shall not scape, but a Com∣mittee is ordered to examine what it might be worth, in case it were sold for publique use. The Parliament in consideration of Sr George Ascues eminent services at Sea, order him to be Admirall of the Irish Seas, and Modell the Expences of the Navy as low as they can possibly, whereby a great part of that vast Charge is saved; yet neither Custome, Excise, nor Taxes made lower, but rather encreased, the Souldiers Petitioning for a larger Taxe, that free Quarter (the greater oppression indeed of the two) might be avoid∣ed. Severall Troopers who pretended a Liberty to Petition without the consent of their Offi∣cers, are punished; five of them are con∣demned first to ride with their Faces to the Horse Tail, then to have their Swords broke over their Heads, and lastly to be cashiered; a Letter which they had concerning the afore∣said Liberty, being judged pernicious and scandalous to the Parliament and Counsell of State.
About this time began those great distur∣bances both in Army and Parliament, occa∣sioned by the distast given to Lieutenant Col∣lonel John Lilburne, by the Parliaments de∣nying some desires of his: But because the Discourse of it would now be too tedious, we shall let it alone till we come to treat of its Effects. But let us return now a little to Scotland, where the Parliament upon rumours that the English Army were marching towards them, prepare to resist, and Vote the raising for their present defence 2000 Horse and 6000 Foot, whilest the Lord Seaforth and Collonel Heisell are busied in fortifying Enderness, and other strong places in the North, all being resolved to defend and maintain the Cause of Charles the Second with their lives and for∣tunes, many Englishmen flocking to them. In the mean time Prince Rupert makes great Havock of the Merchants Ships and Goods in the English and Irish Seas, which makes the Parliament hasten out their Fleet under the Command of Popham, Dean, and Blake, as aforesaid. And now on the ninth of March, 1648. those three Lords, Duke Hamilton (as Earl of Cambridge) the Earl of Holland, and Lord
Capell, were beheaded in the new Palace-yard Westminster, for having raised Arms against the Parliament; nor could Duke Hamiltons pretending himself a stranger, and not subject to the Laws of England; nor the Lord Capells claiming the Lord Generals promise of Quar∣ter, finde them voices enough to save their lives, (though the Lord Goring, and Sr John Owen escaped by Superiority of voices.) They all three died resolutely and handsomely, be∣fitting men of so noble descents. The Parliament in some things to answer the Armies Petition, Order a release of all Prisoners, who were not in a capacity to pay their Debts; the Commission nevertheless ex∣tending to the seizure of all their Estate and Moveables, to pay as far as they will go. They likewise Enact a rebate in Usury, that none should take above six in the hundred, which is an ease to the poor, but a plague to the rich. The 14th of March arrives at London Master Belford from the Parliament of Scotland, who brings Letters expressing their high resentment for the securing of their Commissioners; they assure them that they owned the Paper sent by their Commissioners, by sending another Transcript of it; so their Commissioners are discharged, and it referred to the Counsell of State to send them an Answer.
The Parliament proceed in consideration of what was to be done, in the farther punishing of offendors, and Vote that fifteen be banish∣ed, whereof the Marquess of Winchester, the Lords, Bristoll, Cottington, and Digby, are four. Judge Jenkins, and Sr John Stowell are Ordered to be tried at the Kings Bench Bar. That Collonel Laughorne, Powell, and Poyer, or any others, who have held out any Castle or Fort since the first of March 1648. to be tried by a Counsell of War. They proceed to the Confiscation of the Estates of the Prince of Wales, Duke of York, Duke of Bucking∣ham, Earl of Bristoll, Earl of Newcastle, Earl of Worcester, Lord Digby, Sr William Widdrington, Sr Phillip Musgrave, Sr Mar∣maduke Langdale, Sr Richard Grimvile, Sir Francis Dodington, Sr Iohn Culpepper, and Sr Iohn Byron; any of which being taken in England, are to die without mercy. The Banishment of the Marquess of Winchester is remitted at last, and he with Bishop Wren Vo∣ted imprisonment in the Tower, during the Parliaments pleasure. Brown Bushell is also Voted to be tried for his life. The Parliament hoping to justifie their acti∣ons to the world abroad by Logick, as well as they had done it by force at home, cause a
large and specious Declaration to be drawn up, shewing the causes of their Actions and Pro∣ceedings against their late King, and of the Al∣teration of the Government, which they or∣der to be Printed in Latin, French, Dutch, and Italian, the better to satisfie (as they dream't) the rest of the Christian world. The Lieutenant Generall Cromwell now comes in play again (action being so naturall to him) he being appointed Generalissimo of those 12000 Horse and Foot, which are Vo∣ted to be sent for the relief of Ireland, and the reducing of Ormond, Inchequeen, and Owen Roe, who had now made a full conjunction, and lay neare Dublin with 22000 Men. And now the Parliament by their Act and Declaration of the 19th of February, dissolve all Kingly Government, disheriting the late Kings Children, or any other from any claim, right, or title to the Government of England, Wales, or Ireland, or any of the Honours, Mannors, Lands, Tenements, Possessions, or Hereditaments, belonging or appertaining to the Crown of England, or Ireland. And they by the same Act discharge and absolve all the peo∣ple of England, Wales, and Ireland, of what degree or condition soever, from all Fealty, Ho∣mage, and Allegiance, which is or shall be pre∣tended
due to any of the Issue and Posterity of the late King, or any claiming under him. This Act the Parliament Order to be proclaimed in the City of London by the Mayor, Aldermen, and Sheriffs in Person, and likewise in the chief places of the Nation, to which purpose Writs are sent down to the Sheriffs of the respective Counties. But the Lord Mayor and severall of the Al∣dermen, whose consciences would not permit them to proclaim it, refusing to do it, put a demur upon it throughout the whole Nation; the effects of which the Parliament fearing, called him to the Bar of the House, and finding him resolved, Order the degradation of him, Alderman Bunce, and three Aldermen more. Alderman Andrews being found fit for the Par∣liaments purpose, is appointed to sit on the Bench in the late Lord Mayors stead, who readily executed the Parliaments Com∣mands. The Parliament Constitute a Committee for the sale of Parks, Chases, and Forrest-Lands, of whom any three have power and au∣thority to Act. The 24th of March, the Castle of Pomfret which had held out near nine Moneths, was forced to surrender for want of Ammunition. The private Souldiers who were most of them
inhabitants of Yorkeshire, had liberty by Arti∣cles to go home to their habitations, but the Governour and some others were exempted from Quarter; nevertheless Lieutenant Col∣lonel Morris the Governour esca∣ped. The Scotch Commissioners are at last dis∣patched to the King, with full Instructions to treat with him; of which the chief were: First, That his Majesty take the Covenant, Secondly, That he put from him all who have assisted his Father or him formerly; and parti∣cularly the Lord Montross. Thirdly, That he bring but 100 with him into Scotland. And fourthly, That he bring no forreign force into Scotland without their consent. But whether these Conditions were by him agreed to or no, I think is hardly known. In the mean while the Parliaments friends in Ireland are but in a bad condition, they therefore desire present aid. Clanrickard, Taffe, and Preston, with their Catholicks, having made a full agreement with Ormond, and Inchequeen, the Articles were, viz. after the Catholicks acknowledgement by way of preamble, That Charles the second is King of Ireland, and that they will stand to him with their lives and fortunes. It is agreed: 1. That the Catholicks have free exercise of Religion in
Ireland, and all penalties taken off. 2. That a Parliament shall be held within six Moneths or after, when the Catholicks desire. 3. All Laws made in the Parliament of England since 41, in blemish of Catholicks, in the next Parlia∣ment to be null. 4. All Indictments against any Catholicks since 41, to be vacuated. 5. Way and provision made that Catholicks may be Elected and Vote in Parliament. 6. All Debts to remain as they were, February 8. 1641. notwithstanding any disposition under colour of Attainder. 7. The Estates of the Knights, Gen∣tlement, and Freeholders of Connaght, Clare, Thomond, Limerick, and Tipperary, to be secured by Act. 8. All incapacities of the Na∣tives in Ireland to be taken away by Act. 9. All Honours, Trusts, &c. to be conferred as well on Catholicks as Protestants. 10. That the King take 2000lb per annum in lieu of the Court of Wards. 11. Noble men to be capable of more Proxies then two in Parliament. 12. That the depending of the Parliament of Ireland on that of England, shall be as shall stand with the Laws of Ireland. 13. That the Coun∣sell-Table meddle only with State-matters. 14. That all Acts forbidding the transport of Wooll, be made null by the next Parliament. 15. That if any have been wronged by Grants from King James or since, they may have relief
in Parliament. 16. That divers particular Lords, Knights, and Gentlemen, who have as they conceive been wronged, may be righted. 17. That all who have had their Estates taken from them in Cork, Youghall, and Dungarvan, have restauration. 18. That in the next Par∣liament an Act of oblivion pass to all Ireland. 19. That no Lord Deputy or other Officer of E∣minency farm the Customes. 20. An Act a∣gainst Monopolists and no imposition on Aqua∣vitae. 21. That the Court of Castle-chamber be regulated. 22. The Acts prohibiting plow∣ing with Horses by the tail, and burning Oats in the Straw be nul'd. 23. That his Majesty take off the grievances of the Kingdome. 24. That Maritime causes be determined in Ireland. 25. That no Rents be raised under pretence of defective titles. 26. That Interest be forgiven from 1641. 27. That all this be Acted and of force till a Parliament agree it. 28. That the Commissioners for the Catholicks that treated, agree upon such as shall be Com∣missioners of the peace, and hear all causes under 10lb. 29. That all Governours of Towns, Castles, &c. made by the King, be with the approbation of Catholick Commissioners. 30. That none of his Majesties Rents be paid till a full settlement in Parliament. 31. That the Commissioners of Oyer and Terminer do try
all Murthers, Thefts, &c. 32. That hereafter such Differences as arise between Sub∣jects, be tried by a Court in Ireland. 33. That the Roman Clergy that behave themselves ac∣cording to this Agreement, be not molested. These Articles thus agreed on, Ormond pub∣lishes a Declaration, exasperating the horrid Murther of the late King, and Declaring Charles the second King of Ireland, as the true lawfull and undoubted Heir to his Father; and to him and in his Defence they all resolve to stick with lives and fortunes. The Counsell of State begin now to take the business of Ireland into more serious considera∣tion; and to dispatch relief the sooner, Order that a convenient number of Shipping be made ready at Bristoll, Leverpool, Beaumorris, and Milford Haven, to transport the Army, and to be at the direction of the Commander in chief for Ireland. They likewise give Order that an Hospitall be provided for maimed Soul∣diers in Dublin. That all those who are al∣ready in the Parliaments pay in Ireland, do joyn with those now sent over, under the Com∣mand of his Excellency the Lord Generall Cromwell. That Bread, Salt, Cheese, and other provisions be provided, with a train of Artillery. And that care be taken that continuall supplyes of men be constantly sent.
The seventh of Aprill, the Parliament for the better supply of their Army, and taking off the intollerable oppression of Free-Quarter, pass an Act for 90000lb. a Moneth for six Mo∣neths. But in relation to their present exi∣gencies, for setting forward of the relief for Ireland, the Generall Earl of Pembroke and some others, are sent to the City to borrow 120000lb. upon the security of the two last Moneths Assessment. And now the business of Ireland goes on vi∣gorously, the Parliament making sundry Votes for its furtherance, viz. That care be taken for provisions for the Winter Quarters. That a sufficient number of Ships be imployed on the Coast, at the Command of the Generall by Land. That provision be made for maimed Souldiers, and for the Widows and Orphans of Souldiers slain. That a train of Artillery be provided. That the Troopers be supplyed with such Backs, Brests, and Pots, as shall be fitting. And that care be taken for the convenient sending over of Recruits. And indeed it was no time to dally now, except they meant to have lost all; for Ormond, Taffe, Preston, and Inchequeen, are mustering their Forces to lay siege to Dub∣lin, London-Derry; and Sr Charles Coot in it was already besieged by the Covenanters, or Laggan Forces. And though Owen Roe's
standing out might make a kinde of schisme amongst them, yet it was judged that their Army would be numerous enough both to be∣siege Dublin, and reduce him, (for which last service Inchequeen was intended) his Brother Sr Phellime not being so sure a friend to him as was imagined; so that Ireland could not at that time seem to be in any other con∣dition, then near utterly lost to the Parlia∣ment. The sale of the Deans and Chapters Lands coming under consideration, were found worth 9000lb per annum impropriate, which goes towards the Ministers maintenance; and 18000lb per annum old Rent, which is to be sold. But 1. It was resolved that 300000lb be raised on it in way of doubling, as on Bi∣shops Lands. 2. That no Bill of Faith pass, but such as hath been allowed by Trustees. 3. That the 600000lb due for Souldiers Ar∣rears, stand good upon the Excise, till other security be setled. 4. That this 600000lb be paid out of Lands belonging formerly to the Crown. 5. That twelve Trustees be for this Act, six nominated by the Generall, and six by the Parliament. 6. That the Attorney Generall bring in a Bill to Audit the Arrears of the Souldiers. Thus the Parliament make hast to the sale of the Lands belonging both to
Church and State, for the payment of their Souldiers and servants. The 25th of April 1649, was Collonel Poyer shot to death; Major Generall Loughorne, Coll. Powell, and himself, three eminent Welch∣men, were tried for their lives by a Counsell of Warre, and all three condemned for holding Intelligence with the Enemy; but mercy being shown, it was put to the Lot, which fell upon Coll. Poyer, who suffered death according to sentence. The Princess Elizabeth Daughter to the late King, petitioning the Parliament that shee might have leave to go into Holland to her Si∣ster the Princess Royall of Orange, is denyed; but is ordered to go (with her Brother the Duke of Glocester) to Sr Edward Harringtons in Rutland, who is ordered to take care of them, and 3000lb a year is allowed for their maintenance; but he excuses it being an∣cient. The Parliament take upon them the Royall Prerogative of Coyning Monies; order a new Stamp to be made, with the Arms of England on one side, and round The Commonwealth of England; and the Arms of England and Ire∣land on the other, and round God with us. Severall Troops and Regiments of the Army, either discontented at Liev. Coll. John Lilburns
imprisonment, or some other feigned pretence of their own, mutinie; Coll. Scroops, and Ma∣jor Gen. Iretons (who were designed for Ire∣land) are the chief: but in the end they are all either reduced to obedience or dis∣banded. A Regiment of Coll. Tuthills is sent over to Dublin as a vangard to the rest. Dr Dorislaus whom the Parliament of this Commonwealth had sent over as their Agent, to treat with the States of Holland, was the 5th of May murdered in an Ordinary in the Hague, by six men who entred into the chamber dis∣guised; the English Cavaliers there were sus∣pected for the murther, but we judg it a ca∣lumny, since the certainty could never be known, though the States of Holland offered 1000 Guldens to the discoverers of the assas∣sinates. The Parliament to manifest their surious re∣sentment of the murther of Dr Isaac Dorislaus their Agent, put forth a Declaration, how tender a sense they have of so horrid a mur∣ther, and the dishonour redounds thereby to the Commonwealth; and that since they can∣not have the authors of that horrid villany, they are resolved to execute their revenge upon those Cavaliers (for they are resolved to be∣lieve those there the actors of it) which they
have here in their power, and have not been admitted to compound, and so are left to their mercy, which they else had found had not their fellows there forfeited it: so sweet is revenge, though but upon a meer suspicion of an in∣jury. The Parliament in England put forth an Act declaring what should be high-Treason: the particulars were; 1. That whosoever should maliciously and advisedly, by writing, printing, or openly declare, that this Government by Par∣liament is tyrannicall, usurped or unlawfull, or that the Commons assembled in Parliament are not the Supream Authority of the Nation; or shall plot, endeavour or contrive to stir up or raise any force to the subversion or alteration of the Government, and shall declare the same by open deed, shall be judged guilty of high-Trea∣son. 2. That any person who shall maliciously and advisedly contrive and plot, or cause to be contrived and plotted, any thing which may tend to the subversion of the Keepers of the Liber∣ties of England, or the Councell of State, and shall declare the same by open deed, shall be judged guilty of high Treason. 3. That whosoever not being a Member of the Army, shall plot, con∣trive, or endeavour to stir up any mutiny in the said Army, or draw any Souldiers or Officers from their obedience to their superiour Officers,
or from the present Government, or shall procure, invite, or aid any forreigners to invade Eng∣land or Ireland, or counterfeit the great Seal of England, (for time being) used by Authority of Parliament.: That then they for every such offence be judged guilty of high Treason, and suffer the pains and penalties thereof. This Act was by Order of Parliament proclaimed throughout England and Wales. But now the straits of Ireland requiring a speedy help, which is daily sollicited for, Or∣mond having beleaguered Dublin near a Moneth, and it scarce like to hold out long for want both of men, provisions, and Ammu∣nition, Collonel Tuthills Regiment having carried nothing over but themselves, and their Arms on their shoulders, though scarce Cloathes to their backs; so that the Parlia∣ment to answer those reiterated desires of Lieutenant Generall Jones, and being indeed sensible of their necessities, expedite their as∣sistance, appointing Commissary Generall Ireton, Collonel Scroop, Collonel Horton, Major Generall Lambert, with their four Re∣giments of Horse; and Collonel Ewers, Col∣lonel Cooke, Collonel Hewson, and Collonel Dean, with theirs of Foot, and five Troops of Horse to be made ready for that service; be∣sides which some other Regiments are raised
by beat of Drum. In the mean time Collonel Reynolds Regiment of Horse, Collonel Vena∣bles, and Collonel Monkes of Foot quartering nearest, are ordered to advance to Chester, and thence immediately take Shipping as the Vant-guard of the Army; the other eight Regiments were ordered to march to the ge∣nerall Rendezvows at Milford-haven, where there was a convenient number of Shipping provided to waft them over into Ireland, and whither Generall Cromwell very speedily fol∣lowed them, departing out of London the tenth of July 1649. The Vant-guard commanded by the Collo∣nels, Reynolds, Venables, and Monke, met with so prosperous a gale from Chester, soon arrived in Dublin Road, and having landed their men, notwithstanding the Enemy lay so near, entred the City without any considera∣ble opposition, where they were received with Ecchoes of joy by the Souldiers and Inha∣bitants, who had so long expected them. The Town being now so well strengthened by this new supply, Collonel Jones his old Souldiers, Collonel Tuthills Regiment, with the Inhabitants that bore Arms, and this new Brigade, could now muster between 8 and 9000 stout men. Jones therefore resolves
upon a Sally as soon as he should see occasion, which the Enemy themselves soon gave him, by coming down on the East side of the City, with a party of near 2000 Foot and some Horse, intending to have run a trench along to the Sea, and there to have built a Fort which might have commanded the Haven, and hin∣dred supplyes from England; they within per∣ceiving their design, were resolved to hinder them; so drawing out near twelve hundred Horse and four thousand Foot, couragiously enter those trenches the Enemy had raised, and pursued their charge with so much cou∣rage, that Ormonds Horse presently gave back, and his Foot most cut in pieces, or taken priso∣ners, which easie victory gave such heat to the English Forces, that pursuing it with as much resolution as possible could be expected in men, they followed the Chase as far as Rathmines, where Ormonds Company lay consisting of 19000 Horse and Foot, whom finding secure and out of order, they charged so vigorously, that they soon put the whole body to the rout, pursuing them as far as the Naas, Ormond himself hardly escaping on Horseback. In this Battell were above 3000 slain on the place, 2517 Prisoners taken, many men of quality, of which Ormonds own Brother was one, all their train of Artillery, Ammunition, and pro∣vision
taken, and a rich Camp left for the Souldiers to plunder. Thus was this great Ar∣my of whom such matters were expected, over∣thrown and routed by a handfull of men, and with so small a loss, that it would scarce gain belief if mentioned. But let us leave Ireland, and speak a little of the affairs of Scotland. The Scoth Commissi∣oners at the Hague could not get the King to consent as yet to a full agreement with their Estates, it seemed somewhat too harsh to di∣gest the Covenant, or condiscend to the set∣ling of Church-Government by Presbytery; nor could he either in honour or conscience desert those Noble persons, who had alwayes stuck faithfully both to himself and Father, for a Nation that had sold his Father to destructi∣on, though now they courted him with golden promises; but especially he could not tell how to part with Montross, who had ventured so far for him. Nor would the Commissioners, nor the States of Scotland themselves upon any termes re-admit him, but upon the grant of those Conditions. The King therefore (ra∣ther then so much descent from his Honour) grants a Commission to Montross to levy what Forces he could beyond Sea, and with them to go joyn with the Lord Seaforth, Major Straughan, and others who had got to a head
for the King without the Kirk, in the North of Scotland; but they were routed before he came by Lesley, and himself not long after his arrivall, defeated by a Party of the Kirks, ta∣ken prisoner, and most ignominiously hanged in Edenborough, which action next that of sel∣ling their King, must necessarily bring as much odium upon the Scottish Presbyterians, as ever Sect was under. But let us return a little to England, where at length that turbulent Head-piece John Lil∣burn is brought to triall, the grand Champion of the Levellers, and indeed their only Patriot, a man of an undaunted spirit, neither to be de∣terred by threats, or won by favours. He was tried in Guild-Hall London, by a speciall Com∣mission of Oyer and Terminer, where most of the Judges and Justices of the Courts at West∣minster, the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs, and seve∣rall Aldermen of London were present. His Indictment contained many crimes of a treaso∣nable nature; chiefly being author of severall scandalous reviling Pamphlets, against the Go∣vernment and Governours of the Nation, and particularly that entituled, The second part of Englands new Chains; which contained most sharp invectives against the Parliament, calling them Traytors, Tyrants, Murderers, Ʋsur∣pers, telling them that they were wholly com∣posed
of Rebellion, Villany, Murder, and Per∣jury, with a great deal of such rabble; yet though these Books were verily believed his, the proofs not being clear, the Jury found him not guilty, whereupon he was acquit∣ted. But let us return to see how the Lord Gene∣rall Cromwels Army got over into Ireland. The generall Rendezvows being at Milford-Haven, they there had the news of the great victory over Ormonds Army, which no doubt displeased the Lord Generall, who had hopes to have had a share in, or the whole glory of so great a victory; however he makes what hast he can over, and himself August 13 de∣parts from Milford-Haven, with the Van of the Army in thirty two Ships; on the 15th of May Generall Ireton follows with the Main in fourty two Vessels; Mr Hugh Peters brings up the rear in about twenty Sail. Favourable windes brought them soon to Dublin, where the Canons ecchoed forth the joy of their arri∣vall; but the Lord Deputy Cromwell being wholly addicted to action, stayed not long to receive those entertainments, which the Citi∣zens of Dublin gave, but having refreshed his Army some time, draws out a Body of 15000 Horse and Foot to a generall Muster, out of which he selects twelve Regiments, contain∣ing
9 or 1000 able and resolute men for the present expedition, which he intends for Droghedah; and having furnished his Army with a train of Artillery, fit for the siege of so well fortified a place, marches on with his Ar∣my, and being come near the Town (accor∣ding to the custome of War) sends a Summons to Sr Arthur Aston Governour, but the Sum∣mons prevailed little upon a person known to be so able a Souldier, and who had above 2000 English Gentlemen with him, who had most of them been formerly Commanders in the late Kings Army; but an answer was re∣turned, containing a resolution to expire with the taking of the Town; whereupon the Lord Generall orders all things for the quickest ac∣complishment of his design, which was to take the Town per force, since quick dispatches must necessarily be the life of his business, the Winter drawing so nigh; and however should that let be removed, yet if he should stay the starving it out, he should give Ormond, Inche∣queen, &c. time to raise an Army for its re∣lief; the batteries therefore are planted to the best advantage, and play as furiously, so that in four hours space it levelled the Steeple of St Maries Church, and a Tower by it; and continuing the next day after near five hun∣drep Shot, the South-East Tower is beaten
down, and two very considerable breaches made, which are immediately entred by Col∣lonel Castles, Husons, and Ewers Regiments, Collonel Castle himself (which seldome Com∣manders of like note use to do in a storm) lead∣ing the Van (by the Lord Deputy Cromwells speciall Order, for what intent I'le leave to o∣thers to guess) where he was slain; the Charge on both sides was so hot, as seldome the like hath been seen, the grapple being on both sides at swords point (the only weapon to executi∣on) for near three hours space, till the Assail∣ants were forced to retire, which Cromwell seeing, commands a fresh reserve of Collonel Ewers his Regiment to assail the breach, (but others say that he entred himself, which is very hardly believed, he having too much wisdome to be so desperate) who meeting with wearied Defendants forced their way; though they met with a noble and heroick assistance, yet they gained a sure possession in the Town, though they could not yet subdue it, for Sr Arthur Ashtons men hotly disputed every corner of the Street, so that the Assailants were forced to win what they did by small degrees, till at last the supernumerary force of their enemies over∣coming their valour, they all were massacred by their merciless adversary, the Lord Deputy Cromwell having given strict Orders, not to
allow Quarter either to Man, Woman; or Childe, which unparralleld cruelty, though it may finde excuses amongst men who delight in flattery, yet will it undoubtedly finde as cruell a reward from the most just God, who judge∣eth every mans actions impartially. Some there were who got into Steeples and other places of defence, thinking to save them∣selves, but were all forced either by the sword or famine to yield, who yet in cold bloud found as little mercy, as their fellows had done in the heat of the Battell; there being not above two escaping with their lives, the Dean Bar∣nard afterwards made Almoner, and the other an old man by his leaping out of a Steeple, which Cromwels Souldiers blew up with Gun∣powder, who though he broke his Leg, yet had his life saved. This great slaughter not being occasioned neither by the heat of the Souldiers, but by Cromwels speciall Command, who vowed somewhat to a noble Officer of his, (pleading for mercy for the Defendants) That he would sacrifice their bodyes to the souls of the Englishmen they had murdered, which he could not in justice say of those in Droghedah, know∣ing them to be most Englishmen, and such whose greatest fault was to serve their true and lawfull Soveraign in his just defence. However this slaughter works for his ends,
for upon the News the Souldiers and Towns∣men in Trim and Dundalke, (two adjacent Garrisons) quit their holds; and such was their haste in Trim, that they l ft their great Guns behinde them on the Platforms; and well might their fear be great at the News of Droghedahs taking, when Sr Phelime O Neal at the hearing of it, burst out in a passion swearing, That if Cromwell had taken Droghedah by storm, if he should storm Hell, he would take it. This considerable action having had such wished for success, Cromwell directs his Army towards Wexford, and in his way engarrisons Killingkerick and Arcklo Castle (the feat of the Ormonds) two deserted Forts; many o∣thers in that March submitted, whereof most being places inconsiderable were slighted, o∣thers engarrisoned. The first of October the Army faces Wex∣ford, and the Lord Deputy requires Collonel Synnot the Governour to make a speedy surren∣der of it; he returnes an answer somewhat dubious, so that many Papers pass between him and the Lord Deputy, which was occa∣sioned only by a design the Governour had to waste and delay time, till the Earl of Castle-haven was entred into the Town with 500 men to strengthen the Garrison. So when the
Governour had received these recruits, he no longer writes dubiously, but plainly sends word to the Lord Deputy, that he was resol∣ved to stand it out to the utmost; whereupon Cromwell being enraged at his mockery, bends his force at the Castle, which stands at the South-East end of the Town, which after ha∣ving received some hundreds of great Shot, was forced to a rendition. This so quelled the hearts of the stout Wexfordians, that they quit∣red their Walls, and gave the Enemy free leave to enter, which they delayed not to do, but meeting with no resistance, fell in pell mell till they came to the Market-place, where the Souldiers and Inhabitants reviving their cou∣rage, in vain maintained their ground for a short time, for they were soon over-powred, and all that were found in Arms, slain. Thus Wexford being taken, Cromwell march∣es on to Waterford and takes Passage-Fort, but because of the Winter, presently raises his Army, and whilest severall parties are disposed in their winter-quarters, they reduce severall engarrisoned places, so that in fine all consi∣derable places in Ireland, except Limerick, Waterford, Clonmell, Galloway and Kilkenny, were in the possession of the Lord Deputy Cromwell. But let us leave him thus victorious in Ire∣land,
and return to the King and Scots. The King seeing business go so ill in Ireland, re∣solves to comply somewhat neerer with the Scots, who (notwithstanding his giving Com∣missions to Montross) still sollicit him by Com∣missioners, and at length come to agreement with him. The news of this, and the Scottish great pre∣parations for warre, and as it is supposed to invade England, makes the Parliament send over to Ireland for their victorious Generall Cromwell, whom they intend to send into Scotland, to hinder their coming into England (Generall Fairfax having pleaded his disabi∣lity to go:) but Cromwell before his coming away, he reduces the City of Kilkenny, and the strong Fort of Clonmell, the one by Articles, the other by storm: which done leaving Ire∣ton Deputy in his stead, he takes Ship at Wex∣ford, and so came over to Bristoll, and from thence by Post to London, where upon Satur∣day the first of Iune, he arrived with unexpres∣sible imaginations of joy. About this time Prince Rupert who had played many pranks at Sea, is blocked up by the three English Admirals in Lisbone, (most of his Ships being before either taken or sunk) who treat with the King of Portugall to force him out of his harbour, which he by no
means, neither promises nor threats, could be induced to do, though the English surprize many of his Sugar-Ships coming from Brazill, and threaten to take the rest in case he resolves not to renounce his protection of Prince Rupert; but at last the English for want of water and victuals, are forced to depart from before the Port; which opportunity Prince Rupert ta∣king, gets out and steers for Malaga; whi∣ther the English having victualled follow them, take the Roe-Buck, force the Black-Prince and four more ashore, and Prince Rupert escaping with two Ships more, they sleight him, and giving over further search, return with victory to England. About this time likewise the English having sent Mr Anthony Ashcam Agent to the King of Spain, he arrived the 5th of Iune 1650. at Sancta Maria, where hearing many threats against his person, he procured a guard for to convey him to Madrid; where at his first arri∣vall, lying at an Inne, being the next day at dinner with his Interpreter, six roaring Dons knockt at the door, and having easie admit∣tance, Mr Ashcam rose to salute them; where∣upon the first stabbed Mr Ashcam, and his In∣terpreter endeavouaing to escape, was wound∣ed in the belly, both falling down dead in the place; the murtherers though they escaped to
the Sanctuary, were fetched out by the King of Spain, but again returned thither by the Popes speciall mandate. The League and agreement being as I said before fully concluded between the Scots and the King, so that there wanted nothing but their having him with them, which to ex∣pedite, he hastens from Breda, comes to the Hague; and there takes shipping; from whence, notwithstanding the wait laid for him, he arrives safely at the Spey in the north of Scotland, where he is received with the best entertainment the Scots could give him. But before he ascend the Throne, there are other Conditions to be agreed on, which they told him not of before; 1. He must take the solemn League and Covenant. 2. He must subscribe to a Declaration of the Kirks own framing; declaring, That he renounced the sins of his Fathers house, and of his own; the Idolatry of his Mother, by a constant adhering to the Cause of God according to the Covenant, in the firm establishment of Church-government, as it is laid down in the Directory of publique Worship, Confession of Faith and Catechisme. These and many other bitter Pills was he for∣ced to take, to purge him and make him fit for that Crown which was shortly after put upon his head.
And now the Parliament of England begin to think of their security, and for fear of an invasion from the Scots, resolve to invade the Scots; they therefore order the Armies speedy advance, which presently allarms the Scots; they send two or three Papers to Sr Arthur Haslerig, then Governour of Newcastle, ex∣postulating for the suddain approach of the English Army, which they do only to gain time, that they may be in a better readiness to receive them. The Parliament to satisfie the people of England, publish a Declaration large and spe∣cious enough, shewing the causes and reasons of the Armyes so suddain advance into Scot∣land, though indeed they could pretend no∣thing in justice, but only a fear lest Scotland should invade them. July 22. 1650, The English Army quit their Quarters at Barwicke, and advance into Scot∣land, as far as the Lord Mordingtons house; so they are now the first invaders; thence on to Copperspeth, and so to Dunbar, where they receive provisions from their Ships, and so march to Haddington. At Haddington the Lord Generall Cromwell hearing that the Scotch Army would meet him next at Gladmoore, endeavours to possess the Moore before them, but no considerable Party
of Scots appeared: Lambert and Whalley are sent with 1400 Horse to attempt somewhat on the Enemy at Musselborough, but nothing could be done; The English encamped that night within four Miles of the Scots, but the next day they perceived the Scots Camp so strongly fortified, and flankred with great Guns, that they judged it in vain to attempt any thing upon it, so the English retreat to re∣fresh themselves; the Scots fell in on their rear, and put them to some disorder, till a body of English Horse close with them, put them to the rout, and pursue them to their very trenches. Lambert was in this encoun∣ter wounded in two places, and taken prison∣er, but rescued again; two or three Scotch prisoners of note were taken, and some few slain on both sides. The English march off quietly to Musselbo∣rough, but very much tired and faint for want of provisions, and by lying open in the rain, that they expected the Enemy should fall upon them in the night, which they did, broke through the English Guards, and put a Regi∣ment of Horse to disorder; but the English sallying, and the whole Army taking the Al∣larm, charged, routed, and pursued those fif∣teen Troops under Command of Montgomery, and Straughan: These losses made the Scots keep closer in their trenches.
In the mean time affairs go on well for the Parliament in Ireland; Teoroghan-Castle not∣withstanding the stour resistance of the Lady Governess, is at last compelled to yield: Wa∣terford before which the Lord Deputy Ireton was set down, was in a yielding capacity: Ormonds, Castlehavins, and other royall For∣ces dispersed, so that there now remained on∣ly Limericke, Galloway, and some other incon∣siderable Garrisons, to the wholly reducing that Kingdome. Somewhat before this the English Plantati∣ons in Virginia, and the Caribdy Island, revolt∣ed from their obedience to the Parliament, and declare unanimously for Monarchy and Li∣turgy, but the decay of their Trade (without which they could not long subsist) and a Squa∣dron of Ships sent under the Command of Sir George Askew, quickly reduces them to com∣plyance. The Parliament of England the more to af∣flict the Scots, and encrease their misery, pro∣hibite all traffick with them, command all their Merchants and Ships to depart in ten dayes, who going without Convoy, most of them fall into the hands of the English Frigots, a∣gainst whom they could make no resist∣ance. Collonel Eusebius Andrews being taken
with a Commission from the King, is appre∣hended, and accused for a design to subvert the Government of this Commonwealth, for which he is condemned, and executed on Tower-hill; one Benney who was found to have a hand in the business, is hanged, drawn, and quartered at Tyburne. But to digress: The Prince of Orange ha∣ving a design to enlarge his power over the u∣nited Provinces, is impeaded by the City of Amsterdam; whereupon he endeavours to surprize it: but the Burgers having advice of it, by letting open their sluces forbid the ap∣proach of his Army, so his design failing, he came off with disgrace; but they afterwards came to an agreement, and the Prince was forced to be content with the power he had before, or less. The English Army in Scotland (to which it is time to return) having taken Collington-house, and Readhall by storm, and in the last the Lord Hamilton, Major Hamilton, and good store of Ammunition, and provision, move from Pentland-hills, and Collington, and Readhall, within a Mile of the Scotch Army; both Armyes march side by side in view of each other, but a Bog betwixt them hindred an En∣gagement, but the great Guns played on both sides, which nevertheless provoked not the
Scotch to fight, but still they kept under pro∣tection of the Bog, which the English seeing, retreated and marcht to Musleborough to re∣fresh themselves; which done, they draw off and march to Haddington: the Scots attending their right wing, fall on desperately, but are repulsed by Collonel Fairfaxes Regi∣ment. September 1. 1650, the English Army mar∣ched to Dunbar, whither the Scots followed them, and drew up their whole Army upon a high Hill, within a Mile of the Town: The English Army drew up in a Corn-field below, being encamped on a neck of Land, not a Mile and half from the Sea to Sea; so that the Scots Army being above them, and finding their ad∣vantage, endeavoured the gaining of Copper-speth-pass, which effected, they bragged they had the English in Essex his pound; and Lesly the Scotch Generall bragged he would have the English either dead or alive. The straits of the English were very great, many sick and disabled, and themselves pen't up in this manner wanting provisions; they resolved on the third of September, either to force their way through their Enemies, or die nobly in the attempt; a Party of Horse is first set to gain the pass, which effected, the whole Army charged, and after about an hours hot
engagement, the Scotch Horse being routed, the Foot threw down their Arms and fled There was in the Scotch Army this day neer 16000 Foot & 6000 Horse, wherof 4000 were slain, neer 10000 taken Prisoners. The En∣glish Army were not above 7500 Foot and 3500 Horse, besides disabled men. There was taken from the Scots neer 200 Foot and Horse Colours, 27 Fieldpieces, 10000 Arms, and many Prisoners of note; amongst which were the Lords Liberton, Lumsdale and Grandison. This relation gives me occasion to give you some heads of Cromwel's Letter to the Speaker, wherein the Reader may please to observe his religious canting, and judg themselves if they would not have took him for a Saint. Having given a relation of the fight and victory, he craves leave to add a few words, of which these are part, viz. It is easie to say the Lord hath done this it would do you good to see and hear our poor Foot go up and down making their boast of God; but Sr, it is in your hands, and by this eminent mercy God puts it more in your hands, to improve your power and his blessings to his praise; we that serve you beg of you, not to own us but God alone. We pray you own his people more and more, for they are the Chariots and horsemen of Israell; disown your selves, but own your authority, and improve it, to curb the
Proud and the insolent, such as would disturb the tranquility of England, though under what specious pretences foever, &c. Again, Since we came into Scotland, it hath been our desire and longing, to have avoided bloud in this business, by reason that God hath a people here fearing his Name though much deceived, and to that end we have offered much love to such in the bowels of Christ; and concerning the truth of our hearts therein we have appealed unto the Lord, &c. and more, this is the great hand of the Lord, and worthy the consideration of all those, who taking into their hands the instruments of a foo∣lish shepheard, to wit, medling with worldly po∣licies, and mixtures of earthly power, to set up that which they call the Kingdom of Christ, which is neither it, and if it were, would such means be found effectuall to that end, and neglect or trust not to the Word of God, the Sword of the Spirit, which is alone powerfull and able for the setting up of that Kingdom, and when trusted to will be found effectually able for that end, and will also do it. This is humbly offered for their sakes, who have lately too much turned aside, that they might turn again to preach JESƲS CHRIST according to the simplicity of the Gospell, &c. If this man could not dissemble well, who ever did? The Parliament ordered, that the Scottish
Colours taken from Duke Hamilton at Preston in Lancashire, and those sent from Dunbar, taken at the now recited battell, should be hanged up in Westminster hall, the one on the one side, and the other on the other side. About this time died in the Isle of Wight the Princess Elizabeth, third Daughter to the late King Charles, who had her Funerall rights performed in Newport Church in the same Island, Tuesed Sept. 24. presently after which the Parliament gave order for the sending of Henry Duke of Glocester her Brother to the University at Heidelberg (a Town of the Prince Electors) where the Parliament ordered him an allowance of 1500lb per annum. Quam diu se bene gesserit. In the mean time by the care and pains of the Lord Deputy Ireton, Munster and Ʋlster are reduced to obedience, except some Tories which stand out and lie sculcking in the woods and fastnesses. Waterford being surrendred, there was nothing now left towards the Con∣quest of that Countrey but Connaught; to which effect Limerick as the pass into it was blockt up Deputy Ireton. But let us by a little leave these affairs in Ireland, for the more im∣portant affairs of Scotland. After the Victory won at Dunbarr, the Scots not only lose all their Arms and Artillery in the
Camp, but likewise quitted Leith and Edin∣burrough; whereupon the Lord Generall the 7th of Septemb. sends four Regiments to take pos∣session of Leith (where they found 37 Guns mounted on the Platforms, some shot, and store of Ammunition) and the same day Crom∣well draws the rest of the Army into Edenbur∣rough, without any loss, save the Arm of a Souldier, though the Castle plaid hot upon them. After the Army had spent some time in for∣tifying Leith, and Cromwell had by beat of Drum and sound of Trumpet proclaimed a Protection of Markets, and liberty of Trade in Edinborrough and Leith, the Army advan∣ces towards Sterling, whither most of the Scot∣tish Nobility and Gentry had retired from Edenborrough and Leith,) and Septemb. 18. being within a mile of the Town, a Counsell of Warre was called, and a Summons resolved to be sent, for its surrender to the service of the Commonwealth of England; and accor∣dingly a Trumpeter was sent with a Letter, who being come near the Town, was met by a Gentleman on foot, with a Pike in his hand, who told him that he would neither let him come in, nor receive his Letter. The same day the Scots sent our a Trumpet, desiring a release of Prisoners upon ransome;
but Generall Cromwell returned answer, That he came not thither to make merchandize of men, but for the service and security of the Commonwealth of England. The Summons sent to Sterling not being received, caused Orders to be given for the getting of Ladders and all things necessary for a storm; but upon second thoughts, the strength of the Enemy and dangers being con∣sidered, it was agreed that the Army should draw off, which accordingly they did and marched to Linlithgow, which place lying between Edinborrough and Sterling, being judged fitting to be made a Garrison of, the Generall ordered to be fortified, and leaving in it five Troops of Horse and six Companies of Foot, marched with the rest to Edinbor∣rough. About this time Sept. 23. the afflicted Kirk of Scotland appointed a solemn day of Fasting and Humiliation; 1. To humble themselves for their too much confidence in the arm of flesh. 2. For the malignity and prophaness of their Army. 3. For the plunderings and wickedness of their Army when they were in England. 4. For their not sufficient purg∣ing their Army. 5. For their Commissioners unlawfull and surreptitious manner of prose∣cuting the Treaty with their King, and their
crooked wayes in bringing him home. 6. For their not sufficient purging the Kings house. 7. For the just grounds they have to beleeve his Majesties repentance was not sound nor from the heart. In the mean time Generall Cromwell endea∣vours to beget a right understanding with those that dissented from the King but stood for the Kirk, viz. Coll. Kerre and Straughan, and their adherents for there were three factions in Scotland, viz. one in the North was for the King without the Kirk; another party in the West, was for the Kirk without the King; the third was for King and Kirk, and these were they then at Sterling, who bore the greatest sway, viz. The Committee of Estates and Generall Assembly. To Coll. Kerr, &c. Commis. Ge∣nerall Whalley is sent with a party, but he ac∣costs them first with a Letter, declaring, That it was not unknown what amicable wayes they had used to avoid the effusion of Christian blood before and since they came into Scotland, which though hitherto hath been ineffectuall, yet they should endeavour the same. Shewing further, That their arms were still stretched out to imbrace them, when ever God should incline them to come in, and that they sought not dominion over them to enslave them, nor to depress their Kirk Go∣vernment, neither that they sought to have their
goods or estates, but to carry on the Lords work, &c. with a great deal of such like stuff. To this Letter Coll. Kerre sends an Answer to Commis. Gen. Whalley in very short terms, telling him, That though they were not in a ca∣pacity to act against the Englishmens unjust inva∣sions; yet they were in a capacity to suffer, and should submit to Gods will either by doing or suf∣fering, till the time of their deliverance came: that if it were their happiness to perish in their duty, it would be a sufficient mercy to them, and when the persecution had arrived to its height, their captivity should be returned. Adding, that he thought it strange the English should talk of a cessation, whilest they were captivating their poor people, assaulting their Garrisons, appre∣hending their Ministers, tearing them from their holy callings and from their holy sighing stocks; concluding the departure of the English out of that Kingdome, and then desiring a Christian Treaty, would be a great favour and mercy equally as great to the one as the other; that in the mean time he should stand upon his guard and expect no further overtures of peace. But to digress a little: About the latter end of this moneth of October departed this life the Prince of Orange, who had lately endeavoured to curb the High and Mighty States; in him King Charles lost his greatest interest he had in
those parts. His Princess some ten days after his death was delivered of a young Prince, which in part mitigated the grief for her Hus∣bands death. But let us look a little into Ireland, where Sr John Dungan and Scurlog having gotten to∣gether neer 500 Horse and Foot, met with a party of the Parliaments Army of about 300, charged them, and overpowring them in Horse routed them, slew 50 upon the place, took neer 40 Prisoners, and had carried them into the Woods, had not Captain Essex with about 50 Horse, 20 Dragoons, and 100 Foot come to their rescue; the body of the English Army lay before Limerick. But to return again to Scotland: Cromwell seeing that Peace would not be hearkned to, disposes his Army to the Warre; Major Brown with a party takes in Dalhouse, a supposed harbour of Moss-Troopers, of which sort of vermine he took divers in Darlington house, whom he caused to be shot upon the place. Collonel Monk is sent with a party to reduce Roselane Castle, which with the help of some Granadoes he makes yeeld to mercy. Major Generall Lambert marches to Dunfreez to joyn with Whalley (who had taken Dalkeith Castle by a terrible summons in his march a∣gainst Kerre and Straughan. This Castle wall
was thirteen foot broad at the top, and well stored with Ammunition and Provision. Collonel Kerre was now about Beebles: Lambert having with much difficulty marched over the River to Hamilton, resolves to quarter there that night; which Kerre hearing, resol∣ved to beat up his quarters, and if possible surprize the Major Generall; this he attempt∣ed with a great deal of resolution, but the En∣glish taking the Alarme intime, on a sodaine encompassed most of the enemies Horse, killed 100, took 100, besides 400 Horse and Fur∣niture forsook of their Riders, therest they pur∣sued as far as Ayre; in the which pursuit Col∣lonel Kerre was was taken, and severall of his Officers. This defeat caused Straughan to come in, who was with the rest carried by the Major Generall to the head Quarters. Cromwell all this while strongly besieges the Castle of Edinburrough, yet his mines prove in∣effectuall in that hard Rock; so that he causes an artificiall Mount to be raised, whereon to plant his battery, so that his Canons and Gra∣nadoes flew thick and three-fold at the Castle, at which the Defendants at first hung out a red Flag in defiance, but after a short time hung out a white one for Parley, which was accept∣ed, and after a great many Messages to and fro, surrendred, upon Articles agreed upon be∣tween
Major Abernethe and Captain Hynder∣son on the part of the Castle, and Collonel. Monck and Liev. Coll. White on the Generals, to this effect: First, That the Castle be sur∣rendred to his Excellency on the 24th of De∣cember, with all the Arms, Magazine and furniture of warre thereto belonging. That the Governour with all the Officers and Souldiers should then march forth with their Arms, Co∣lours flying, Drums beating, Matches light∣ed, and Bullet in mouth, whether they shall think fit. That such adjacent Inhabitants as had Goods in the Castle, should have them restored; and to that purpose they had liberty from the 19th to the 24th of December to fetch them away. The sodain rendition of so strong a hold as this was, made the world beleeve, that the Ca∣nons plaid upon it with Silver instead of Iron shot. About this time there was a kind of petty Insurrection in Norfolk, by a company of in∣considerable persons, who declared for the sup∣pressing of Popery, restoring King Charles to his Crown, revenge of his Fathers death, and for rooting out of heresie and schisme; but being only begun by a disorderly number, they were soon vanquished, and the principall ri∣sers about 20 in number executed. Sr Henry Hide having received a Commis∣sion
from the King of Scots, to be Ambassa∣dour for him at the Grand-Signors Port in Con∣stantinople; being arrived there stood in com∣petition with Sr Thomas Bendish, then Ambas∣sadour, and the Case being heard before the Vizier, the Verdict was given on Bendish his side; so that Sr Harry Hide was forced to de∣part the Port, whence coming to Smyrnd, with an intention to go for Venice, he was by a wile invited on board a Ship to a Feast, was treacherously brought away to England, and here beheaded before the Royall Exchange, for having taken Commissions from that King. The Winter being now at the height, made the War in Scotland at a stand on the English part; but the Scots having now as they thought throughly purged their King, pro∣ceeded to his Coronation, which was perform∣ed at Scone, with as much Solemnity and Gal∣lantry, as their necessities would permit, on the first of January 1651. The King crowned, they proceed to the Ex∣communication of Straughan, Swinton, and o∣thers who had deserted them, and were gone in to the English; they then strive to pacifie dissenting parties, and pass an Act for new Levies throughout the Nation. The King is likewise created Generall of this Army now
intended to be levied, with an unusuall kinde of Ceremony, viz. by crossing a Pike, Musket, Carabine, and Sword over his Head. Lothian Carre is made Major Generall; and Middle∣ton Lieutenant Generall, David Lesley having layn down his Commission. The English now beginning to stir, Collo∣nel Fenwicke is commanded to march with two Regiments of Horse and Foot, for reducing of Hume-Castle; who having faced it, sent a Summons to the Governour, to which he re∣turned an answer; the capriciousness where∣of makes me insert both. Thus ran the Sum∣mons. Sir, His Excellency the Lord Generall Cromwell hath commanded me to reduce this Castle you now possess, which if you now deliver into my hands for his service, you shall have fit terms for your self, and those with you, and ease the adjacent parts of a great Charge. If you re∣fuse, I doubt not but in a short time by the Lords assistance, to obtain what now I demand. I ex∣pect your answer to morrow by seven of the Clock; and rest To the Governour of Hume-Castle. Your Servant George Fenwick. To which the Governour next Morning returned this answer.
Right Honourable, I have received a Trum∣peter of yours as he tells me, without a pass, to render Hume-Castle to the Lord Generall Cromwell. Please you I never saw your Gene∣rall. As for Hume-Castle it stands upon a Rock, Given at Hume-Castle this day before seven a Clock. So rests without prejudice to my native Coun∣try. Your most humble Servant Tho. Cockburne. After this conceited answer of the Gover∣nours, he likewise salutes Collonel Fenwick with these Verses. I William of the Wastle Am now in my Castle, And awe the Dogs in Town Shan't gar me gang down. But after the great Guns had played a little, and a small breach was made, at which Fen∣wicks men were ready to enter, he was forced to surrender the Castle upon Quarter for life, of which Captain Collinson with his Company
took possession. Collonel Moncke likewise though in somewhat longer time had the same fortune with three Regiments of Horse and Foot in reducing Timptallon-Castle, (which had many times cut off Passengers, and done no little harm to the Country by frequent ex∣cursions,) the Governour and Souldiers find∣ing no other Conditions, being forced to sur∣render to mercy. But to give some stop to the English Pro∣ceedings, Generall Cromwell was taken with a violent Feaver, which confined him many dayes to his Chamber, insomuch that it was generally voted up and down the Scoth Camp that he was dead, but a Trumpeter coming to Edinborough from Fife (to demand restitu∣tion of a Ship laden with goods, which was taken by the English Frigots, going from Brunt Island to Fife) and there confidently averring to the Souldiers that their Generall was dead; which coming to Cromwels ears, he caused the Trumpeter to be brought before him, and not only gave him assurance of his life, but of his recovery in great measure, which at his return caused no small decrease of joy in the Scotch Army. Generall Dean about this time arrived at Leith, with a Squadron of English Ships, bringing with him a convenient quantity of
supplies both of men, Money, and provisions, together with twenty seven flat bottomed Boats for transportation of the Army over in∣to Fife, so extreamly carefull were the Parli∣ament of their Army in Scotland. In the mean time the Scotch Levies go on vigorously; Middleton marches out of the High-lands with a considerable number both of Horse and Foot. The Town of Dundee to shew their affection to his Majesty, advanced a brave Regiment of Horse at their own charge, and sent them with six brass pieces of Ordnance, for a present to their King at Ster∣ling. Whilest these things were acting in Scotland, there happened a very strange accident at Ox∣ford in England. One Anne Green servant to Sr Thomas Read, having been got with Childe by a Gentleman of the House, about the fourth Moneth of her time, by over-working fell in travell, and not knowing what it might be, went to the House of Office, where with some straining, an abortive Infant of about a span long fell from her, which being found out, she was carried prisoner to Oxford, and there condemned for the Murther, and hanged: After she had hung near an hour, (all which time she was pulled by the Legs, and strook on the Brest by some of her friends, and some
Souldiers that stood by with the But ends of their Muskets:) she was cut down, put into a Coffin, and brought to a house to be dissected by some Physicians; when they opened the Coffin, they perceived a ratling in her Throat, whereupon one standing by stamped on her Brest and Belly; but Dr Petty and two other Doctors present, fell speedily to use some meanes to bring her to life, which they did to the wonder of all men; she still as upon the Gallows averring her innocency. The Parliament now to abolish the shadow, as well as formerly they had done the substance of Monarchy, cause the Statuas of the late King, which were set up at the West end of the Cathedrall of St Pauls Church; aed that set up in the Royall Exchange, to be pulled down; and over the conspicuous place of the last, caused this ignominious, Motto to be set: Exit Tyrannus Regum ultimus, anno liber∣tatis Angliae restitutae primo. Anno Domini 1648. January 30. which might far better be inverted. They likewise cause the Kings Arms in all places of the Kingdome to be defaced and ex∣punged, the Souldiers using all violence ima∣ginable to his Majesties Pictures, though but set up for Signs.
In the mean time the Parliament are courted by severall forreign Ambassadors from the Hollander, Spaniard, and Portugall, all re∣questing peace and amity; though 'tis sus∣pected the Hollander then intended a War. But however the Parliament of England send over Oliver St John, and Walter Strick∣land Esquires, as Ambassadors extraordinary to Holland, where they were entertained with a great deal of Ceremony. The heads of their Ambassage was, 1. That a firme league and confederacy be made between the two Repub∣licks. 2. That former treaties and agreements of trade and commerce be renewed. 3. That the States of Holland would make strict search after the Murderers of Dr Dorislaus; and that like affronts might be prevented for the fu∣ture. But notwithstanding the States had put out a Declaration, commanding that none should upon strict amercements affront the English Ambassadors; yet three Moneths were past, and nothing agreed upon, but innumerable affronts received; the Ambassadors by Order of the Parliament of England returned home, infect â pace. But Van Trumps lying hovering with his Fleet of Scilly, made the English Jealous that
they intended some hostile attempt upon the place; but the reason of his hovering being demanded, the Hollanders answered, that they only lay there to demand satisfaction for such Ships, as those Pirates had taken from their people, which satisfied for the present; however the Parliament thought good to re∣duce those Isles under their own obedience, which they shortly after did, by a Fleet under Command of Admirall Blake, and Sr George Askew. In the mean time Cornet-Castle in the Isle of Guernsey, which still held out with a Party for the King, was assaulted by a considerable Party of Foot, upon information given that there was but Forty men in the Castle, and eighteen of them disabled, when upon tryal there was found sixty good men in the Castle, who made hot work for the assailants, breaking their Ladders, and killing many of them with Case∣shot from the Flankers, so that they were fain to get off by the Boat, which proved as unfor∣tunate, two Boats full of Souldiers being sunk by Shot from the Castle. Captain Browne Bushell, a Noble Royalist, who had done many handsome actions for the service of both the Kings, was beheaded under the Scaffold at Tower-hill. In the mean time the Forces under Com∣mand
of the Lord Deputy of Ireland, scatter and disperse those Forces raised by Castle-ha∣ven, Clanrickard, Dillon, and others, in the Counties of Kerryathlone, Monaghan, and Wicklow, and settle severall Garrisons, to the distraction of most of their Enemies; no con∣siderable places being left to them but only Li∣merick and Galloway. That considerable Gar∣rison of Finnagh in Westmeath, being surren∣dred to Commissary Generall Reynolds, and Phelim Mac Hugh, who came with 1500 Horse and Foot to its relief, routed, most of his Company slain, and many considerable Of∣ficers taken prisoners. But let us return again to the main business in Scotland. Collonel Moncke with a Party of Horse and Foot marches towards Blackness, a Garrison of the Scots, which had much en∣dammaged the English Quarters; which af∣ter the Batteries raised, and some Shot was spent, was reduced, the Defendants craving Quarter, which (considering the strength of the place) was granted. The Scots in the mean time grow powerfull; for notwithstanding all the strifes and emulati∣ons amongst them, an agreement is patcht up, to the seeming satisfaction of all the dissenters; they are likewise in hopes of a power to rise for them in Lanchashire, which with a consi∣derable
Party promised from Scotland to joyn with them, might confront any force of the Parliaments; but the design is discovered be∣fore it was acted, and Thomas Cooke Esquire of Grays-Inne the principall Agent for Lancashire taken. Major Generall Harrison upon these disco∣veries is sent into the North with a Body of Horse and Foot, and to oppose the Enemy if he should make an invade, by way of Car∣lisle. The above-mentioned plot was contrived throughout all England, though by ill fortune timely prevented; severall persons of quality, but most Presbyterian Divines were taken, viz. Mr Christopher Love, Major Alford, Major Adams, Collonel Barton, Mr Blackmore, Mr Case, Mr Cauton, Dr Drake, Captain Far, Mr Gibbons, Mr Hrviland, Major Huntington, Mr Ienkins, Mr Iaquell, Mr Iackson, Lieute∣nant Collonel Iackson, Captain Massey, Mr Nalton, Captain Potter, Mr Robbinson, Mr Sterks, Collonel Sorton, Collonel Vaughan, and others; of which only two suffered, viz. Mr Love, and Mr Gibbons, who after many delays were beheaded on Tower-hill, the 22. of August 1651. There hapned much about this time a petty rising in Wales, two or three hundred persons
being gathered together in behalf of the Scots King, upon a report that the English Army was routed, and the Scotch advancing into England; but the design proved as void of suc∣cess, as the report was of truth. But the Scots make severall in-falls upon the Out-guards and Garrisons of the English, wherein they had frequently good success, kil∣ling some, and taking others, having the ad∣vantage of the English in the knowledge of the Country, which makes the English contract their Quarters, drawing away the Out-Gar∣risons, and putting the Army into a posture to march to Fife; but the Ground not yet afford∣ing Grass or Oats, the enterprize was for the present suspended. The Scotch Levies were now compleated to 15000 Foot and 6000 Horse, with which they march on this side Sterling, to a place called Torwood, where the King drew up most of his Horse and Foot, and enrails them in a regular fortification. Cromwell draws up his Army towards them, and marched in Battalia within view of their Camp, in hopes to draw them to a Fight; but they got nothing else from them, then some thundring Messengers from their great Artillery. The Lord Generall vext at their delays, fals upon Kalendar-house, kept by a Party of theirs,
and in the end though it was stoutly defended out of hopes of relief, takes it by storm; but when this neither would provoke the Scots to fight, he resolves now having so fit an oppor∣tunity, to do that which he had so long inten∣ded, viz. to land some men on Fife; and accordingly Collonel Daniells Regiment of Foot having four Companies more joyned to it, and four Troops of Horse, all under Com∣mand of Collonel Overton, being imbarqued at Leith, under pretence of being sent for Eng∣land, arrived next morning on the other shore, landed and intrenched in despite of a Party of Scots which strove to oppose them. This News brought to the Lord Generall, Major Generall Lambert is presently ordered with two Regiments of Horse and two of Foot to second them, which they did; but advice of it arriving in the Scotch Camp so alarm'd them, that in all haste Major Generall Brown is sent with four Regiments of Horse and four of Foot, to drive the English out, which they might have done had not Major Generall Lam∣bert been arrived before them. So there being now almost an equall force, the Fight began to the great loss of the Scots, whereof near 1500 were slain, 1000 taken prisoners, among which Sr John Brown, Major Generall was one,
who shortly after (as 'tis supposed) out of grief for this defeat, died. Upon this overthrow the Scotch Army re∣move their Camp from Torwood, and march directly to Sterling-Park. Cromwell follows in their rear, hoping yet to draw them to a Battell, but they would by no means be indu∣ced to it, though he followed them within two Miles of Sterling. The Lord Generall perceiving his delays would be in vain, marches with his whole Ar∣my to Lithgoe, whence he sends over into Fife the greatest part of them, with the train of Artillery, to prosecute the War on the other side; the remainder with him being only four Regiments of Horse and four of Foot, which he made use of to secure what was alrea∣dy gained, and observe the Scots moti∣ons. In the mean time the Lord Lambert faces Brunt Island, which is surrendred upon Arti∣cles, without discharging so much as one piece of Artillery. The Lord Generall likewise having dispatch∣ed those affairs which detained him at Leith, crosses the Frith, and coming to the Army, draws them into a posture; and having left Colonel Wests Regiment in Brunt Island, mar∣ches with the rest towards Sr Johnston, and in
two dayes faces the Town, and being inform∣ed that there was no Garrison in it, he sends a Summons to the Inhabitants, not doubting of a suddain rendition, but it proved otherwise: for the Lord Dafferes had the day before entred the Town with 1300 Souldiers. The Lord Generall hereupon sends another Summons to the Governour, who sullenly re∣turns him no answer; but after the Artillery had played one day, his stomack came down, and the Town was surrendred upon Arti∣cles. The English Army being marched as far North as St Johns Town, the King seeing af∣fairs go so desperately in Scotland, and loath to lose so good an opportunity, advances with his whole Army consisting of about 16000, and marches with all speed possible into England by way of Carlisle. This suddain and unexpected action startled the whole English Nation, but especially the Parliament at Westminster, who though they had doubting such a thing, ordered Major Generall Harrison with 3000 Horse and Dra∣goons to attend such an irruption, yet know∣ing him unable to encounter so great a Body, they could not tell what the event might be; they therefore proceed to the leavying of new Forces in all the Counties of England; and
likewise for the better carrying on of their bu∣siness, Enact, That no person whatsoever should presume to hold any correspondency with Charles Stuart or with his party, or with any of them, nor give any intelligence to them, nor countenance, encourage, abett, adhere to or assist any of them, nor voluntarily afford, or cause to be afforded or delivered to any of them any victuals, provision, Ammunition, Arms, Horses, Plate, Money, Men, or any other relief whatsoever, under pain of high Treason; and that all persons should use their utmost endeavours to hinder and stop their march. Yet for all this the Scotch Army went on in prosecution of their design, bending their course by a swift March for the West of Eng∣land; though it was expected by the whole Nation, and especially by their friends, that they would have directed their course to Lon∣don. Generall Cromwell being at St Johnston, and hearing of this suddain march, leaving such Forces as might secure that part of Scotland which was already won, and leaving six or seaven thousand Horse and Foot more with Lieutenant Generall Monck to reduce those parts which remained; he orders Major Gene∣rall Lambert with five Regiments of Horse and Dragoons to fly away with all possible speed to
get into the rear of the Scots Army, whilest Harrison was in the Front, aad with the rest of the Army followes as hard as he could, and on the 12 of August crossed the Tine; but let us leave him following the Scotch Army, and look a little into the affairs of Ireland. Limerick though for some time blockt up, yet held out stoutly against the Forces of the Lord Deputy Ireton, they still relying upon the Lord Muskerryes help for relief, who at length having gathered an Army of near 1000 Horse and Dragoons and 2000 Foot, had an intenti∣on to joyn with some Forces which were got together in Lemster; but the Lord Broghill hearing of his design with about 400 Horse and Dragoons and 1000 Foot, endeavoured to hinder compaction, so there hapned an en∣gagement between them, which though it was bloudy to the Lord Broghill (himself likewise being indangered) yet in the end he obtained full victory over the Lord Musker∣ryes Forces, of whom there were neer 600 slain, many of them Officers, but very few taken; there were likewise neer 200 of the Lord Broghills slain, and many wounded, the dispute being very hot on both sides; yet this startled not at all either Limerick or Galloway, which were both beleaguered, and resolved to hold out to the uttermost bit of bread.
But let us return to see how the Scots direct their March in England, where being come to Warrington Bridge, Harrison endeavours to impead their passage, but in vain; for they gained the Bridge, and forced him to retire; so they march on without impediment to Wor∣cester, Lambert following them at the heels, and Cromwell with all possible expedition ad∣vancing from Scotland, the Militia in every County being raised, or marching towards them, to inclose them in that City of which they had possessed themselves. For on Friday the 23 of August, the King with his Army entred Worcester, resolving to tarry there and abide the brunt, for there were now so many Forces leavied, that all wayes were stopt to impead his Marching farther. He causes works to be raised here for his great∣er security, and sends forth his Letters Man∣datory to Collonel Mackworth, Governour of Shrewsbury, and to Sr Thomas Middleton in Wales, for leavying Forces to assist him; but both his commands and perswasions pro∣ved vain and unnsefull. And now the black day begins to draw nigh; Cromwell with an iuimaginable celerity joyns with Fleetwood, Desborough, Gray of Groby, Lambert, and Harrison, who com∣manded the rest of the Parliaments Forces; the
Militia Forces are likewise joyned to them; so they all march unanimously forward to sur∣round the Scotch Army in this pound at Wor∣cester. Nor was there ever so great an Army gathered together in so small a time in Eng∣land; for the whole force could not amount to less then 80000 men. The Army being now drawn near to Wor∣cester, the first design they set upon was the possession of Ʋpton Bridge, where Cromwell intended to pass over with his Army. Fleet∣wood had the management of this enterprize, who sends first a small party of Horse and Foot, to judge of the feasableness of the attempt: these though they found the Bridge broken down, all save only one beam of Timber, which reached from one Arch to another, boldly dismount and venture over, and secure them∣selves in a Church, which Massey (who lay in Ʋpton with about 200 Horse and 60 Dra∣goons in a great deal of security, not dread∣ing an Enemy) allarmed at, assaults, whi∣lest in the mean time Lambert passes over a considerable party of Horse to their relief; whereupon Maffey finding it in vain to fight, made an honourable retreat towards Wor∣cester, himself still bringing up the rear, in which service he was wounded by a shot in the hand.
The Bridge thus won is immediately repair∣ed, so that Fleetwoods Army passes all over whilest Cromwell causes a Bridge of Boats to be made over the Severn, on the other side, that by passing over his Army, the Enemy might be the more streightened. But let us leave them a little at Worcester in the forementioned posture, and look a little into Lancashire, where the Earl of Derby with about 300 Gentlemen, endeavour to raise the Country, and had a party of near 1500 Horse and Foot; Collone Lilburne is ordered to oppose him, with whom Generall Cromwells Regiment of Foot is ordered to joyn. To pre∣vent their conjunction the Earl marches to∣wards Manchester, to surprize that Regiment; Collonel Lilburne flanks the Enemy in their march, hoping by that means to joyn with the Regiment; which to prevent, the Enemy for∣ces him to engage; the dispute was tedious, by reason Lilburne was over-matched with Foot, but in the end the Earl was totally rout∣ed. The Lord Widdrington, Sr Thomas Ti∣desly, Sr William Throgmorton, Sr Francis Ga∣muel, with many other inferiour Officers, and about 60 Souldiers slain upon the place; Col∣lonel Leg, Collonel Robbinson, Collonel Bay, and Collonel Gerrard, with severall other Commission-Officers and Gentlemen, with a∣bout
500 private Souldiers were taken, to∣gether with the Earl of Derbeys George, Gar∣ter, and other Badges of his Order, but he himself escaped to Worcester, there to tell the sad news of his petty overthrow, which was but as a prologue to a greater. But to return again to Worcester, Fleet∣woods Army having all passed over Ʋpton Bridge, make a Bridge of Boats over the River Teame, to attaque the West side of the Town, which so alarmed the Scots, that they rise from their Leaguer at St Jones, and with a great part of their Horse and Foot advance to oppose the Lieutenant Generals passage. The Lord Ge∣nerall to divert their design leads on in person on the other side of Worcester, which he had undertook to attaque, two Regiments of Foot, Collonel Hookers Horse and his own Lifeguard, whilest Fleetwood with Collonel Goffs and Deans Regiments of Foot, marches on to a Hedge-fight, which the Scots thought most secure, and stoutly maintained their ground, till the fresh supply of Blakes, Gibbons, and Marshes Regiments force them to retire to Pawick Bridge, where they are again engaged by Col∣lonel Hayns, Cobbets, and Matthews Regi∣ments, and at length still overpowred by the Enemyes fresh supplyes, forced to retreat in some disorderly hast into Worcester.
Their success being so bad on this side against Lieutenant Generall Fleetwood, they resolve to trie if they could have better fortune against Cromwell on the other side. Therefore on a suddain they sally out with all the Horse and Foot they could, and at the first shock made Cromwels men retire somewhat disorderly, the King himself performing the duty of a valiant Commander in the head of his Horse; but at length overpowred by their numerous fresh supplyes, they were put to the rout. The Horse flying amain towards the North, and the Foot into Worcester, followed at the heels by their victors, who entred the Town with them, which they sacked; killed, or took most of the Scots prisoners, who found life or death, according to the mercy of those, into whose hands they fell. From this Battell there escaped only about 3000 Horse, most or all the Infantry being ei∣ther slain or taken, and near 100 prisoners of quality; of which the chief were, Duke Ha∣milton, Earl of Shrewsbury, Earl of Derby, (who fell now into Collonel Lilburnes hands, though he mist him before) Earl of Cleaveland, Earl of Lauderdail, Earl of Rothes, Earl of Carnwath, Earl of Kelly, Lord Spine, Sir John Packington, Sr Charles Cunningham, Sir Ralph Clare, Major Generall Piscotty, Major
Generall Montgomery, Collonel Graves, and Mr Richard Fanshaw, Secretary to his Majesty. The number of the prisoners in the whole was given out to be near 10000, together with whom was taken the Kings Standard, Coach and Horses, Collar of SS, and Star-Cloak. Major Generall Massey likewise though he es∣caped the Battell, yet not finding any secure shelter, and being grievously wounded, sur∣rendred himself prisoner to the Countess of Stamford, and was secured by the Lord Grey of Groby her son, and after recovery of his wounds, by him sent up to London, from whence he shortly after escaped. The News of this victory extreamly re∣joyced the Parliament at Westminster, who ne∣vertheless were somewhat sorry for the escape of the King of Scots, who notwithstanding the great search made for him, and the Fine set upon his head, escaped. For after having quit∣ted the field at Worcester, he with only one servant with him retired into the Woods, where he hid himself two or three dayes, till at length coming to a Gentlemans house, who had for∣merly been a servant of his Fathers, he was by him conveyed to a noble Esquires house in that County, where he lay disguised near two Moneths, till the heat of the search was over, from whence he came up to London as servant
to a Gentlewoman, and so at fit opportunity escaped into France. Many of the Scotch Nobility were about this time taken by Generall Monck in Scotland, at a place called Ellet, where they were met to∣gether to negotiate the royall affairs; viz. old Generall Lesley, Earl of Marshall, Earl of Craford, Lord Keith, Lord Ogilby, Lord Bargayny, Lord Huntly, Lord Lee, with ma∣ny other Knights, Gentlemen, and Mini∣sters, who were shortly after sent by Sea to London. The Lord Generall Cromwell after his great victory at Worcester on the third of September, (his ever propitious day) on the eighth sets forward towards London, where arriving on the twelfth he was met by the Speaker, and most of the Members of Parliament, the Pre∣sident of the Counsell of State, the Lord May∣or and Aldermen of the City of London, with great acclamations of joy, and acknowledge∣ment of the Parliaments obligation to him for his eminent services, which was expressed by the Speaker in a very elegant speech. Shortly after two of the Parliaments Chief∣tains left this world, both men of eminent conduct, the one Generall Popham, one of the Admirals of their Fleet, who was a man from whom all men expected excellent service for
them, had his dayes been prolonged: The other the Lord Deputy Ireton, who died of the plague under the Walls of Limerick, whose body (or a Coffin in its stead) was afterwards brought over into England, and laid in State in Sommerset-House, and from thence carried with as much pomp (as ever any Kings of Eng∣land since the conquest) to be interred in West∣minster Abbey, where his Effigies was likewise set up in requitall of his many services, he ha∣ving a long time been one of the Parliaments fortunate Commanders. In the mean time the Parliament take order for the speedy reducing of the Islands of Gersey and Man, in pursuance whereof Collonel Haynes with two Regiments of Foot and four Troops of Horse, set sail out of Weymouth the 16 of October, and arriving at Gersey though they found some opposition at Landing, yet they easily forced their way, and soon possess∣ed themselves of the Island, all the Forts in it being presently delivered to them, except E∣lizabeth Castle, which held out till the middle of December, and was then surrendred upon Articles. Collonel Duckenfield, with his own Gene∣rall Cromwels and Generall Deans Regiments of Foot and two Troops of Horse, on the 14th of October departed out of the Bay of Reaumor∣ris,
towards the Island of Man, and arriving there on the 17th in Ramsey-Bay, there came aboard to them an Islander, to assure them that they should have no opposition in their Land∣ing; that they might come securely under their Forts which they had taken possession of for them; that only two Castles held out, viz. Peel and Rushen, which were held by the For∣ces of the Countess of Derby, which they would help them to reduce. He is at first distrusted, having nothing in writing to show, but Major Fox being sent ashore, findes it true; so the Army lands and besieges both the Castles of Peel and Rushen, which after short time delivered up with bloud to Collonel Duckenfield for the use of the Parliament, on the 26th of October 1651, where there was found good store of provision and Ammunition of all sorts. Shortly after was surrendred to the Parlia∣ments Forces the strong and impregnable hold of Corne-Castle in the Isle of Guernsey, with good conditions to the defendants, considera∣tion being had to the strength of the place, and the bloud might probably be yet spent in reducing it per force, or the charge they must necessarily have been at in starving it out, it being still found very well victualled. Notwithstanding that numerous company
of Noble men and Persons of quality that were taken with the King at Worcester, there were none suffered under the Axe of the Parlia∣ments Justice, but only the Earl of Derby; who notwithstanding his having quarter given him for life, was by a Counsell of Warre condemn∣ed to death, and accordingly had his head se∣vered from his body on the 15th of October at Preston in Lancashire, where he first began his rising; and Sr Timothy Fetherstone who was executed shortly after. Some other persons of meaner quality suffered death at Chester, Shrewsbury, and other places. And now the Parliament having setled them∣selves so well at home, begin to take into con∣sideration the many wrongs, affronts and mis∣chiefs committed upon the English Nation by the Hollanders, together with their delays in treating for an Accommodation: therefore to shew their resentment, they put forth an Act for encouragement of Navigation, the most pleasing to the English Marriners, and displeas∣ing to the Hollanders that possible could be. The heads of it were these. 1. That no Commodity whatsoever of the growth or manufacture of Europe, Asia, Affrica or America, or any part thereof, as well of the English Plantations as others, should be emport∣ed into England, Ireland, or any of the Territories
thereof, in any Ships but such only as do truly belong to this Commonwealth or the Plantations thereof, under the penalty of the forfeiture of Goods and Vessels. 2. That no Commodities whatsoever of for∣reign growth or manufacture which are to be brought into this Commonwealth, in Ships be∣longing to the people thereof, shall be by them shipped from any places, but only from those of the said growth, production or manufacture, or from those ports where the said Commodities can only be or usually have been shipt for transporta∣tion, and from none other places. 3. That no sort of Fish usually caught by the people of this Nation, nor any Oyl made of Fish, nor any Whale, Finne or Whalebones, shall be im∣ported as abovesaid, but only such as shall be caught in Vessels belonging to the people of this Nation, under the former penalty. 4. That no kinds of salted Fish from the first of February 1653, shall be exported out of this Land in any other save English Vessels. There were severall Exceptions and Provi∣soes in it in refference to the Commodities of East-India, from the Levant seas, from the Ports of Spain and Portugall. This Act extreamly perplexes the Hollander, who upon it they send over their extraordinary Ambassadours to renew a Treaty, and endea∣vour
by all means possible the calling in of that Act which would be so pernicious to their en∣grossing Trade; but their designs failing in its recalling, they grow angry, and begin to dis∣pute the unquestionable right of the English Soveraignty in the narrow Seas, refusing to lore their top-sails; which was the occasion of that great breach of peace between these two Re∣publiques, more potent in shipping then all the rest of the Christian world. The first brush hapned thus. In the beginning of May 1652, Van-Trump Admirall of the Dutch-Fleet, with about 42 sail of Ships was discovered on the back side of the Goodwin sands, bearing to∣wards Dover-Road. Major Bourne who com∣manded a squadron of the Parliaments Ships lying then in the Downs, presently ordered the Greyhound Frigat to make sail and speak with them: which she did with the foremost, and they civilly strook their topsails, and said They came from Admirall Trump with a Mes∣sage to the English Admirall; and coming a∣board our Ships, told our men That the Nor∣therly winds having blown hard severall dayes, they were forced further to the Southward then they intended, and having rode some days off Dunkirk, had lost there divers Cables and An∣chors, professing they intended no harm to the En∣glish Nation. In the mean time Major Bourne
having given Generall Blake who was to the Westward with the rest of the Fleet, speedy advice of them, he makes what haste he can towards them, and on the 19th of May in the morning he spies them at Anchor in Dover-Road; upon sight of him they weigh and stand to the Eastward, where they met with an Express from the States; whereupon they tacked about and bore directly for the English Fleet, Van-Trump being in the head with his Flag aloft and refusing to strike: Whereupon Generall Blake lets fly three Guns, but with∣out Balls, at Trumps Flag, and Trump in dis∣dain shot off a Gun to the windward, and in∣stead of loring his Flag, hangs out a red one of defiance (as a sign to his whole Fleet to begin the fight,) and gave Generall Blake a broad∣side; which was answered immediately with another, so the fight began hotly on both sides, and continued about four hours till night part∣ed them. There was one Dutch Ship sunk, and another of thirty Guns taken with the Cap∣tains of both and neer 150 Prisoners: of the English there was about 10 killed and 40 wounded: some Ships, and especially the Ad∣mirall, dammaged in their masts, sails and rig∣ging, but no considerable hurt done. This attempt of the Dutch upon the English Fleet, whilest their Ambassadours were treat∣ing
for Peace, so incensed the Parliament, that notwithstanding all that possibly could be al∣ledged, either by those two Ambassadours then in England, or two other sent over, could not appease them, but they were fully resolved to be revenged of the Hollander for this high and daring affront; which finall answer their Am∣bassadours having received, had leave to de∣part. And now these two mighty Common∣wealths, prepare with all vigour possible for warre. Generall Blake with a gallant Fleet of Ships is sent Northward toward the Isles of Orkney, to seize upon all such as he should find fishing on those Coasts, where he took 12 Dutch men of Warre which were Convoyers to those Fishermen. Sr George Ayskew with his squadron of Ships left to guard the narrow Seas, makes prize of many Holland Merchantmen, and going to Plimouth to clear the Seas and convoy those English Merchantmen that lay there, to Lon∣don, being about 8, or 10 leagues off Plimouth, he receives intelligence of the Dutch Fleet, calls a Counsell of Warre, and resolves to find them out; and the same day being the 16th of August, between one and two in the after∣noon, they had sight of the Dutch Fleet, and presently stood towards them with all the sayl
they could pack: The Dutch were 60 men of Warre and 30 Merchant men; the English but 46 in all with Fireships and Scouts. Sr George with a squadron of seaven Ships charges through and through the Dutch, notwith∣standing they at first brunt received very much dammage in their masts and rigging; and had the rest of the Captains done their duty, they had in all probability routed the Dutchmens great Fleet, but at length the night parted them: the English in this fight had severall Captains wounded, and Captain Pack killed. Prizes of Holland Merchant-men are daily sent into the River by Generall Blake, Vice-Admirall Pen, and Sr George Askew, to the great encouragement of English Marriners, those Merchants Ships having generally good plunder, and being taken with little dan∣ger. And now a Fleet of French fals likewise into the hands of the Engliish, which as they were going to relieve Dunkirke, are spied by the English, and being pursued, are most of them taken. The names of them were, The Triton with 31 Guns, the Shepheard 29 Guns, the Gift of God 30 Guns, the Dutchess 22 Guns, the Crescent 26 Guns, the Hunter 22 Guns, the St Lewis 28 Guns, a small Frigot of 8 Guns, and 6 Fire-ships. The taking of this Fleet ma∣king the French in Dunkirke despair of relief,
caused the rendition both of it and Graveling, to the Spaniard. And now on the 28 of September happened that notable fight between the English and Dutch, commonly called the Kentish Knock. Generall Blake having discovered a Fleet of Hollanders, consisting of about sixty Sail (on the backside of the Goodwin Sands) under the Command of Admirall Dewit, makes towards them, and engages them; but the Dutch ha∣ving placed themselves under the Sand called the Kentish Knock, to hinder the English from coming to the Weathergage, they endeavour∣ing to do it had like to have endammaged themselves: for the Admirall, the Royall So∣veraign, the Resolution, and the St Andrew, and others struck on the Sands, but getting off again without any harm, fell afresh to the work, till night parted them. Next Morning September 29 the Duch Fleet was seen two Leagues Northeast off the English, who made after them all the forenoon with that little wind there was, but the wind coming to North and by West, they could not get up to them; yet some of the best Frigots were com∣manded to bear as near the Dutch as they could, and keep them in play till the rest came up. About three a Clock they got within shot of the Dutch Fleet, who fearing that by de∣grees
the English would get within them, set up their main Sails and ran for it, whom ten Frigots had in chase till six a Clock; the next day the whole Fleet pursued the Dutch into their very harbours. In this sight the Holland∣er had five Ships disabled, among which the Rearadmirall was one, whose Captain and men the English took out of her, but left her floating on the sea. The English lost not above forty men. But in the mean time the Hollanders get the better of a squadron of our Ships in the Straits, where they were eleven to four, they take the Phaenix, an English Ship of 45 Guns, which the English retake afterwards by a stratagem. The Danish Ambassadour who was come over just at the beginning of the breach be∣tween the two Commonwealths, the wound now beginning to fester, is recalled by his Ma∣ster; who was forc't to temporize with the Hollanders, and who to that effect detains 22 English Merchants Ships which were coming from the Eastland; and notwithstanding all fair treaties, would not be perswaded to let the Ships go, but took out the Goods and sold them. The Hollanders now prepare to be revenged of those rubs they had received from the Eng∣lish, and to that intent appear on the 20th of
December on the backside of the Goodwin with 90 Men of Warre and 10 Fireships; the Eng∣lish were 42 sail in the Downs, yet for all their small number resolve to fight them, though it proved to their loss; for the Garland and Bon∣adventure besides two Merchants Ships were taken, Generall Blake himself was endangered, and the Vanguard and Victory scarce got off clear. This loss made Generall Blake retreat into Lee Road, so that the Dutch bragg'd of us (as we before had done of them,) that they had pursued us unto our Harbours. The Parliament however provide to re∣venge this loss, and to that effect order fit en∣couragement to the Marriners; That their pay instead of 18s, should be 23s per mensem. That for every Prize they shall take, they have 10s for every Tunburthen, and 6lb 13s 4d for every Piece of Ordinance, to be equally distributed, besides the rifling of all above the Gun deck. That they shall have 10lb a Gun for every Man of Warre they shall sink or destroy by fire, &c. That they which will come in to serve volunta∣rily shall have a moneths pay gratis. Care was likewise taken for Provisions for sick and wounded men aboard and Maintenance a∣shore. These encouragements made the Seamen ven∣ture more willingly, so that about the middle
of February the English had a gallant Fleet of Ships at Sea, which the 18th day discovered the Dutch Fleet, in number about 80 Men of War, with about 150 Merchant men from Roan, Nants and Bourdeaux, between Portland and the Isle of Wight. About eight in the morning, Generall Blake and Generall Deane in the Tri∣umph, with three or four of the headmost Ships of the English Fleet, endured the brunt with neer 30 of the Dutch men of Warre till two or three of the Clock, when half the Eng∣lish Fleet came up, who continued the fight till night. The English in this days service had the Sampson (a Flemish Prize) disabled, the Men they afterwards took out and sunk the Ship themselves; the Dutch had one Ship sunk. Feb. 19. The Dutch steering on their course, the English made towards them, brought some of their Ships by the Lee and destroyed them. Feb. 20. The two Fleets engaged, and the dispute continued very hot for near five or six hours, till at last the Dutch begun to fire out of their sternmost Ports, and fly away; so the English gave them a chase, took fifty of their Merchants, and nine men of War. The slaugh∣ter was great on both sides, though greater on the Dutch then English. Whilest the Dutch are thus beaten in the
Channell, they give us a blow before the Port of Livorne, where the Leopard, Peregrine, and Levant Merchant are taken by them, the Sampson fired, and the Bonadventure blown up; Captain Badiley who lay out at Sea du∣ring this fight with twelve Ships, not being able or willing to come to their assistance. In the mean time arrives an extraordinary Ambassadour from the King of Portugall to the Parliament, which after many addresses, trea∣ties, and conferences is concluded, upon ob∣ligation to satisfie the English Merchants losses. From France there comes two Agents, one from the King of France, desired release of those Ships taken before Dunkirke; as also that there might be a right understanding between the two Nations. The other from the Prince of Conde, craving aid against the Cardinall and his faction, who had strongly besieged Bour∣deaux; but they both proved ineffectu∣all. And now happened a very strange alterati∣on in the Scene of affairs in England. Cromwell whose ambition was now ripe, and who knew that now he might take a very fit opportunity to usurp that power he had so long gaped for; the people of these Nations being weary of the actions of this Parliament, and their dilatory
proceedings and apparent intentions of perpe∣tuating themselves; and he perceiving that as the people were weary of them, so they would be would be willing to be rid of them: On the 20 of April 1653. enters the Parliament house, attended by some of his principall Officers, where he delivered severall reasons why that Parliament should be dissolved, and a period put to its sitting, which was immediately done. The Speaker with the rest of the Members, (some by force, some through fear, and some through murmuring) departing the house, all the Nation rejoycing, and scarce a man grie∣ved for their dissolution, but themselves; it being generally believed, that though the Na∣tion might not be bettered by this change, yet worse could not befall it. But to satisfie the wiser sort of people, Gene∣rall Cromwell and his Counsell of Officers pub∣lish a very large and specious Declaration, shewing the reasons of his dissolving this Par∣liament; in that they regarded not the Nations good, or proceeded to the establishment of a Com∣monwealth as they pretended, but only to an ar∣bitrary perpetuation of their power; and that therefore some other meanes must be sought for the establishment of such a Government, as might suit with the Liberties and Priviledges of the people.
Thus that part of the Parliament who had cut off their King and Masters head; and usurp∣ed an authority over these Nations, is turned out of doors by their servant Oliver Cromwell, and their power wholly taken into his own hands; which how he executed and improved to his own advantage, in the next part shall be declared.
FLORƲS ANGLICƲS, OR THE Government of England ƲNDER Oliver Lord Protector, from the Year 1653, to 1658. PART II. THe Parliament, or at least that part of the House of Commons which then sate, being dissol∣ved, and their power wholly devolved into the hands of their aspiring Generall Crom∣well, (their Dissolution being willingly assent∣ed to, by most of their principall Officers both by Sea and Land) he had now nothing to do, but to give notice to the Magistrates of the Ci∣vill
and Capitall Laws, to go on in the prose∣cution of their duties (the generality of the people being very well satisfied;) to which effect this ensuing Declaration was publish∣ed Whereas the Parliament being dissolved per∣sons of approved fidelity and honesty, are (ac∣cording to the late Declaration of the 22 of April last) to be called from the severall parts of this Commonwealth to the supreme Authority; and although effectuall proceedings are and have been had for perfecting those resolutions, yet some con∣venient time being required for the assembling those persons, it hath been found necessary for the preventing the mischiefs and inconveniences, which may arise in the mean while to the publick affairs, that a Counsell of State be constittuted to take care of, and intend the peace, safety, and present management of the affairs of this Com∣monwealth; which being setled accordingly, the fame is hereby declared and published, to the end all persons may take notice hereof, and in their se∣verall places and stations demean themselves pea∣ceably, giving obedience to the Laws of the Na∣tion as heretofore, and in the exercise and admi∣nistration whereof, as endeavours shall be used, that no oppression or wrong be done to the people; so a strict accompt will be required of all such, as shall do any thing to indanger the publick peace
and quiet upon any pretence whatsoever. O. Cromwell. The Dutch (however the English Nation seemed generally satisfied) yet hoped that such distractions might advance their cause and in∣terest, arising from this suddain alteration and change of the State of affairs in England (ima∣gining Chimeraes in fancies, and building Ca∣stles in the Air, with vain hopes that these con∣fusions at Land, would hinder all preparations at Sea to oppose them; so having manned out a high and mighty Fleet, they begun to play the Rex. And first having ready in their habours, a numerous Fleet of Merchant-men, bound for France, Spain, Italy, the Levant, and East-Indies, they with a Fleet of 90 Sail of men of War, undertake to convoy and secure them from all English surprizals; yet notwithstand∣ing their force, they dare not venture to con∣duct them through St Georges Channell, his Cross having so oft proved bloudy to them there, but chuse rather to steer their course round the North of Scotland, which way though it was far more long and tedious, yet was as much more safe and secure. Trump having happily according to his Commission left these Merchant-men out of all suspicion of danger, tacks about, and bends
his course to the Sound, from whence he con∣voys home a great Fleet of Eastland-Mer∣chant-men, from Russia, Denmarke, Dantzicke, and other Ports of the Baltick Ocean; and in his voyage he meets with another Fleet of Hol∣landers coming from France, which being joyned to him, he enters with a great deal of bravery into the Ports of Holland and Zealand, his Fleet in the whole consisting of between 3 and 400 Sail of Ships. The Flemmings pufft up with this happy suc∣cess, and understanding that the English Fleet was gone Northward, thought to do some noble exploit on the English in their absence. Having therefore hoised Sail, they stand over for the Downs; and on the 25 of May ranged themselves in Douer-Road with 108 Ships, where finding but three small Ships, (a poor prize for so great a Navy) they began to wreak their malice upon the Town, by beating some Tiles off from the tops of the houses with their great Shot, wherein they manifested far more folly then valour. From thence they stood off towards the North, out of a pretence to seek for the En∣glish Fleet, which they boasted they must send Hue and Cry after, but they met them sooner then they expected; for the English Fleet be∣ing returned Southwards, and Anchoring
three Leagues off the South-head of Gober, ear∣ly in the morning on the third of June espied two Dutch Galliots, which being chased by two English Frigots, brought them within ken of their whole Fleet; upon which the two Fri∣gots giving the usuall and appointed tokens, the whole Fleet made Sail with what possible speed they could to engage the Dutch; but the wind being scarce, it was near twelve a Clock before they could reach them with their Shot. This first dayes dispute was very hot on both sides, and so continued till night parted them, though little harm was done to the English, but only the loss of Generall Dean, who was slain in the beginning of the encounter, with a Can∣non shot from one of the enemies Rear-Admi∣rals, as it was supposed. The second day though it were late before the Fleets could joyn, yet the dispute proved very hot and bloudy. Van Trump had at first got the advantage of that little wind was stir∣ring, and brought up his Fleet in very good order, thinking to charge through and through the English, but his design failed; for the wind rearing about to the Westerly, the En∣glish Generals Blake and Moncke, fell in so furiously amongst the thickest of the Dutch Fleet, that they soon forced them to retire;
and their thundrings of Shot still continuing, the Dutch not able to abide it, tacked about, and with all the Sail they could make, ran to∣wards their own Coasts. But the English in respect of those dangerous flats, thought it not safe to pursue them too far, but only sent some light Frigots to discover their course. In this encounter there was no certain ac∣count could be given of the Dutch that were slain; but there were taken prisoners 6 Cap∣tains; 1350 common-Seamen and others; 11 men of War taken; 6 sunk. Of the En∣glish, Gnerall Dean slain; 1 Captain killed; 120 Sea-men slain; and 236 wounded: But in all this desperate Batrell not one Ship lost or disabled. The Dutch Fleet by the opportunity and ad∣vantage of the night, got into the Wielings; the Ʋley, and the Texell, to recruit their men, and repair their losses which were so great; but the loss on the English side being so inconside∣rable, they resolved to keep the Sea, and ha∣ving mended their torn and tottered rigging, they call a Counsell of War, where it was a∣greed on, that the whole: Fleet should make what hast they could towards the Weilings, and by ranging up and down the Coast, block up the Dutch in their habours, which they did for a good space of time, taking prizes at plea∣sure,
and not permitting the Dutch whose Fleet was seperated into severall harbours, to joyn or be in a capacity to make any resistance; so that the Dutch (having now the English Fleet constantly in sight, though against their wils) need not be put to any further trouble of making a Hue and Cry after them. But let us leave the Hollanders thus blockt up, and re∣turn to our Scepter-aspiring Cromwell in England. Who having finished his Consultations with his Counsell of Officers, about choosing those persons into whose hands he intended to put the Legislative power of the Nation, sends out his Warrants to those persons (so by him cho∣sen) (whom he will have stiled a Parliament, though they amounted not to above 140 per∣sons for the three Nations) to appear at the Counsell-Chamber in Whitehall on the 4th of July 1653. where they being accordingly con∣vened, Generall Cromwell attended by severall Officers of the Army, makes them a short speech, which being ended, he delivers them a Writing under his hand and Seal, impowring them to be the supreme legislative Authority of the three Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland, with all the Territories thereto be∣longing; and that any forty of them should be a Quorum sufficient to dispatch any publick
business, make Laws, raise Moneys, and order the affairs of Peace and War as they should think fit; only their sitting was limited to the third of Nouember 1654, and three Moneths before their dissolution, they were to make choise of others to succeed in their room. So Cromwell having canted out a prayer that God would bless them and their Counsels, dismissed them. From thence they retired to the old Parlia∣ment-house at Westminster, where having chose Mr Rouse Speaker, they began to debate what they should call themselves, a Parlia∣ment, or something else; but at last it was resolved in the affirmative (by what law or reason few canguess) that all addresses should be made to them as to a Parliament. But it is very like many (if not most) of this pact Parliament knew very well for what end and purpose they were called, viz. to make way for Cromwels future greatness; and though perhaps these were the fewer part, yet be plainly endeavoured to hedge in the greater by somenting those differences among them, which his earnest pressing them to take the Tithes and Universities into consideration, caused. About this time John Lilburn, who for his factious spirit had long lain in prison, and was
at last banished by the long Parliament, upon occasion of this change of Government, came into England, and cast himself upon the Lord Generall Cromwell for protection; but he knowing his turbulent temper, refused to in∣termeddle, but left him to the Law, so being committed to Newgate, he was brought to his triall in the Old Baily, where notwithstanding the endeavours of his adversaries, he so strong∣ly pleaded his cause, that the Jury brought him in not guilty. But however his spirit be very well known, and that he would still be carping at whatever Government should be established, he was still kept prisoner first in the Tower, and after in Dover-Castle, where Trandling according to the madness of his brain, from one opinion to another he at length fell into Quakerisme, in which heresie he died. But let us look a little into Scotland, where though the English had got possession of most of the Forts, Garrisons, and strong holds, in the Low-lands, yet the High-landers from their craggy Cliffs made many incursions into the Country, committing many Murthers, Robberies, and Outrages upon both people and Souldiers; forth with again betaking them∣selves to their inaccessible fastnesses, whither our Souldiers not knowing the Country nor
Passes, could not tell how to pursued them, and they encreasing daily into great numbers, headed by Glencarne, Atholl, Seafort, and o∣thers. The Lord Seafort having surprized se∣ven or eight men, that came ashore to seek provisions from aboard the Fortune Frigot, who layar Anchor at Lew is Island, was so vain as to send his Summons to the Ship, requiring it to surrender, but it proved as could not be o∣therwise expected, ineffectuall. The condition of Ireland was the same with that of Scotland, all the strong holds and for∣tresses being reduced to the English yoke, nor any opposition made, but what the excursions of some Tories (who lurked in Woods and Fastnesses, and did much damage to the Coun∣try people and travellers on the Road) pro∣duced. The Hollanders perceiving their force too weak to resist the English strength, send over four Commissioners, viz. Monsieur Beve∣ring, Newport, Youngstall, and Vanderpaue, (who died soon aftet his arrivall here) to re∣new again the Treaty. Though three remain∣ing Commissioners pursued their negotiations very close, yet the Treaty produced at that present neither cessation or intermission of Arms, but both parties prepared for War, and had during the Treaty a most remarkable Fight, which happened thus.
On the 29th of July the English Scouts dis∣covered a Dutch Fleet from the Weilings, con∣sisting of about 95 men of War, (which Fleet Van Trump had all that while been preparing with indefatigable labour to beat the English from his Countries harbours; and to encou∣rage and add resolution to his Seamen, had made proclamation, That all the men of War taken from the English should be the Mari∣ners, with a considerable Summe of Money to whomever should take the Admirals or vice-Admirals Flag. The English Scouts having e∣spied them gave notice to the Fleet, who made what Sail they could possibly towards them, which the Dutch discerning, stood away, and the English after them, but the wind being scarce, came not into Shot till six a Clock, when thirty light Frigots engaged them, but little was done this day, in regard the night parted them. The Dutch all night stood into the Texell, where there joyned with them 25 stout men of War more, so that now they made 120 in all. With this Fleet Van Trump the next morning by break of day faced the English Fleet: But the Generals Blake and Moncke, finding the wind somewhat high and the weather thick and cloudy, fearing the Sands or a Lee shore more then all the Dutch force, stood off to Sea, which
made the Dutch suppose a flight; so that one of Trumps Captains urged him to pursue them, telling him, that those dogs durst not abide one broad side from his Excellency; that he might clearly see they ran away for fear, and that he should not lose so fair an opportunity. But ge∣nerous Van Trump who knew the English bet∣ter, returned the Captain this modest answer: Sr be you carefull to look to your charge, and trouble your head no further, for if the English were but 10 Sail, I am sure they would fight us, and so indeed it happened; for the weather clearing up, and the wind laying, they drew up their Fleet into a body, and tacked about to meet the Enemy, who being likewise in a posture, they presently engaged. The Fight was couragiously maintained on both sides, from between five and six in the morning, till one in the afternoon, both Fleets charging va∣liantly one through the other; till at length (the Dutch Admirall Van Trump, fighting in the midst of the English Fleet with a great deal of courage and resolution, was by a Musket Bullet shot on the left Pap near the heart, and slain outright.) The Dutch began to decline, many of their Ships being likewise fired or sunk; and the amazement for their Generals death possessing the whole Navy, they hoised up all the Sail possibly they could, and made away
directly for the Texell; and the English be∣fides the damage many of their Ships had recei∣ved, were loath to be too hold on that shore, so they pursued them no farther, but steered their course to Soal buy, that they might there dispose of the prisoners, and mend their totter∣ed Sails and Rigging. The English in this Fight had 8 Captains slain outright, viz. Graves, Chapvian, Tay∣lor, Newman, Crispe, Owen, Cox, and Pea∣cock; and 400 common Seamen; they had likewise 700 men wounded, of which 5 Cap∣tains, viz. Stoakes, Seaman, Rouse, Hollan∣der, and Cabit; they lost but one Ship, viz. the Oake which was burnt by a Fireship, and had two or three more disabled. As for the loss the Dutch received, in relation to those slain or wounded, was uncertain; but their visible loss was 30 men of War sunk or fired, 6 Captains, and about a 1000 prisoners taken; but their greatest loss and indeed the loss of all was the loss of their Renowned Generall Van Trump, who had the hard fortune to be al∣wayes beaten by the English; yet could not his judgement be at all taxed, nor his fame e∣clipsed, which formerly he had so deservedly gotten, to be esteemed one of the ablest and best understanding Sea-Captains in the world. For this ominent piece of Service, Cromwels
pact Parliament ordered that Chains of gold should be presented to the Admirals Blake and Moncke, Vice-Admirall Pen, and Rear-Ad∣mirall Lawson; other Chains were likewise presented to other Flag-Captains; and Med∣dals of silver to the Officers of the Fleet, in to∣ken of their good service. But whilest our Fleets are thus victorious a∣broad, discontents are broached at home, by reason the Parliament had now sat near six Moneths, and effected nothing for the good and settlement of the Nation; having indeed done nothing at all but made that Act concern∣ing Marriages, out of meer envy and despite to the Clergy. So beginning at first to lop off a branch of the Ministers maintenance, that they might afterwards cut down the Tree. Con∣cerning Tithes it is debated in the House what saw fit to be done, and a Committee appointed to onsider of so weighty a business, who being fully convinced in a full hearing by argu∣ments, and reasons drawn both from the Laws of God and man, of the legality of it, make report to the House in the affirmative for Tithes; which so exasperated those who were of the contrary faction, that they begin clear∣ly to argue against the Ministeriall Function, urging it to be burdensome to the people, and by that strange consequence Antichristian.
There were near 60 of the Members of this o∣pinion, which the rest (though the major part, fearing would undermine them, by lay∣ing hold of some opportunity to assemble them∣selves together, and by any forty of them be∣ing a Quorum, accomplish their designes) resolve to dissolve their House themselves; which motion being made by a Member on the 12th of December, was readily assented to, and so the Speaker and severall others adjourned to Whitehall, and redelivered their Instrument of Government into the hands of Oliver Crom∣well, from whom they had received it. This Parliament having thus by writings un∣der their hands resigned again the power given them, the whole Authority both Civill and Military of these three Nations, was by this resignation strangely understood to be devolved into the hands of Oliver Cromwell. Where∣upon he calls a Counsell of Officers, who ha∣ving some others joyned with them to consult of the settlement of a Government, at length after much seeking of God (where I leave the Reader to judge of the rabble of hypocriticall canting that was blabbered out) they conclu∣ded to have a Commonwealth in a single Person: That that Person should be Oliver Cromwell, Captain Generall of all the Forces in England, Scotland, and Ireland: That his Title should
be, Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Domi∣nions and Territories thereunto belonging: That he should have a Counsell of one and twenty per∣sons to be assistant with him in the Government: That an Instrument should be framed, contain∣ing the Basis and foundation of this new esta∣blished Government, the chief Heads of which were these, 1. That the Protector should call a Parlia∣ment every three years. 2. That the first Parliament should be conve∣ned on the third of September 1654. 3. That he should not dissolve any Parliament till it had sate five Monoths. 4. That such-Bills as they offered to him, he not passing them in twenty dayes, should pass without him. 5. That he should have a select Counsell (of men faithfull to his interest) not exceeding one and twenty, nor under thirteen. 6. That the Protectorship should not be here∣ditary. 7. That immediately after his death the Counsell should choose another Protector before they rose. 8. That no Protector after him should be Ge∣nerall of the Army. 9. That in the intervals of Parliament, he
with consent of his Counsell might make Laws which should be binding to the Subject, till the next Sessions of Parliament. Oliver Cromwell now made Lord Protector, who had taken so many Oaths and Covenants before, is to swear afresh, which was perform∣ed on the 16th of December 1653 with a great deal of State, in the Chancery-Court in West∣minster-Hall, before the Judges, Mayor, and Aldermen of London, with the chief Officers of the Natron, where in the presence of God he pro∣mised upon Oath, not to violate or infringe the matters and things contained in the aforementio∣ned Instrument, but to observe and cause the same to be observed, and in all things to the best of his understanding, govern the Nations according to the Laws, Statutes, and Customes, seeking peace, causing justice and Law to be equally ad∣ministred. Presently after the Administration of this Oath, the following Proclamation was by Or∣der of the Counsell, published throughout all the Territories and Dominions of the Com∣monwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, viz. Whereas the late Parliament dissolved them∣selves, and resigning their whole powers and Authorities, the Government of the Common∣wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, by
a Lord Protector and successive trienniall Parlia∣ments is now established. And whereas Oliver Cromwell Captain Generall of all the Forces of this Commonwealth, is declared Lord Protector of the said Nations, and hath accepted thereof, We have therefore thought it necessary (as we do hereby) to make publication of the premisses, and strictly to charge and command all and every per∣son and persons, of what quality and condition soever in any of the said three Nations, to take notice hereof, and to conforme and submit them∣selves to the Government so established. And all Sheriffs, Mayors, Bayliffs, &c. are requi∣red to publish this Proclamation, to the end none may have cause to pretend ignorance in this be∣half. This Proclamation was first of all proclaim∣ed by a Serjeant at Arms in the Pallaceyard Westminster, and by the Lord Major, Sheriffs and Aldermen of London at the Royall Ex∣change, and afterwards throughout all Eng∣land, Scotland and Ireland. The City of London to shew their willing concurrence to this great Change, invite the Protector to a Dinner at Grocers-Hall, whi∣ther he is attended with a great deal of magni∣ficence, and received with as much pomp and splendor as possibly could be. There he first first makes use of the Power given him, in gi∣ving
Titles of Honour, by dubbing of Sr Thomas Viner then Lord Major of London Knight. And now out of imaginary fears of danger, the better to secure his state, a seeming Plot is found out, some Cavaliers are sent to the Tower, and the others warned from London upon it; but the Protector to shew his clemency at his first entrance into the Government, after some small time of durance, releases again those who were imprisoned in the Tower. The King of Scots being now come into France, was there honourably received by the Court where he took up his residence, at which time there were many discontents of the Prin∣ces of the blood, against the aspiring ambition of Cardinall Mazarine, in so much that it had like to have come to a civill warre. To com∣pose which difference, the King of Scots offer∣ed to mediate in order to a reconciliation, wherein he so farre prevailed, that he procured a Conference between Deputies on both sides; to whom, although he urged his own condi∣tion as an argument for the French King to compose the difference in love rather then to to stand it out; all which proving ineffectuall, both sides betake themselves to armes; the Treaty not succeeding; caused him to lie under the displeasure of the Cardinall. The Scots in the Highlands under the com∣mand
of Glencarne and Kenmore, by Commis∣sion from the King, rally and rise to a consi∣derable body of neer 4000 Horse and Foot, hoping they might once more fairly dispute their quarcell in field; but Major Generall Morgan with 1500 Horse and Foot coming upon them at their Rendesvouz, before they could get into any good order, killed neer 200 on the place, took most of the rest Prisoners, Glencarne himself hardly escaping with about 40 Horse. The three Agents from Holland having been here all this while, and little or nothing agre on for the ratification of a Peace between the two States, two of them went over to receive fuller power from the Lords States (as was pretended) but it was rather suspected that it was to fetch Money, which was the only bait by which the Protector could be won to an ac∣cord, for at their return the Peace was sudden∣ly clapt up, and by a large Proclamation an∣nexed to the Articles (shewing the reason's of the Peace, which would so much (as was pre∣tended) redound to the good of the Nation, though no understanding Englishman but might guesse at the inconveniencies of it) pro∣claimed on the 5th of Aprill at London, and after in other parts of England. And now another Plot succeeds the last, the
chief designers are pretended to be Gilbert and John Gerrard Esquires brothers, one Jones an Apotheeary, Tewdor, Fox and Vowell; the design was to have slain the Protector, raised an Army, and brought in the King; but how no man ever knew, (however these feigned Plots, or at least Plots first contrived by them∣selves, are good seturers of Tyrants and usurpers; for hereby they fright men from reall designments,) the plotters are sent to the Tower, and a High Court of Justice is erected for their triall, Gerrard and Vowell are con∣demned to be hanged, the rest are saved; Vow∣ell according to sentence was hanged at Cha∣ringcross, but Coll. Gerrard upon Petition had the favour to be beheaded at Towerhill, where he behaved himself so gallantly, and looked death so unappalledly in the face, that his very enemies were forced to admire his courage and constancy. At the very same time Don Pantaleon Sa Bro∣ther to the Lord Ambassador of Portugall, was beheaded on the same scaffold, for having com∣mitted a ridiculous Riot on the New Exchange, where (followed by a crew of mad fellowes, Ser∣vants, and Lacquies to his Brother or himself) he shot a Gentleman that was there walking, in the head, and had done further mischief, had not the noble Coll. Gerrard (who was for
an other cause beheaded before him) stopt their fury, and with his Rapier drove them be∣fore him down stairs: This Portugall came with so great fear to the block, that many deemed his life was gone before the blow with the Axe was given. The King of Scots being still in France, and finding notwithstanding his own and his Mo∣thers endeavours, that the Treaty with France and England was vigorously solicited by Mon∣sieur Newfvill: Seeing that by necessary con∣sequence the Peace being concluded, he and his party must be enforced to leave France, thought it a great deal better and more honou∣rable, voluntarily to desert that Kingdom, then to stay till he were forced out by complement: so he with his Brother the Duke of York, his Cousins Prince Rupert and Edward, retired themselves to Chatillon a house of the Prince of Conde's, from whence not long after the King and Prince Rupert went into Germany. But now Glencarne reenforced by hopes of Middletons coming out of Holland with sup∣plies of Money and Ammunition, begins to stirre again in the Highlands, exhorting his Countrymen to gain themselves immortall fame, by redeeming themselves and their po∣sterity from the slavery and bondage they now lay under, filling their ears with those vast
supplies which Middleton was to bring out of the Netherlands. At length Middleton ar∣rives, and amongst other things brings a Com∣mission for himself to be Commander in Chief, and Monroe Lieutenant Generall. But Glen∣carne looks upon this as a very high affront, that he should take the pains to raise an Army, and others be appointed to command over it; that he was a Souldier, and equally fit to com∣mand with the best, and therefore could not comport this affront done to his honour. Mid∣dleton endeavours to reconcile these differen∣ces, but in vain, Clencarne disdaining to con∣descend lower then to be Lieutenant Generall, which neither Middleton nor Monroe would yeeld to; whereupon Glencarne challengeth his adversary to a single Duell, where Fortune favouring him, he wounds and disarms Mon∣roe, and presently after with neer 506 Gentle∣men deserts Middleton, and makes his compo∣sition with the Governour of Dunbarton. However Middleton prosecutes his designes as well as he can; Generall Monk is sent against him, with Commission to be Generall of the Forces in Scotland; he hearing of these dis∣sentions, delayes marching towards them till he see the event, which happening as before, he advances towards Middleton, engages him at Loughgerry, Routs him and forces this stub∣born
Generall to fly back again into Holland. And here I cannot omit a passage which may sufficiently vindicate the Kings Majesty of Scot∣land from those aspersions of Popery laid a∣gainst him. After the Kings departure out of France into Germany, the young Duke of Glo∣cester, was placed by the Queen-Mother in a Jesuites Colledge, to be instructed in the Ro∣man Catholick Religion, which his Brother the King hearing of, sent speedy order to have him brought to him; which being obeyed, as he was departing Paris with the Marquess of Ormond, the Queen desired only that he would stay and take a dinner in the Colledge before he went; to which he answered, That though she were his Mother, yet he ought rather to give obedience to his Brother who was his King. This deniall so angred the Queen, that she permit∣ted him not to take leave of her; and after when the King sent a Letter to excuse the busi∣ness, she in fvry burnt it; which circumstances may sufficiently evidence, that the King is still truly Protestant. In the mean time our new Lord Protector, according to his Oath taken in the Instrument for Government, summons his Parliament on the 3d of September 1654, which being assem∣bled, the day before their Sessions, the Prote∣ctor meets them in the Painted Chamber;
where he only desires them to accompany him to hear a Sermon in Westminster Abby, and that afterwards he would impart his sense to them. About nine of the Clock his Highness went from Whitehall to the Abby, attended by his ordinary Guard and some of his Counsell bare, the Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal and of the Treasury, following in their Coaches, he going likewise in his Coach ac∣companied by Lambert and his Sonne Henry; here they staid whilest Dr Goodwin finished his Sermon, after which retiring into the Painted Chamber, he was followed by the Parliament, to whom he made a formall Speech much to this effect; That that Parliament was such a Congrega∣tion of wise, prudent and discreet persons that England had scarce seen the like, and that it would have been very necessary and worthy such an Assembly, to give a relation of the series of Gods Providences all along to these very times; but that being very well known to them, he should at present omit it, and proceed to the declaring how the Erection of this present Power was a suitable providence with the rest, by shewing them what a condition these Nations were in at its erection; every mans heart was then against another, every mans interest divided against a∣nothers, and almost every thing grown arbitrary:
That there was grown up a generall contempt of God and Christ, the grace of God turned into wantonness, and his Spirit made a cloak for all wickedness and profaness; nay the axe was even laid to the root of the Ministry, and swarms of Jesuites were continually wafted over hither to consume and destroy the welfare of England: That the Nation was likewise then engaged in a deep warre with Portugall, Holland and France, so that the whole Nation was in a heap of confu∣sion: but that this Government was calculated for the peoples interest (let malignant spirits say what they would) and that with humbleness toward God and modesty towards them, he would recount somewhat in behalf of this Government. For first it had endeavoured to reform the Law: it had put into the seat of Justice men of known integri∣ty and ability; it had setled a way for probation of Ministers to preach the Gospell; and besides all this, it had called a Free Parliament (blessed be God they that day saw a Free Parliament.) As for the Warres a Peace was with Sweden, Denmark, the Durch and Portugall, and one was likewise neer concluding with France. That these things were but entrances and doors of hope, but now he made no question to enable them to lay the top stone of this work; he recommended to them this Maxime, That Peace though it be made, is not to be trusted further then it con∣sists
with interest. That the great work now lay upon this Parliament, was that the Government of Ireland might be setled in termes of Honour; That they would avoid confusions, lest forreign States should take advantage by them: That as for himself he did not speak like one that would be a Lord over them, but as one that would be a fellow-Servant to them in this great affair. So to conclude; he desired them to repair to their House, and use their liberty in choosing a Speak∣er. The Protectors speech finished, the Mem∣bers immediately repair to their House, and there choose William Lenthall Esquire Master of the Rolls to be their Speaker, which done they begin upon the Instrument for Govern∣ment. The Question is in the first place pro∣posed, Whether the Legislative power shoald be in a single person and a Parliament? The Pro∣tectorians endeavour by all means possible to perswade that it should be no Question, but be carried absolutely in the affirmative. This is as strongly opposed by the greater part of the House; and amongst the rest a Member who had all along strongly opposed Monarchy, as incongruous to his interest, stood up and told them, That they could not but discern the snares that were laid to entrap the priviledges of the peo∣ple; for his own part he declared that as God had
made him instrument all in cutting down Tyran∣ny in one person, so now he could not endure to see the Nations liberties shackled by another, whose right to the Government could be measured out no other wayes then by the length of his Sword, which was only that which emboldened him to command his Commanders. Many speeches were made confirming what he had said, and in direct op∣position to a single person. These debates and divisions upon the Pro∣tectors instrument were soon carried to his ear; and therefore (he fearing that in the end they would produce irreconcileable jarrs) resolved to remedy them in time, and to put the Parlia∣ment into a posture more complacent to his de∣signs if possible; he goes therefore by water from Whitehall to Westminster, enters the Painted Chamber, and sends for those Mem∣bers of Parliament which were then sitting, to whom he declared. That the God of heaven knew what great grief and sorrow of heart it was to him, to find them falling into heats and divisions: That he would have them take notice of this, that the same Go∣vernment made him a Protector whech made him a Parliament: That as they were intrusted with some things, so was he with others: That in the Gouernment there were certain Fundamentals, which could not be altered: As,
1. That the Government should be in a single person and a Parliament. 2. That Parliaments should not be perpetn∣all. 3. That the Militia should not be trusted in∣to one hand or power, but so that the Parlia∣ment have a check on the Protector, and the Pro∣tector on the Parliament. 4. That in matters of Religion there ought to be liberty of Conscience, and that persecution in the Church was not to be tolerated. That the rest of the things in the Government were examinable and alterable, as the State of affairs did require: That for his own part his heart was even overwhelmed with grief, to see that any of them should go about to overthrow what was setled, contrary to their trust received from the people, which cannot but bring very great inconveniences upon themselves and the Nation. This was the summe of his perswasions to them; but fearing that this would not suffici∣ently win them to his interest, he provided a recognition to be signed by every individuall Member, as followeth. I do hereby promise and engage to be true and faithfull to the Lord Protector, and the Common∣wealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, and shall not (according to the tenor of the Indenture
whereby I am returned to serve in Parlia∣ment) propose or give my consent to alter the Government, as it is setled in one person and a Parliament. This was subscribed by many of the Mem∣bers, though the major part rather chose to a∣bandon the House; the rest conntinued sitting to the end of the five Moneths, at which time the Protector seeing their dilatory proceed∣ings, and that they delayed the setling him in the Government, the time being expired wherein his Instrument gave him leave (not letting slip one day nor sarce an hour) dissolves them. Some time after the time of this Parliaments dissolution, was there a horrible terrible Plot discovered, against his Highness the Lord Pro∣tector and his usurped power: The first ap∣pearance of its effects was at Salisbury, whi∣ther on the 16th of March came a Body of a∣bout 200 Cavaliers, and it being then the time of the Assizes there, they took away the Judg∣es Commissions, clapt guards on all the Innes, till they had seized upon all the Horses, then left the Town and marched towards Pool, com∣manded by their Captains; Wagstaffe, Penrud∣docke, and Jones. Another Party at the same time surprized the Town of Shrewsbury, and endeavoured to
have taken the Castle; but being discovered, that design was prevented. There was likewse a Party to the number of 800 or a 1000 men got together in Montgo∣meryshire. In Sherwood-Forrest likewise in Nottingam∣shire, there was a Party gathered together, but frighted with their own shadows, they dis∣persed; as did likewise two parties which were upon Yorkeshire and Northumber∣land. This Plot was said to have been laid all over the Nation, though there were so few appear∣ances, and all those vanished of themselves, except that commanded by Wagstaffe, Penrud∣docke, and Jones, which being pursued by Collonel Ʋntoncrooke out of Wiltshire into De∣vonshire, were by him and John Copleston Es∣quire Sheriff of Devon totally routed, Penrud∣docke and Jones taken, and Penruddocke with some others executed. For this service the Protector afterwards dubbed the Sheriff of De∣von, and in token of more favour gave him the Sword wherewith he Knighted him. About the end of this year 1654, died that famous Antiquary and accomplished Scholler Mr John Selden of the Inner Temple, whose fame was so great in Forreign parts, that many per∣sons of known wisdome and Learning, came
over on purpose into England to see and ad∣mire him. Nor need any give him any larger Encomium, then the Right Reverend Bishop of Armagh gave him in the Pulpit when he preacht his Funerall Sermon, viz. That he esteem'd Mr Selden a man of such vast parts and Learning, that he judged himself not worthy to carry his Books after him. The Protector had a great while been pre∣paring a mighty Fleet with all necessary pro∣visions for some notable voyage; all the world standing amazed at his preparations, and every one fearing thuir own States, they could not guesse whither his design tended. At length those vast preparations produced two mighty Fleets, the one under command of Generall Blake, was fitted only for the Sea and sent to the Streights; The other about two moneths after was committed to the charge of Generall Pen, who was to take aboard him a Land Ar∣my commanded by Generall Venables. These Land Forces being about 3000, were divided into the severall Ships, which were in number 30 sail of good Ships, but not provided with Provisions necessary for so great an Army, nor so long a voyage; nor indeed could the Com∣manders provide themselves things fitting, they not knowing whither, nor how farre they were to go.
The 19th of December 1654, this Fleet set sail for Portsmouth directly for the Barbadoes, where the Generals had order to break open their Commissions, this being the appointed place of Rendesvouz, whether having a fresh gale of wind and fair, they arrived on the 29th of January, and came all to anchor in Carlyle-bay, where presently after they landed their men. The sudden departure of these two great Fleets, made the King of Spain (who feared thry were designed against him,) to send an express command to the Marquess of Leda then Governour of Dunkirk, to pass into Eng∣land in the quality of an extraordinary Am∣bassadour, to see if he could possibly search out the certainty of that grand Court secret: he accordingly being arrived in England, spent severall days here, but having no satisfaction in that which he most of all desired, returned back again. But to return to our West-India voyage: whilest the Fleet abode at the Barbadoes, the Generals, Collonels and inferiour Officers look'd diligently after their respective charges; the Shallops brought in quarters out of Eng∣land are set up; the Coopers are ordered to trim the Watercaske: two Frigots are sent to St Christophers and St Mevis to raise Men; the
Generals striving to compleat their Regiments at the Barbadoes, and form Regiments out of the Seamen to serve upon occasion; and at length being in a full readiness, they shipt about 6000 Men, and a Troop of Horse (which the Islanders of Barbadoes had set out at their own charges) and on the 31th of March 1655, set sail from the Barbadoes, and six days after arrived at St Christophers, where there joyned with them 1300 Voluntiers, (the Planters ser∣vants both here and at the Barbadoes, being ready and willing to go, upon condition that their time should go on, and that they might as well be free by serving the State as their Ma∣sters) so though the Fleet were encreased by 20 sail of Dutch Merchant-men (which were seized on at the Barbadoes, for trafficking there contrary to the Articles of Peace between the two Nations) yet were all the Ships as full as they could well hold, though there were hardly Provisions (the chance supposed which might in probability retard the voyage consi∣dered) for half the number that was aboard; but as they were, they set sail from thence, and steered their course directly for Hispaniola, whither on the 13th of Aprill the whole Navy arrived, and came within sight of Sto Domingo, upon which place their first and chief enter∣prise was designed: Being here a generall
Counsell of Warre was called, and by their whole votes it was agreed, that Generall Ve∣nables should land with his Forces: and he ac∣cordingly the next day lands 7000 Foot, a Troop of Horse, and three days Provision about ten or twelve leagues to the westward of the Town. The Souldiers were half out of their wits, with consideration of the great moun∣tains of Gold which they expected to find in the Town, insomuch that every man encou∣raged his fellow with hopes of being made for ever; there seem'd such an universall courage over the whole Army (though more out of the hopes of an imaginary gain then true va∣lour) that without doubt had not those hopes been quell'd, there might have been almost a certainty of victory presupposed. But the Generall (I know not whether according to his Instructions, or the desire he had to en∣gross the whole spoil to himself, or at least get it into his own hands) finding their designs and intentions, immediately causes Proclama∣tion to be made, that upon the taking of Sto Domingo, (which he might perhaps have had had this Proclamation been kept in) no man should presume to plunder either Money, Plate or Jewels, or take or kill any tame Cattell whatsoever, upon pain of death. This without doabt was in great part the ruin of the business;
for had the Souldiers had but the hopes of so great a gain as they promised themselves, they would have undergone those dangers and streights which so much weakned them, with thrice the courage they went, and without that vexation of spirit for an imaginary loss, which destroyes a man more then the pain and travell of his body; however their streights were great, for they passed through almost unpassa∣ble Woods, through which they were forced to cut their way, and where they found not a drop of fresh Water, so that what with the heat of the Sun, which was excessive and pierced their very brains, and the Drought which that heat caused, together with their discontent of mind, (and we know sorrow is likewise dry) they were most of them grown faint, and dis∣abled for service. Having marched thus two dayes and half, and with much difficulty passed those Woods, (though without any opposition but what those Woods themselves, the heat of the Sun, and want of fresh Water made) they at length joyned with Collonel Bullards Brigade, con∣sisting of three Regiments of Foot, (which Ad∣mirall Pen bad landed on the side of a Bay, a∣bout two Leagues from the Town, where like∣wise a fresh-water River disburdned itself, and which was the appointed place for conjunction
of the whole Body, which consisted now of 9000 or 10000 men, though most fainting, scarce able to walk much less fight for nothing; but the Army being thus conjoyned, they make what speed to march on, not doubting but to possess the Town on the suddain. There first advances a forlorne hopes of about 500 men, commanded by Captain Cox the chief guide for the place, after whom followed the main Body of the Army. Being thus come within four Miles of the Town, the Spaniards with a small Party of Horse suddainly encounter the forlorn hopes, and in an instant routed them, forcing them through the next Regiment, which they likewise put to flight, and had pursued their victory to the slaughter of most of them, had not the whole Army come up to their relief. Whereupon the Spaniards in very good order and without any considerable loss, retired to a Fort close by the Woods; but there were near 50 of the English slain, besides Captain Cox chief guide (as I said before) for the place. The Generall having received this loss, and finding that the chief reason of his mens weak∣ness was want of Water, retreats back again to the River before spoken of, resolving that he would having refreshed his men, carry on his design against all resistance; and to that effect causes scaling Ladders to be made, and two
small Drakes with a Mortar-peece and Grana∣do-shells to be landed from the Fleet, which were to be convoyed by Water, near the Town. And so being in readiness they once more advance towards the Town, some guides having undertaken to lead them by a private way, without danger of the Fort; but missing the intended way, they fell again into the same path, and into worse disgrace then they had formerly received; for the Spaniards ha∣ving certain advice by the Negroes and Molat∣toes of the English March, resolved to enter∣tain them in their passage, and according as they had resolved it so they performed it. For on the 25th of April 1655, the whole Army approaching near a Brick Fort (built there by the Spaniards, and defended with nine good peeces of Ordnance, and 300 men) were up∣on a suddain charged by a Party of the Enemy, which lay undiscovered among the Trees. These resolute fellows though not above 70 in num∣ber, having fired a volley of Shot upon the for∣lorne hopes, flew in upon the English (who were already wearied and almost choaked with thirst) with their steel Lances, and that with such fury, that in a moment they routed both them and the Generals Regiment, with near half of the Army, who flying back into the Rear, possessed them there with such a pannick
fear, that every man began to fly and shift for himself, whilest the Spaniards pursued their victory with infinite slaughter, finding no re∣sistance, but what was made by that only in this action valourous Gentleman Major Gene∣rall Haines, who resolved not to stir a step, but fighting valourously in the midst of his Ene∣mies, sold his life at no cheap rate. At length the Spaniards weary of killing, retreated with seven English Colours, which they carried with them as sure Trophies of the victory. There were sound dead of the English 600 up∣on the place, 300 wounded, besides 200 more who flying into the Woods to save themselves, were afterwards knockt on the head by the Molettoes and Negroes. Upon this distaster, the Army that night drew up to the Spanish Fort, and planted a Mortar-peece in a convenient place, and all things were in readiness for a battery, when on a suddain the Army was commanded to draw off, and without doing any harm to march to their old Watering place in the Bay. For what in∣tent or by whose counsell this was done, I have not the capacity to guess. And now they were come into the Bay there wanted victuals, so that they were forced to go out in Parties to fetch some in, whence ma∣ny of them came short home, being knockt on
the head by the Negroes: Till at last forced by necessity, they were fain to eat the Horses of their own Troop. In this miserable condition they remained some days, till at length a re∣solution was taken to ship them, which being finished the third of May, the whole Fleet set Sail, and on the 10th arrived in the Port of Ja∣maica, whither they bent their course from Hispaniola, and though they failed of their first enterprize there, yet here they had better success, for they soon possessed themselves of the chief Town called Oristano, where the Ar∣my began to take up their habitation, and to plant. This hath since proved a pretty thri∣ving Island, profitable to the English, and an ill neighbour to the adjacent Spanish Islands. Shortly after (but one after the other) the Generals Pen and Venables returned into Eng∣land, whom at their arrivall the Protector in thanks for the service they had done, commit∣ted to the Tower. Thus much concerning this unfortunate voyage: Let us now sweeten it a little with the noble exploit performed by Generall Blake in the Streights, whither he was sent with a gallant Fleet to scour those Seas of Turkish Pirats, which took and destroyed many En∣glish Ships, making slaves of their persons. He first seeks for them out at Sea, but missing
his aims there, resolves to seek them where they were to be found: And first on the 10th of March arrives at Algier, where the most con∣siderable both in quantity and quality lurked, be anchored without the Mold; he sends a Messenger to the Dye, requiring restitution of such English Ships as had been taken by them, and that the Captives be immediately released. The Dye having provided a large present of Beef and Muttons, and other fresh provisions alive, returns the Messenger with them, and this answer to the Generall: That the Ships and Captives already taken were of particular men, and therefore it lay not in his power to re∣store them, without the generall discontent of all his Subjects. Yet as for the English Captives that were there, if he pleased to redeem them he should, and he would set a reasonable and indiffe∣rent price upon their heads. And that if the Generall thought good, they would conclude a peace with him; and for the future offer no acts of hostility on their part, to any of the English Ships or Natives. This answer seemed satis∣factory to the Generall, and accordingly the Captives were redeemed, and a peace conclu∣ded. This business thus dispatched at Algier, he bends his course for Tunis, where having sent a Summons to the Dye, he received but a rough
complyance, they wholly slighting his desires. And having drawn their Ships under the Castle of Goletta, thought them secure, sending him word; That there were their Castles of the Go∣letta, and their Ships and Castles of Porto Feri∣no, that he should do his worst and not think to sear them with his Fleet. This resolute an∣swer exasperated both the Generall and Sea∣men, who resolved to be revenged for this in∣solence. A Counsell of War is called, who conclude on a resolution to burn those nine Ships in Porto Ferino, which they effected thus. Every Ships Boat being manned with stout and resolute Mariners, are sent into the Harbour to assault and fire the Ships, whilest the Ad∣mirall, Vice-Admirall, and Rear-Admirall, ply continued broad sides upon the Castle, to hin∣der it from endammaging their Boats, who af∣ter a stout assault fire the Ships, and return back again with the loss of but 25 men, and 48 wounded. This noble action of Generall Blake resounded to the praise of the English Nation, as far as the Port of the Orand-sig∣nor. But to digress a little from our Story: A∣bout this time happened the Queen Christiana of Swedelands unparalleld resignation of her Crown and Kingdome, to Carolus Adolphus her Kinsman, being contented from a mighty
Princess, to put her self into the condition of a Lady Errant; only these Conditions she would have granted and accorded to by her suces∣sor. 1. That she retain a good part of her, King∣dome, and the Custome to her self. 2. That she will be no Subject, but free of her self without controul. 3. She will travell whither she pleaseth. To these the Prince replyed; 1. That he would not be a King without a Kingdome. 2. That he will have no Rivall nor Superi∣our. 3. That he will not hazard himself about her designes abroad. How these Differences in the Proposals were accommodated I know not, but shortly after she resigned up her Kingdome to her Co∣zen, leaving to her self only the bare title of Queen, but to him both the title of King and possession of a Kingdome. With him the Lord Whitlock who had some time been Ambassador there, soon concluded a firm League both of∣fensive and defensive between these two Nati∣ons; the effects of which had been felt to pur∣pose in some parts of Christendome, had Oli∣ver Cromwell lived much longer then he did.
The horrible massacre which had been com∣mitted by the Forces of Charles Emanuel Duke of Savoy, upon the poor Protestants in Pied∣mont: The Protector to shew his pious care of his fellow-Brethren, ordered a day of Humili∣ation to be kept, and great summes of Money raised for their relief, though 'tis highly sus∣pected most of it was otherwise employed. And now the Lord Protector to curb the people the better, and secure himself, consti∣tutes a new kind of Officers, called Major Ge∣nerals of Counties; but in effect the same with Turkish Bassaes, he divides England into ele∣ven parcels amongst them. The Names of these Bassaes or Major Generals as he called them, and their severall parts were as follow∣eth, viz. Major Haynes For Essex, Suffolke, and Norfolke. Collonel Kelsey For Kent and Surrey Collonel Goffe For Suffex, Hampshire, and Barkeshire. Lieutenant Generall Fleetwood For Oxfordshire, Bucks, Hartford, Cam∣bridge, Isle of Ely, Essex, Norfolke, and Suf∣folke. Major Generall Skippon For the City of London.
Commissary Generall Whaley For Lincolnshire, Nottingham, Derby, War∣wicke, and Leicestershire. Major Butler For Northamptonshire, Bedford, Rutland and Huntington. Collonel Berry For Worcester, Hereford, Salop, and North-Wales. Collonel Wortly For Cheshire, Lancashire, and Staffordshire. Lord Lambert For Yorkeshire, Durham, Cumberland, West∣merland, and Northumberland. Collonel Barkestead For Westminster and Middlesex. The greatest service which these Major Ge∣nerals did the Protector, was the forcing the Delinquents in their respective Provinces, to pay in the Decimation of their Estates for old offences; which performed, he himself find∣ing these Major Generals to be an eclipse of his glory, reduced them again to their former Stations. Another design of the Protectors to raise Money, should have been the introduction of the Jewes into England: Here was two hun∣dred thousand pounds to be got, which made the care of the encrease of the Church of Christ
lye extreamly. So he proposes it to severall Ministers for their approbation, alledging that since there is a promise for their conversion, means must be used to that end, which is the preaching of the Gospell, and that cannot be had, except they be permitted to reside where the Gospel is preached. But notwithstanding these Ar∣guments, the design was declaimed against both by Clergy and Laity; so the Jews were denied their Re-admission, though 'tis suppo∣sed the Protector swallowed down some part of that sweet promised morsell. The Spaniard having had certain advice of the attempt and repulse of the English at Hi∣spaniola, and their Possession of Jamaica, thought this a sufficient breach of the peace, (though there was never any peace made with him beyond the Line, he alwayes taking those English Ships he could light on and master, though they went to traffick thither) present∣ly makes a seizure of all the English Merchants persons and goods then resident in Spain; so that the War begins to grow hot on both sides the Tropick. The Protector therefore orders the Generals Blake and Montague, to block up Cadiz, the chief Port-Town of the King of Spain, and whither his Plate-Fleet used yearly to come. He likewise endeavours a peace with France, (who had had Wars with Spain for a
long time) to which the Cardinall Mazarine consenting, it was easily concluded on. The French King being so inhumanely unworthy as (upon Mazarines instigations) to banish his Majesty the King of Scots, and the rest of the late Kings children his nearest relations, out of his Dominions; though indeed he could do no more but forbid their re-entrance, they being already gone to further the making of a peace with him, who had so unjustly exposed them from their inheritances. The English Fleet under Montagues and Blakes Command, had for a good while in a manner besieged Cadiz by Sea, but could by no exasperations be drawn out of their harbour to fight them, the Spaniards thinking it a sa∣fer policy to let the English beat at Sea, and at last be forced to depart for want of provisions, rather then venture either men or Ships against them, who they had seen so well experienced in such terrible Sea-fights with the Hollander. But the English found in Wyers Bay in Portu∣gall, a convenient supply both of Water and provisions, which proved a great deal nearer, then the Spaniard imagined they would be for∣ced to fetch it. Hither were the Generals gone for fresh Water and provisions, having left only a Squa∣dron of seven Ships, under Command of Cap∣tain
Stainer, before the Port of Cadiz, to have an eye upon whatever Ships should pass in or out at that Port. Being thus plying to and fro thereabouts for some dayes, it happened that a stiff gale of Wind forced Stainer to stand out to Sea, where he spied a very pleasing ob∣ject, part of the King of Spains Fleet coming from the West-Indies, and making directly for Cadiz; he was somewhat to the Lee-ward, made up towards them with all the Sail they could possibly, and after some two hours hard plying, Captain Stainer with his Ship, the Speaker, the Bridgewater, and the Plimouth Frigots got up to them, (the other four of the English never being able to come up) and pre∣sently these three engaged them. Though the Spaniards were eight tall Ships or Galleons, yet in short time the Spanish whole Fleet was spoiled, whereof one was sunk, two burnt, two ran ashore and were bulged, one escaped, and two remained in the hands of the English, one whereof had a great quantity of Plate and Cochenill in her, the other was for the most part laden with Hides. In these Ships many persons of note were taken, who together with the Ships were safely convoyed home, to the great joy of the Protector, who made a particular day of Thanksgiving to God for so great a booty.
But notwithstanding the late great Plate prize, yet our Protector is still necessitated for Moneys; therefore to procure some, and out of a longing desire he had to have his power confirmed to him by the people, hoping that a new Representative might grant him that which the first denied or refused, issues out his Writs for the Election of another Parlia∣ment. Yet remembring the speeches and carriages of many Members in the late Parliament, he gave secret advice to the Sheriffs in most Coun∣ties, not to permit them, if possible to be cho∣sen; however the people in most Countries choosing according to respect, his secret ad∣vice would scarce hold water. The 17th of September 1656, this Parliament met first at Westminster, where they found the ancient priviledge of Parliament broken, by a promise imposed upon every individuall Mem∣ber, before he should be permitted to sit in the House; to wit, that he would not act any thing prejudiciall to the Prebyterian Government; which promise so to be made, so digusted ma∣ny of the Members, that they choose rather to return home; but the major part assenting to it, entring the House, chose Sr Thomas Wid∣drington for Speaker, and began to act suita∣ble to the wishes and desires of the Protector.
For first that they might secure his Highness person (whose loss would certainly have been the ruine of the Nation) against all attempts which should be made against him by the Ma∣lignant Party, or such desperate Fellows as Sindercombe. They make an Act, wherein it was Enacted high Treason for any to attempt, compass, or imagine the Protectors death. They likewise considering the end for which they were called, grant him round summes of Money for the carrying on of the Spanish War; and to that effect make these ensuing Acts. An Act for an Assesment upon England for three Moneths, at the rate of a Moneth 60000lb On Scotland for three Moneth a Moneth. 05000lb On Ireland for three Moneths a Moneth. 05000lb On England, Scotland, and Ireland, for three years. England to pay 35000lb. Scotland to pay 06000lb. Ireland to pay 09000lb. An Act for continuing of Tunnage and Poundage. An Act for preventing the multiplicity of Buildings in about the City of London, and within ten Miles thereof. A whole years re∣venue
to be prefently paid for dwelling, or Out-Houses, that have been reared upon new foun∣dations since the year 1620. An Act for Excize of Merchandise import∣ed. These with many other being presented to the Protector for his consent, were by him gladly passed, at which time he spake some∣what to this effect to the Speaker. I perceive that among these Acts of Parliament, there hath been a very great care had by the Parliament, for the just and necessary support of the Common∣wealth, by these Bills for leavying of Money now brought to me, which I have given my consent unto. And understanding it hath been the practice of those who have been chief Governours, to acknowledge with thanks to the Commons their care and regard of the publicke, I do very hearti∣ly and thankefully acknowledge their kindness herein. But let us a little leave the Parliament per∣fecting all things to the Protectors content, and see a relation of the victorious Generall Blakes thrice worthy exploit at Sancta-Cruze. Generall Blake lying with his Fleet near Ca∣diz, had advice brought him that the Spanish West-India Fleet was put into the Port of Sancta-Cruze in Teneriffa, the chief Island of the Canaries. Whereupon the Fleet weighs
Anchor, and on the 20th of Aprill 1657, were at the mouth of Sancta-Cruze Bay, where they espied the Spanish Ships sixteen in number, ly∣ing in an order almost semi-circular; at the mouth of the Haven stands a Castle well fur∣nished with Guns, and besides that seven Forts more with three, four, and six Guns a piece, so that the passage in must needs be dangerous or rather desperate. Besides Don Diego D'aques the Spanish Admirall to make all safe, had caused the smaller Ships to be mored alongst the shore, and the six great Gallions lay far∣ther off at Anchor, with their broad sides to∣wards the Sea. Generall Blake having per∣ceived this posture of defence in which they lay from the offing, presently calls a Counsell of War, where it was resolved that they should presently attaque them, not at all considering the eminent hazard. Captain Stainer Com∣mander of the Speaker is ordered first in with them, who presently falls upon the Ships, not at all considering or regarding the number of the Shot, which the Forts on every side conti∣nually powred upon him; and maintains near an hours Fight, till the Generals Blake and Montague (having ordered some Frigots to ply the Forts and Brest-works with continuall broad sides) came up, and with all their pow∣er encountered the Spaniards, who though
they made a gallant resistance, yet in four hours space they were driven out of their Ships, which though possessed by the English, yet could not easily be brought away, so they were by them fired to the number of sixteen small and great. This noble attempt cost the English but 48 men, and 120 wounded. The Spaniards be∣sides the loss of their whole Fleet, had many hundreds of men slain on the shore, and in the Forts and Brest-works, besides those which lost their lives in the Ships. For this noble exploit the Protector by Or∣der of Parliament, sent a Diamond Ring worth 500lb, for a present to Generall Blake. And Captain Richard Stainer who led on the first Squadron, was at his coming to England, for this and his former service, Knighted. This year happened a Conspiracy of other sort of men then Cavaliers; for on the 19th of Aprill 1657, at a House in Shoreditch, severall discontented persons who had been formerly of the Army, were apprehended, who had ap∣pointed to have Rendesvowzed on Mile-end-Green, and so have marched into other Coun∣ties to augment their Party. Store of Arms were taken, and the number of the Conspira∣tors being many, they were disposed of in se∣verall prisons. Major Generall Harrison, Vice-Admirall Lawson, Collonel Rich, and
Major Danvers, were secured as the chief Ring∣leaders. This was called the Plot of the fifth-Monarchy-men. The Protector out of a desire he had to keep the Spaniards to it every where, makes a pri∣vate agreement with France, to send out a Bri∣gade of his best Infantry, (which the French extreamly wanted) to assist them in Flanders. These were begun to be raised about the 4th of May 1657; and about the latter end of the Moneth, having had a very fine passage into Picardy; joyned with those Forces command∣ed by the Marshall of Turene. Over these Sir John Reynolds (one of the Protectors Knights, but formerly Commissary Generall of the Ar∣my in Ireland) was appointed Commander in chief, and Collonel Morgan was made Major Generall. But to return a little to our affairs at home: The Parliament had long been debating con∣cerning the settlement of his Highness, and had almost concluded of it; when on a suddain a Paper was sent into the House, desiring his Highness advance of Title. Upon this the grand machine of Government was printed, entituled, An humble Petition and Advice, humbly entreating that his Highness would be pleased to change his Title of Protector, to that of King. This was extreamly averse to
his nature, who (God bless us) would be a Servant and not a Master of his Country. He knew Monarchy to be odious both to the Ar∣my, and (as he said) to the people; and therefore he gave the Parliament this positive answer in the painted, Chamber, That he could not accept the Government under the Title of a King. Whereupon the Parliament voted that Protector should be the Title of the chief Ma∣gistrate; and the Petition and Advice being altered accordingly, nothing now wanted to the making it a Law, but his Highness appro∣bation: So a Conference is desired with him, which granted, the Protector on the 25th of May 1657, meets the Parliament in the pain∣ted Chamber, where Sr Thomas Widdrington Speaker presents him with the humble Petition and Advice, the substance whereof was 1. That his Highness Oliver Cromwell un∣der the Title of Lord Protector, would be plea∣sed to execute the Office of chief Magistrate over England, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Ter∣ritories thereunto belonging, &c. and to govern according to all things in this Petition and Ad∣vice: And also that he would in his life time ap∣point the person, that should succeed in the Go∣vernment after his death. 2. That he would call a Parliament consist∣ing of two Houses once in three years at farthest.
3. That those persons who are legally chosen by a free Election of the people, to serve in Par∣liament, may not be excluded from doing their duties, but by consent of that House whereof they are Members. 4. That none but those under the Qualifica∣tions therein mentioned, should be capable to serve as Members in Parliament. 5. That the power of the other House be li∣mited, as herein prescribed. 6. That the Laws and Statutes of the Land be observed and kept, no Laws altered, suspen∣ded, abrogated or repealed, or new Laws made, but by Act of Parliament. 7. That the yearly summe of a Million of pounds sterling, be setled for maintenance of the Navy and Army, and three hundred thousand pounds for support of the Government, besides o∣ther temporary supplies, as the Commons in Par∣liament shall see the necessities of the Nation to require. 8. That the number of the Protectors Coun∣sell shall not be above twenty one, whereof the Quorum to be seven. 9. The chief Officers of State, as Chancel∣lors, Keepers of the great Seal, &c. to be ap∣proved by Parliament. 10. That his Highness would encourage a godly Ministry in these Nations, and that such
as do revile and disturb them in the worship of God, may be punished according to Law, and where Laws are defective, new ones to be made. 11. That the Protestant Christian Religion, as it is contained in the Old and New Testament, be asserted and held forth for the publick profession of these Nations, and no other; and that a Con∣fession of faith be agreed upon, and recommended to the people of these Nations; and none be per∣mitted by words or writings, to revile or reproach the said Confession of faith. The Petition and Advice of which the fore∣going Lines were the heads, being in the pain∣ted Chamber read to the Protector, was by him passed, though with much seeming reluctan∣cy; he declaring, That he came not thither that day as to a triumph, but with the most serious thoughts that ever he had in all his life, being to undertake one of the greatest burthens, that ever was laid upon the back of any humane creature; so that without the support of the Almighty, he must necessarily sink under the weight of it, to the damage and prejudice of these Nations. That this being so, he must ask the help of the Parliament, and the help of all those that fear God, that by their prayers he might receive as∣sistance from the hand of God, seeing nothing but his presence could enable him to the discharge of so great a trust.
That seeing this is but an Introduction to the carrying on of the Government of these Nations; and forasmuch as there were many things which could not be supplied without help of Parliament, he thought it his duty to desire their help; not that he doubted of it, for he believed that the same spirit that had led the Parliament to this, would easily suggest the rest to them. That nothing should have induced him to have undertaken this intollerable burthen to flesh and bloud, had he not seen that it was the Parlia∣ments care to answer those ends for which they had engaged, calling God to witness, that he would not have undergone it, had he not saw it to be determined by the Parliament, to make clearly for the liberty and interest of the Nation, and preservation of such as fear God; and that if these Nations be not thank full to them for their care therein, it would fall as a sin upon their heads. To conclude, he recommends to them other things which would tend to Reformation, and the discountenancing of vice, and encouragement to good men and vertue, desiring them that they would not be wanting in any thing that might make for the good of the Nations. So wishing the Lord to prosper their endeavours, ends. The Members having heard this speech are dismissed, and return to their House, whi∣ther
in few dayes the Protector sends them a Letter, desiring their adjournment some con∣venient time, till the Inauguration of his High∣ness the Lord Protector, could be convenient∣ly performed. And accordingly they passed a Bill for their adjournment from the 26th of June 1657, to the 20th of January following, the said 26th of June being the day appointed for his Highness solemn investiture. His Highness with accustomed Ceremonies, being conducted to the place which was pre∣pared for him, under a Cloth of State in West∣minster-hall, the Speaker in the name of the Parliament, presents severall things (which were ready laid upon the Table) unto him. First a Robe of purple Velvet, lined with Er∣mine, being the habit anciently used at the so∣lemn investiture of Princes; next a large Bible richly guilt and boss'd; then a Sword; and lastly a Scepter of massie Gold: Which thus presented in the whole, the Speaker arose, and assisted by the Earl of Warwick and the Lord Whitlocke, vested his Highness; then present∣ed him the Bible; the Speaker girt his Sword about him; and lastly gave him the Scepter; which done, the Speaker returned again to the Chair, and administred the Oath to the Pro∣tector in these following words. I do in the presence and by the name of Al∣mighty
God promise and swear, that to the ut∣termost of my power I will uphold and maintain the true Reformed Protestant Christian Religion, in the purity thereof as it is contained in the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, to the uttermost of my power and understanding, and encourage the profession and professors of the same; and that to the utmost of my power I will endea∣vour, as chief Magistrate of these three Nations, the maintenance and preservation of the peace and safety, and just rights and priviledges of the peo∣ple thereof; and shall in all things according to my best knowledge and power, govern the peo∣ple of these Nations according to Law. This Oath administred, and some attending Ceremonies performed, a Herald stood up a∣loft, giving signall to a Trumpet to sound three times; after which he did by Authority and Direction of Parliament, publish and pro∣claim his Highness, Lord Protector of the Com∣monwealth of England, Scotland, and Ireland, requiring all persons to yeeld him due obedi∣ence. This Proclamation ended, the Trumpets a∣gain founded, and some Souldiers, and others set there on purpose, ecchoed forth, God save the Lord Protector. Then was he again pro∣claimed by an Officer at Arms, standing on the stairs, which was answered again by the same
Ecchoes of some of the Souldiery. These Ceremonies ended, the Protector at∣tended by all the Officers of State, went into the Palace-yard Westminster, in his Robes, where entring his Coach, he returned in State to Whitehall. But let us now return a little to our English Forces, which went over under Sr John Rey∣nolds, to assist the French King, who this year about the latter end of October, advance into the Spanish Territories; and joyning with the Marshall Turine, the whole Army according to agreement, sate down before the Mardike-Fort, which lyes about two Miles from Dun∣kirke, and was judged of concernment to the taking of Dunkirke it self, (which place accor∣ding to agreement, the French Army in con∣sideration our helps, was joyned with theirs to the siege, before any other service, and if taken to deliver it into the English hands) after a short siege Mardike was upon Articles sur∣rendred to the French and English, and pre∣sently a Garrison of Souldiers placed in it; whom the Spaniards suddenly after endeavour∣ed to remove, by giving a fierce Camisado to the Fort, when the Armyes were drawn into their Winter-Quarter; but it proved inef∣fectuall. For though there were no want of courage in their charge, yet the English re∣pulsed
them; though they not content with this expulse, adventured upon it again, where though the Duke of Yorke, who commanded in chief, performed things worthy of so gallant a Prince, yet were they forced to a second re∣treat. Whilest the sweetness of these successes made many men rejoyce, there arrived news to im∣bitter it, viz. the death of that noble and thrice valiant Generall Blake, who had done such noble and gallant service for his Country; had beaten the Hollanders (that potent Nati∣on at Sea) forcing them to run into their har∣bours for shelter, he had lately burnt the mighty King of Spains West-India Fleet in his own harbours, and under his own Castles; and to shorten his praises in a word, had he been but as loyall as he was valiant, his praise might justly have exceeded the ancient Semi-gods, (and the Pyramids of his same have en∣dured with glory to eternity; though he was now buried obscurely in Harry the sevenths Chappell, and neither Statua nor Tombe e∣rected to his memory. The Lord Protector having how ensured his greatness, begins to conferre Titles of honour upon his Children, his eldest Son Richard is made Chancellour of the University of Oxford; and his younger Son Henry sent over Lord De∣puty
into Ireland, where 'tis affirmed by some, that he governed both with such prudence and magnanimity together, that he had in short time gained the loves both of the English and Irish in that Nation. And 'tis by most con∣ceived probable, that had his Father lest the Government of England to him, as he did to his Son Richard, these Nations might have still remained subject to that Family. About this time the Armyes in Flanders be∣ing still disposed in their Winter-Quarters, Sir John Reynolds Commander in chief, together with Collonel White, and some other Com∣manders of Note; imbarquing in a Shallop at Mardike, to come over and visit his Highness the Lord Protector, were by a suddain storm driven upon the Goodwin Sands, and were there all drowned. His Highness had in this intervall of the Par∣liaments Sessions, made choice of sundry per∣sons to fill up his other House, or Pageant-House of Lords; which because posterity may know what persons they were, every one al∣most having heard both of them, and known the rise of most of them, I shall here insert their Names.
1. Richard Cromwell. 2. Henry Cromwell. 3. Nathaniell Feins. 4. John Liste. Com∣missioners of the great Seal. 5. Henry Lawrence. President of the Pri∣vy Counsell. 6. Charles Fleetwood. Lieutenant Gene∣rall. 7. Robert Earl of War∣wick. 8. Edmund Earl of Malgrave. 9. Edward Earl of Manchester. 10. William Viscount. Say and Seal. 11. Phillip Lord Visc. Liste. 12. Charles Lord Visc. Howard. 13. Phillip Lord Whar∣ton. 14. Thomas Lord Fal∣conbridge. 15. George Lord Ew∣ers. 16. Iohn Cleypool. 17. Iohn Disborow. 18. Edward Monta∣gue. 19. Bulstrode Whit∣lock. 20. William Sidenham. 21. Sr Charles Woel∣sey. 22. Sr Gilbert Picke∣ring. 23. Phillip Skippon. 24. Walter Strick∣land. 25. Francis Rouse. 26. Iohn Iones. 27. Sr William Strick∣land. 28. Iohn Fines. 29. Sr Francis Rus∣sell. 30. Sr Thomas Homey∣wood. 31. Sr Arthur Haste∣rig. 32. Sr Iohn Hebard. 33. Sr Richard Onslow. 34. Sr Gilbert Gerrard. 35. Sr William Roberts.
36. Iohn Glyn. 37. Oliver St Iohns. Judges. 38. William Pierre∣point. 39. Iohn Crew. 40. Alexander Popham. 41. Phillip Iones. 42. Sr Christopher Pack. 43. Sr Robert Tichborn. 44. Edward Whalley. 45. Iohn Barkstead. Lieut. of the Tower. 46. Sr Iohn Hewson. 47. Sr Thomas Pride. 48. Sr George Fleet∣wood. 49. Richard Ingoldsby. 50. Iames Berry. 51. William Goffe. 52. Thomas Gooper. 53. Edmund Thomas. 54. George Monk Ge∣nerall in Scotland. 55. David Earl of Cas∣sils. 56. Sr William Lock∣hart. 57. Archibald Iohn∣son of Warreston. 58. William Steel. 59. Roger Lord Brog∣hill. 60. Sr Mathew Thom∣linson. 61. William Lenthall. 62. Richard Hampden. This is the Catalogue of those Lords (at least such as were ordered to be so esteemed by the Protector) which were by him created Peers of the Land, (though without any other Title then that of bare Lord (how unfit many of them were to be so, I'le leave to any ratio∣nall man to judge, since (though there might some persons of honour he pickt out amongst them) men raised by the power of the Sword,
yet were the greatest part of them such as had either raised themselves fortunes out of these Kingdomes distractions, and so were as deeply engaged against their King and Country as himself, which made them indeed the fitter for his designes, as being most likely to stand true to his interest. But the time of the prorogation of the Parlia∣ment being expired, they make their appearance in the House, the Pageant-House of Lords like∣wise sitting according to ancient custome, whi∣ther the Protector coming, sends to the Com∣mons to tell them that he attended them in the House of Lords, whither the Speaker with the rest of the Members immediately go, to whom he makes a very fair speech; telling them in conclusion, that if they would go on to pro∣secute his designes, that they should be called the blessed of the Lord, and the generations to come would bless them, &c. But the Parliament ac∣cording to the fourth Article of the Petition and Advice, which sayes, That no Members legally chosen should be excluded from perfor∣mance of their duty but by consent of Parliament, immediately proceed to the calling over and re-admitting of those Members, which had formerly been secluded by the Protector, to his Highnesses no little discontent. The Parliament being now full, began to be
angry at the House of Lords, and to esteem it only as a Pageant-Parliament, set up on pur∣pose to mock them; for it was strange to them, that that power which was created but by a part of a Parliament, should have a negative voice over a sull House. And at length they went so far as to question the Protectors power in calling them or Authorizing them to sit as a House of Peers, which he finding, thought it not fitting to let businesses of this high nature run too far. So on the 4th of February he goes to his House of Lords, and by the Master of the black Rod he sends to acquaint the House of Commons of his being there; so the Speaker, and the rest of the Members repairing thither, and standing without the Bar, his Highness sit∣ting under a Chair of Estate, made a large Speech to them; and in conclusion told them, That it did concern his interest as much as the publick peace and tranquillity of the Nation, to terminate that Parliament, and therefore he did now put an end to their sitting. So the House in obedience to his commands, dissolved. And now the Protector having a plot near discovery, orders the settlement of the Militia of London, (but in such mens hands as would certainly be faithfull to his interest) this he doth under pretence to perswade the people how much he labours for their security; which to
make them more sensible of, presently after succeeds the discovery of this horrible terrible plot, and herein not only his own person must be endangered, but the Tower and Mews must be furprized both at one time, the City of London fired, and all the Souldiers about it to be put to the Sword; and all this monstrous Gunpowder-work to be performed by not a∣bove thirty persons, of whom the Reverend Dr Hewit, a man so truly Christian, that he would rather have prayed for, then revenged himself of an enemy, must be head here; whi∣lest Sr Henry Slingsby must from a prisoner in the Castle, take possession of the Garrison of Hull; yet these two, with about twenty or thirty others of meaner rank, were clapt up in∣to the Tower, and after some time being brought before the high Court of Justice, erect∣ed for that purpose, were charged with high Treason: For 1. That they had traiterously and maliciously endeavoured to raise force and leavy warre a∣gainst his Highness and the Government, and to subvert and alter the same. 2. That they had traiterously declared, pub∣lished and promoted Charles Stuart eldest Sonne to the late King Charles, to be King of England, Scotland and Ireland. 3. That they had held intelligence with the
said Charles Stuart. These were the heads of the Charge against them. Sr Henry Slingsby was likewise charged for endeavouring to se∣duce the Governour of Hull, and perswading him to surrender that Garrison to the King: for these they were both condemned as Tray∣tors, though there were no witness against Dr Hewit, but the Confession of one Mallory, (who pretended himself to have been in the Plot,) and accordingly on the 8th of June, he and Sr Henry Slingsby lost their heads on Tow∣er hill; how justly God of Heaven knows! but we may have the liberty to guess by cir∣cumstances. Many endeavours were used by severall per∣sons of quality for the saving of Sr Henry Slingsby, and many Peritions presented by the Ministers of London in behalf of Dr Hewit, and his Daughter Cleypool begging on her knees; but nothing could pacifie the Protector, who was resolved these two worthy persons should be sacrifices to his tyranny. There were likewise executed for this busi∣ness Collonel Edward Ashton, who was hangd, drawn and quartered at Mark lane end in Fan-Church street, Edmond Stacy, who suffer∣ed the same death in Cornhill, and John Bette∣by, who suffered like wise in Cheapside; the Ro∣manlike death of the last being very well worth remembrance.
As the death of Dr Hewit was a prodigie to to the world, so there could no less then a pro∣digie attend it. For some time before his execu∣tion, there came up the Thames as farre as Greenwich a Whale of a very great length and bigness, it being the wonder of the all the be∣holders to imagin, that such a Creature of such a vast bigness, should either find the way up, or be content to leave (especially at that sea∣son of the year) its naturall Element. But let us return again to the scene of warre in Flanders, where the English and French Armies are joyned together, and set down be∣fore Dunkirk, with a resolution to take it be∣fore they stirred; whereupon Don John D' Au∣stria knowing the importance of the place, it being the Key of Flanders, and next after Graveling a frontier to France; besides the continuall supplies of Money it brought his Treasury, and the many inconveniences would ensue by the English possessing it, resolves ra∣ther to hazard his whole Army then not at∣tempt its relief. But whilest he is getting of force together, the English and French forces had in a small time run their trenches to the counterscarp, and still incroached nigher and nigher to the wall; which the Spaniards having advice of, and fearing lest their relief might come too
late, make what haste possible to its a shstarce: the better to effect which, Don Iohn dreins most of his Garrisons, and compleats a body of 10000, with these he marches post hast through Fuornes, and encamps within a mile and a half of the Marshall Turines quarters; of which the Confederates having advice, immediately dislodg with a body of 15000 or thereabouts, leaving still sufficient to guard the trenches and make good the approaches, in case the Towns∣men should attempt a sally. With this force of men and 10 pieces of Cannon Turine faces the Spaniard; the English foot were drawn up in four great battalions, and were ordered to give the first onset on four other battalions of the Spaniards foot which had taken the advan∣tage of the ground, by placing themselves up∣on three rising hillocks, and were seconded by Don Iohn himself. The English were com∣manded by the Lord Lockhart, who having first commanded a forlorne hope of about 300 Muskiteers to mount the sand hills, which he seconds with his own Regiment of Foot com∣manded by Collonel Fenwick, who stoutly maintained their ground, though the Spaniards played down continuall volleys of shot a∣mongst them, and the French refused to se∣cond them, sent another considerable Brigade to their relief, which made no dallying, but
immediately fell in amongst the Spanish Foot with the buttend of their Musquers, who after some small resistance, not having been used to such kind of Club-Law, left the field and fled; whereupon the French Horse seeing the good fortune of the English Foot, fell in upon the Spanish Horse, who few or none of them stood the charge, except those under the commands of the Dukes of Yorke, and Glocester, who ha∣ving made a gallane resistance, were forced, more overpowred with number, then over∣reached in valour, to quit the field after the rest. In this Battell a great part of the Lord Lock∣harts Regiments were either slain or wounded; and amongst the rest, Lieutenant Collonel Fen∣wicke who led them on, was slain by a Musket-Bullet of the Spaniards side. The slaughter was very great, the French Horse after the Battell having little or no mercy in the pursuit, so that there were near 3000 slain, besides many the Spanish Nobility who were taken, most wounded, and many of which after died of their wounds. This totall rout of the Reliev∣ers Army, as it encouraged the besiegers, so it totally discouraged the besieged: for they could expect no relief neither by Sea nor Land, the English Frigots blocking them up by sea, and Don John D' Austria not being able to re∣cruit
his Army by Land. But yet the Marquess of Leda to show he was not totally disheartned, with a strong Party sallies out of the Town, and falls upon the French Quarters, which was counted rather an act of desperation, then va∣lour, or hopes of success; for here he who was the life of the business, and whose life might still the action in being, received a wound, of which he shortly after died; and with him the Spaniards possession of the Town of Dunkirk. For those within after the French and English had for fourteen dayes together continued to play their Mortar-peeces upon the Town; the inhabitants weary of the sport, and despairing, beat a Parly, and desire to come to capitulati∣on; which being granted, the Town was surren∣dred up upon Articles, viz. 1. That the Town should be surrendred up, with all their great Guns, store of victuals, maga∣zines of Arms and Ammunition without any im∣bezlement whatsoever. 2. That the Officers and Souldiers should march out with Drumms beating, Colours flying, two piece of Ordnance and their baggage. 3. That they should have free liberty to march to St Omers, with a conduct to convey them-thi∣ther. 4. That the Inhabitants should remain indem∣nified in their persons or goods, and enjoy their
former priviledges and customs for two years; nor be molested by any one in matters of Religion. These Articles being thus concluded on and ratified by his Majesty of France, the strong Town of Dunkirk was surrendred, and posses∣sion taken of it by the King of France and Car∣dinall in person on the 25th of June 1658. The Spaniards then marching out to the num∣ber of about 1700 Horse and Foot, the English had the possession of the Town immediately delivered over to them, wherein they found 136 brass piece of Ordnance, with great store of Ammunition and Provision in the Ma∣gazines: it was immediately engarrisoned by three Regiments of the English Foot then there, and a Regiment of Horse to be under the command of the Lord Lockhart was imme∣diately raised, and as fast as possibly could be sent over thither. But whilest the Armies lay before Dunkirk, the King of France lying then at Calice, the Lord Faulconbridge (who was made one of the Protectors bloud by marrying the Lady Mary one of the Protectors Daughters) was sent to Calice to complement that King and Cardinall; in return of which, Mounsieur Ma∣nani Nephew to Mazarine and the Duke de Grequi, are sent to salute his Highness, who are here very nobly entertained, and sent back
with high satisfaction and content. The Lord Lockart having now got sure pos∣session of the Town of Dunkirk, endeavours to keep fast his hold; and to that effect he cau∣ses Proclamation to be made. 1. That whatsoever Burger hath withdrawn himself out of the Town, out of hatred or aver∣sion to the present Government, shall not return without satisfaction given, and a Pasport from the Governour. 2. That no Burger remaining in Town shall go out, nor any abroad return into the Town, without a Pasport. 3. That no Burger entertain an enemy in his house without disclosing him, on pain of being proceeded against as an enemy. 4. That whosoever shall conceal in his house any Arms, Ordnance, or Ammunition, shall upon discovery pay ten times the value. 5. That no Inkeeper receive or lodge any guests or strangers, without bringing their names and qualities immediately to the Governour. 6. That no man remove or convey any goods out of the Town, without giving a particular thereof, and obtaining license so to do. 7. That no Tradesman open shop on Sunday, and that no punishment be inflicted for following their callings on other Holidays, notwithstand∣ing any power or eustome to the contrary, (is not
this a breach of the fourth Article?) 8. That the values of Money within the Town, the prices of Wine and Beer, and the weight and proportions of Bread be henceforth ac∣cording to the Orders ensuing, (the value of Mo∣ney there I have inserted, in regard it may be usefull to those that travell thither) viz Old Jacobusses at 15 Gilders. New ones or Carolusses 14 Gilders. English Shillings 13 Stivers or pence. English half Crowns 32 Stivers and a half. Gold Spanish Pistols 11 Gilders. Gold Rials 8 Gilders. Gold Soveraigns 18 Gilders. Gold double Duckats 12 Gilders. Gold French Crowns 5 Gilders and 10 Stivers. Gold Hungary Duckats 6 Gilders. Gold Albertine 7 Gilders and 16 Stivers. Gold Reinis-Gilders 3 Gildets 15 Stivers. Gold Riders of Zealand 7 Gilders 10 Stivers. The double ones and half accordingly. Gold Flemish Crowns 4 Gilders 16 Stivers. Italian Pistolls 9 Gilders 12 Stivers. Gold Crowns of Leige 3 Gilders 10 Stivers. Silver Duccatoons 3 Gilders 15 Stivers. Flemish or sealed Pattacoons 3 Gilders. Silver Lewisses 3 Gilders. Holland Rix Dallors 3 Gilders. Cardeques of Weight one Gilder.
French Testoons of Weight 19 Stivers. French silver Franks or Livers of Weight one Gilder 7 Stivers. Flemish Shillings 7 Stivers and a half. Zealand Shillings 7 Stivers. Flemish Stooters 2 Stivers and a half. The Flemish ten Stiver piece 12 Stivers. The Flemish five Stiver piece 6 Stivers. Flemish Stivers and marked pieces at one Sti∣ver or 4 Farthings. Flemish and French Farthings four to a Peny or Stiver. The rest of the Declaration contained the pri∣ces of Wine, Beer, Bread, and Flesh; and that no man should presume to sell or transport Wine, or Beer, upon severall penalties or amercements. There was likewise an Oath to be admini∣stred to all the inhabitants of Dunkirke, as fol∣loweth, viz. I A. B. do in the presence and by the name of the Almighty God, promise and swear, that from henceforth I shall bear faith and true Allegiance, and shall be true and faithfull unto Oliver now Lord Protector of the Commonwealth of Eng∣land, Scotland, and Ireland, and the Domini∣ons and Territories thereunto belonging, and his Successor as chief Magistrate thereof, and shall not design, contrive, or attempt any thing against the Person or Authority of the Lord Protector,
or against the safety, just defence, or necessary pre∣servation of this Town or place of Dunkirk, in and for its safety, defence, and preservation, under the Government of the Lord Protector, and his Suc∣cessors, against all conspiracies and attempts whatsoever, and will do my best endeavour to make known and disclose unto the Protector and his successors, or the Commander in chief in this place, under his said Highness for the time being, all treasons and traiterous conspiracies which I shall know or hear of to be against his Person or Authority, or against the safety of this Town or place of Dunkirk, for the betraying of it into the hands of any other persons, or that tends to the withdrawing of any of the persons or people in it, from their fidelity to the Lord Protector, or his Government. Dunkirk thus securely estated in the hands of the English, the French Army after about a Moneths siege, possess themselves of Graveling, a strong Tower not far from Dunkirk; so that the English and French had now in their hands all the Frontier-Towns on this side of Flan∣ders. But whilest the Armies are thus triumphing in Flanders, God sends the Protector a scourge at his own doors; for his dearly beloved Child, the only darling of his eyes, the Lady Eliza∣beth Cleypool, on whom he had placed the
whole affections of his soul, was by the re∣venging hand of the Almighty (for the inno∣cent bloud of his Prophet and servant so lately added to the great mass before shed) on the 6th of August taken out of the world, from be∣fore the eyes of her dearly loving Father, whose very image 'tis said she was, and into whose praises many are pleased to lash, and advance her fame to the skies (either out of fear, flattery, or to show the world how they can command their Pens to any subject,) but amongst the rest he most pleases me, who is pleased to stile her an Amazon, perhaps not unfitly; but de mortuis nil nisi bonum. She dying at Hampton Court, was from thence the fourth day after conveighed by wa∣ter (with a great many Barges in mourning accompanying her corps) from thence to West∣minster, and there laid in the Painted Chamber (where a stately Herse was prepared for her,) till about 12 a clock at night, when with a Noble, but no over stately Funerall pomp, her body was conveighed into Henry the seavenths Chappell, and there interred in a place purpose∣ly provided for it. Hir death was the cause of so great grief to the Protector hir Father, as most affirm, that it was one chief cause of his, which followed not long after; for having been very pensive
and melancholly, from her death till aboutthe middle of August, his distemper was percei∣ved to be an Ague, which together with other malignant humours so depressed his vitals, that it brought him at length to his finall Exit, though with many strivings and struglings, he often falling into swouns and trances, being loath to go to give an account. He could not be perswaded that his distem∣per was mortall, being an Enthusiast in judg∣ment, firmly believing, That as God had car∣ried him to that height, so he had some farther work for him to do; he having about him such sycophantine Chaplains, one of which but three days before his death praying by his bed side used this expression, Lord we beg not of thee life, for that we are already assured of; but that thou wouldest be pleased to ease him of his lan∣guishing misery. Having had severall discourses with divers of his Privy Counsell, who earnestly pressed him according to the first Article of the Petition and Advice, to name his Successor, being am∣bitious to leave what he could no longer en∣joy himself, to his own line, named his Sonne Richard Cromwell for succeeding Protector af∣ter his death. The night before his departure (says one) he was observed to have uttered this Prayer:
Lord, I am a miserable creature, yet I am in Covenant with thee through grace; and I may, I will come unto thee for thy people. Lord thou hast made me, though very unworthy, a mean instrument to do them some good, and thee service; and many of them had too high value of me, though others would be glad of my fall. But Lord, howsoever thou disposest of me do good for them. Give consistency of judgment, one heart and mutuall love unto them. Let the Name of Christ be glorious throughout the world. Pardon such as delight to trample upon the ashes of a worm, and pardon the folly of this short Prayer, even for Jesus Christ his sake. This was on Thursday night, and on Friday morning being the 3d of September 1658, (his twice auspicious day) he shewed all the signs of a dying person, though he continued still alive till about three a clock in the afternoon, when his great soul expired, and went to give an account of his actions in this life, to the great High Court of Justice, who had so often called men to account before his High Courts of Ju∣stice here: yet there he might have this surety, which could not be given here, that there are neither Trepanners nor false Witnesses. The Privy Counsell upon advice of his death, immediately assembled together, and being satisfied of his departure out of this world,
and that he according to the first Article of the Petition and Advice, had appointed his Sonne Richard Cromwell to succeed him in the Go∣vernment of Lord Protector of England, Scot∣land and Ireland, &c. they agreed to his choice, and the Officers of the Army having likewise assented thereto; they immediately sent the Lord Chamberlain to acquaint the Lord Ri∣chard Cromwell, that they were coming to wait upon him; whereupon he attended their com∣ing; and the Lord President being the for∣most, made a Speech to him in the name of the whole Counsell: wherein he let him know, how deeply the Counsell was affected with grief for the death of his Princely Father, and that they could not but very much condole with him for so great a loss; and withall to acquaint him, that his late Highness his dear Father, having in his life time, according to the humble Petition and Advice, declared and appointed him to succeed in the Government of these Na∣tions; the Counsell had taken the matter into consideration, and thereupon resolved it, and had caused a Proclamation to be drawn up which was passed by the Counsell, communi∣cated and consented to by the Officers of the Army, and subscribed by the members of the Counsell, and the Lord Major of London and Officers of the Army with one consent, where∣by
his Highness was to be proclaimed Lord Protector of these three Nations of England, Scotland, and Ireland; and that the said Pro∣clamation was to be made publick the next Mor∣ning at nine of the Clock, &c. To this his Highness returned answer, That he had a very deep sense, as well of his own sorrow for the loss of his Father, as of the faithfulness of the Counsell of the City of London, and Officers of the Army, toward his deceased Father and himself in the pre∣sent occasion; and likewise the sense he had of the great weight of the Government now by Gods pro∣vidence thrust upon his shoulders, which he could no better way hope to sustain, than by theirs and the good people of the Nations Prayers, whose peace and prosperity he would endeavour to main∣tain to the utmost of his power, &c. so he dis∣missed the Counsell. Thus you have a full relation of the end of Oliver Cromwell Lord Protector of England, Scotland, and Ireland, whose valour only moun∣ted him to that height, and for which only he deserves remembrance or applause; and by which he raised his Family to that pitch, to e∣quall with the best of the Kingdome, and the Nation to that glory, that forreign Princes both feared and envied it. He had issue two Sons, viz. 1. The Lord Richard Cromwell, (who was
brought up in a soft kind of life, and more ad∣dicted to hunting and pleasures, then either to Warres or Governments) who succeeded him in the Protectorship. 2. The Lord Henry Cromwell, who from six∣teen years of age was by his Father bred a Soul∣dier, and was at his death Lord Deputy of Ire∣land. And four Daughters, viz. 1. Bridget his eldest Daughter was first mar∣ried to the Lord Deputy Ireton, and after his death re-married to the Lord Fleetwood, who succeeded Ireton in the Deputyship of Ireland. 2. Elizabeth his second Daughter married to the Lord Cleypool, Master of his Highness Horse. 3. Mary his third Daughter married to the Lord Faulconbridge. And 4. Frances his youngest Daughter who was married to the Lord Rich, Grandchilde to the Earl of Warwick. So high were his fortunes raised, that those of the Nobility who would once have hardly deigned to have spoke to him, would now have accounted it an honour to have matched into his Family. But let us leave him sleeping in his ashes, and proceed to his Son Richard.
FLORƲS ANGLICƲS, OR THE Government of England ƲNDER Richard Lord Protector, in the Years 1658, 1659. PART III. OLIVER Lord Protector of Eng∣land, &c. being thus deceased, the Privy Counsell send a Com∣mittee of their own members, viz. the Lord Mountague Ge∣nerall at sea, Walter Strickland Esquire, and Major Generall Skippon, to the City, who acquainted them with the Counsels intentions to proclaim his Highness Richard (the eldest
Sonne to the late deceased) Lord Protector of these Nations, and their territories and do∣minions; which being readily assented to by them, the ensuing Proclamation was the next day after Olivers death, first read at the Coun∣sell window by Norway King of Arms; viz. Whereas it hath pleased the most wise God in his Providence, to take out of the world the most serene and Renowned Oliver late Lord Protector of this Commonwealth, and his said Highness having in his life time, according to the humble Petition and Advice, declared and appointed the most Noble and Illustrious the Lord Richard, eldest Sonne of his said late Highness, to succeed him in the Government of these Nations; wee therefore of the Privy Counsell, together with the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Citizens of Lon∣don, the Officers of the Army, and numbers of o∣ther principall Gentlemen, do now hereby with one full voice and consent of tongue and heart, publish and declare the said Noble and Illustrious Lord RICHARD, to be rightfully Protector of this Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ire∣land, and the Dominions and territories there∣unto belonging, to whom we do acknowledg all fidelity and constant obedience, according to Law and the said humble Petition and Advice, with all hearty and humble affections; beseeching the Lord, by whom Princes rule, to bless him with
long life, and these Nations with peace and hap∣piness under his Government. This Proclamation was signed by the Lord Mayor of London, the members of the Privy Counsell, and most of the Officers of the Ar∣my, and was afterwards proclaimed in the Palace-yard Westminster, at Cheapside, the Royall-Exchange in Cornhill, and so in order throughout all the Dominions of England, Scotland and Ireland. Proclamation being thus made, the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen in their forma∣lities, came in the afternoon to condole the death of his late Highness, to congratulate his Highness advancement to the Protector∣ship, and to surrender up into his hands the Sword of the City: they were received with the accustomed Ceremonies, and the Lord Mayor having delivered up his Sword, recei∣ved it again from his Highness hands; and af∣ter some other Ceremonies performed as usuall, and Dr Goodwin having prayed for a blessing upon his Highness Person, his Government, his Forces by Sea and Land, and upon all the Peo∣ple of these Nations, Nathaniell Fines one of the Lords Commissioners of the great Seal, and one of his Highness Privy Counsell, admini∣stred the same Oath to his Highness, which had been formerly administred to his Father upon his Installment
After the Oath administred, his Highness first addressed himself to the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, thanking them for theirs and the Cities fidelity and good affection towards him, and then having returned the like thanks to the addresses of the Officers of the Army, he dis∣missed them; and then passed a Proclamation for continuance of all such as were in any Office of Government at his Fathers death, till further directions from his Highness. The sixth of September, by his Highness Or∣der the Imbargo made upon his Fathers death on all Ships and Vessels in the Ports of England and Wales, was taken off, and Sr Oliver Flem∣ming Master of the Ceremonies, was ordered to acquaint the Ministers of all forreign Princes, of the death of Oliver Lord Protector, and that both that Title and the Government of these three Nations, was devolved and established on his eldest Son Richard Cromwell. The Lord Newport who was come over as Ambassador extraordinary from the States of Holland, to the Protectors Father, but first by reason of his indisposedness being retarded his audience, and afterwards by reason of his death, his Ambassage proved ineffectuall; he having received new Letters from his Masters, order∣ing him to condole his late Highness death, and complement his present Highness for his ad∣vancement
to the Government, hoping that the same firm league and peace might be continued between his Highness and those States, as had been between them and his princely Father; delivered his Message in a publick audience be∣fore his Highness, and received an answer con∣formable to his desires. Severall addresses protesting both love and obedience to his Highness, are presented both by the Army, City of London, and most of the Countries; the whole Nation being seemingly content and satisfied with his advancement to the Government of these Kingdomes. Nor were the Officers of the Army, even those who afterwards showed themselves most active in depriving him of his Government, backward; but every particular Regiment gave in their ad∣dresses, condoling his Fathers death, and pro∣testing their willingness, nay joy, in becoming obedient to him. But amongst all those addres∣ses, I cannot omit one passage in that presented by Major Generall John Disborow and his Re∣giment, in which condoling his Fathers death they adde thus, viz. Your Highness, your Ar∣mies, and people, reap the benefit of his prayers and successes; but alas! this our Moses (your dear and blessed Father) the servant of the Lord is dead, and shall we not weep! Though we weep not for him, we cannot but weep for our selves. We
cannot but look after him, crying, Our Father, our Father, the Chariots of Israell, and the horsemen thereof; the fiery Chariot indeed of England, whose fury and ambition had set the whole Nation in flames and combustion. Nor are the rest of those forreign Ministers which were then in England, viz. the Ambas∣sadors of France, and Sweden, and Portugall, the Agents for the Hans-Towns, Florence, Venice, and Genua, backward in coming to lament with his Highness for the death of his Father, and desire the continuance of that league; friend∣ship, and amity, which was maintained and granted by him. To which the Lord Protect∣or returned answer, that there could not be a∣ny greater argument used for his continuance offriendship with any Kingdome or Common∣wealth, then by telling him that his Father had contracted it. Nor are Scotland, or Ireland, less complyant to his desires then England had been, they thence send their addresses and promises of o∣bedience; so that his Government seemed e∣very where to begin with a great deal of sereni∣ty, and fair promises of a long continuance. In Scotland likewise, Generall Monke who con∣tinued Vicegerent there, published a Declara∣tion for the better securing the peace of that Na∣tion: declaring
First, That no person then beyond the seas, or out of the Dominions of this Commonwealth, &c. Except Masters of Ships, or Seamen belonging to Ships of this Commonwealth, should after the first of December 1658, presume to come into Scotland, without Licence from the Lord Pro∣tector, or his Counsell in England, the Lord De∣puty or Counsell of Ireland, or his Highness Counsell of Scotland; as they would answer it at their perils. Secondly, That such Persons as shall arrive in Scotland after the first of December, having such a Passe, shall at their arrivall be bound to give intimation to the Governour of the next ad∣jacent Garrison, who is to examine them, and see that their Passe be not counterfeit: and for all those who shall arrive before the first of De∣cember, they are to make their appearance be∣fore the Governour of the next adjacent Garrison, who is to examine the cause of their coming into Scotland, and if he find them to be persons suspe∣cted, to apprehend and secure them. Thirdly, That no Master of any Ship, shall either coming from beyond the Seas, or going out of Scotland, bring in or carry out any person whatsoever who hath not such a Passe as afore∣said. This Proclamation was published under high pretences of preventing the design of the Cavalier party there.
And now the time approached for celebra∣ting the Funerall Pomp of his Highness Oliver late Lord Protector, of which great care had been taken, and no imaginary state neglected: for he being first embowelled, was from White∣hall carried to Somerset House, where his Effi∣gies was set up in state after this manner. Three Rooms were first hung with black Cloth, adorned each of them with a Canopy and Chair of State of the same. The fourth where the Corps was and the Effigies did first lie, was hung with Velvet, and adorned with Scut∣cheons and Banners in most Noble sort; after which, the Effigies was removed into another Room, and there exposed to publike view, standing in Princely manner upon an ascent under a Canopy of State, with a Scepter in one hand, a Globe in the other, and a Crown on his head, after the ancient manner of the Kings of England; his Armour lying by him, and the Banners, Banrols and Standards placed round about hm, and so continued untill the solemnizationi of the Funerall-Pomps and Ce∣remonies, which were performed on the 23th of November 1658, in form following: The Effigies being taken down by severall of the Protectors Gentlemen, was with a rich Canopy carried over it, taken and placed in a Chariot, covered with black Velvet, adorn∣ed
with Plumes and Scutcheons, and drawn by six plumed Horses, covered to the heels with black Velvet: Then the Train began to march, betwixt the Rails set up on purpose, from So∣merset House to Westminster, on each side of which stood the Souldiers with black Ribbons on their red Coats, and their Ensignes furled and covered with a vail of Cypres. And first went a Knight-Marshall on Horseback, with his black Truncheon tipt with gold, attended by his Deputy, and severall other Officers to clear the way. Next followed the Poor men of Westminster, two and two in mourning Gowns and Hoods: Then the Servants of those Persons of Quality attended the Fune∣rall: Then the Servants of the deceased Pro∣tector, in their respective places and orders: Then the Servants of the Lord Mayor, Sheriffs and Aldermen of London: Then the Servants attending the Ambassadours and Agents of Forreign Princes: After them the Poor Knights of Windsor in their Gowns and Hoods: Then the Clerks, Secretaries and other under-Offi∣cers belonging to the Army, Admiralty, Trea∣sury, Navy and Exchequer: Then the Com∣manders in the Fleet, and Officers of the Ar∣my: Then the Commissioners for Excise, the Committees of the Army and Navy: Then the Commissioners for approbation of Mini∣sters:
Then the Officers belonging to the Pri∣vie Counsell and both Houses of Parliament: Next followed the Protectors Phisicians: Then the Field-Officers and generall Officers of the Army: Next the Aldermen of London: Then the Masters of the Chancery, and the deceased Protectors Counsell at Law: Then the Judges of the Admiralty, the Masters of Request with the Judges in Wales: Then the Barons of the Exchequer, the Judges of both Benches, and Lord Mayor of London: Then the Persons allied to his Highness. and the Members of the Lords House: After them the Agents of Ve∣nice, Genoa, the Hans-Towns, and other pub∣like Ministers: The Holland Ambassadour a∣lone: The Portugall Ambassador, whose Train was born up by four Knights of the Or∣der of Christ: The French Ambassadour whose Train was likewise born up by four Persons of Quality: The Lords Commissioners of the Great Seal: The Lords of the Privie Counsell: Then followed the Chief Mourner, with those Persons who bore up his Train: most of the Persons of Honour were in Close Mourning, and were in their divisions distinguished by Drumms and Trumpets, and by a Standard or Banner, and by a Mourning Horse, of which there were eleven in all, four covered with black Cloth, and seven with Velvet; These
being all past in order, the Effigies followed in the Chariot, with six Banner Rolls born on each side, and eight Persons bearing the se∣verall pieces of the deceased Protectors Arms, all which were attended by Heralds; after whom came Garter principall King at Arms, attended by a Gentleman on each side bare∣headed: Then followed the Horse of Honour, in very rich Trappings of Gold embroidered upon crimson Velvet, and adorned with white, yellow and red Plumes, which was led by the Master of the Horse: And last of all followed the Protectors Guard of Halbertiers, with the Warders of the Tower. In this State was the Effiigies conducted from Somerset House to Westminster, where it was taken off the Chariot, and in the same State as it was first taken out of Somerset House, car∣ried into the Abby Church, and placed under a woodden Monument stately erected for it, with the Bannors and six Ensignes of Honour placed about it; the Corps having been some days before buried in a Vault purposely provi∣ded for it in Henry the 7ths Chappell, over which a stately Monument was intended to be erected over it, but the after sodain Revolu∣tions of State hindred that undeserved remem∣brance of him. With all this Pomp and Splendor were the
Funerall Ceremonies of the deceased Lord Protector performed, so prodigall were the Counsell of State to the very memory of their so beneficiall a Master, not regarding at all the Debts or other inconveniences which they might run the Nation into, by so vast an ex∣pense; so that in requitall to him, or to ingra∣tiate themselves with his Sonne, they were so vain as to extend the pomp and expence of his Funerall, beyond that of any English King since William the Conquerours time. The deceased Protector had in his life time contracted a firm League both offensive and defensive with the King of Swetheland, which caused the now Protector his Sonne, upon the Swedes desires, to man out a great Fleet for his assistance, against the Dutch who aided the King of Denmark his enemy. Between forty and fifty sail of gallant Ships were sent forth un∣der the command of the Lord Mountague: this Fleet having spent neer six moneths in the Sound, even to the time of the dissolution and annulling of that Power that set them forth, returned home having done nothing worth the mention. The Protector now to strengthen himself, by the advice of his Counsell calls a Parliament, and Writs are issued out for their appearance on the 27th of January 1658, whether they
being accordingly convented, and having (ac∣cording to custome) made choice of Challoner Chute, Esq; for Speaker of the House; the Protector the same day, attended by many of his Fathers new made Nobles, went in state to Westminster, the Lord Cleypool bearing the Sword before him, where having heard a Ser∣mon, he went in his formalities to the new Lords House, from whence he sent the Usher of the Black Rod, to acquaint the Parlia∣ment that he expected them; who being come to the barr, he made them the following Speech: My Lords and Gentlemen; I beleeve there are scarce any of you here, who expected some moneths since to have seen this great Assembly at this time, in this place in peace, considering the great and unexpected change which it hath pleased the all disposing hand of God to make in the midst of us. I can assure you, that if things had been according to our own fears and the hopes of our enemies, it had not been thus with us. And therefore it will become both you and me, in the first place to re∣verence and adore the great God, possessor of Hea∣ven and earth, in whose hands our breath is, and whose are all our wayes, because of his judg∣ments, so to acknowledg his goodness to these Lands, in that he hath not added sorrow to
sorrow, and made the period of his late Highnes∣ses life, and that of the Nations peace to have been in one day. Peace was one of the blessings of my Fathers Government, a mercy after so long a Civill War, and in the middest of so great division which that war bred, is not usually afforded by God unto a people in so great measure. The Cause of God and these Nations which he engaged in, met in all the parts of it, as you well know, with many enemies and great oppo∣sition. The archers privily and openly sorely grieved him, and shot at him, yet his bow abode in strength, and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty God of Jacob. As to himself, he died full of dayes, spent in great and sore travail, yet his eyes were not waxeddim, neither was his nature or strength a∣bated; as it was said of Moses, he was service∣able even to the last. As to these Nations, he left them in great ho∣nour abroad, and in full peace at home, all Eng∣land, Scotland, and Ireland dwelling safely, eve∣ry man under his Vine and under his Figtree, from Dan unto Beersheba. He is gone to his rest, and we are entred into his labours; and if the Lord hath still a blessing for these Lands, (as I trust he hath) as our peace hath been lengthened out to this day, so shall
we go on to reap the fruit, and gather the har∣vest, of what his late Highness hath sown, and laid the foundation of. For my own part being by the providence of God, and the disposition of the Law, my Fathers Successor; and bearing that place in the Govern∣ment that I do, I though it fit for the publick good, to call a Parliament of the three Nations, now united and conjoyned together into one Com∣monwealth, under one Government. It is agreeable not only to my trust, but to my principles, to govern these Nations by the advice of my two Houses of Parliament. I find it asser∣ted in the humble Petition and Advice, (which is the corner stone of this building, and that which I shall adhere unto) that Parliaments are the great Counsell of the chief Magistrate, in whose advice both he and these Nations may be most safe and happy. I can assure you I have that esteem of them: And as I have made it the first Act of my Government to call you together; so shall I further let you see the value I have of you, by the answers that I shall return to the Advice that shall be given me by you, for the good of these Nations. You are come up from your severall Countries, as the heads of your Tribes, and with hearts I perswade my self to consult together their good; I can say I meet you with the same desires, ha∣ving
nothing in my designes, but the maintenance of the Peace, Laws, Liberties both Civill and Christian of these Nations, which I shall always make the measure and rule of my Government, and be ready to spend my life for. We have summoned you at this time, to let you know the state of our affairs, and to have your advice in them, and I beleeve a Parlia∣ment was never sommoned upon so important oc∣casion. It is true as I have told you, we are through the goodness of God at this time in peace, but it is not thus with us because we have no enemies; there are enough both within us and without us, who would soon put an end to our peace, were it in their powers, or should it at any time come in∣to their powers. It will be becoming of your wisdomes, to con∣sider of the securing of our peace, against those who we all know are, and will be our implacable enemies; what the means of doing this are, I shall refer unto you. This I can assure you, that the Armies of England, Scotland and Ireland, are true and faithfull to the peace and good interest of these Nations, and it will be found so, and that they are a consisting body and usefull for any good ends; and if they were not the best Army in the world, you would have heard of inconvenien∣cies
by reason of the great arrear of pay which is now due unto them, whereby some of them are reduced to great necessities: but you shall have a particular account of their arrears, and I doubt not but some consideration will be had thereon in some speedy and effectuall way. And this being matter of money, I recommend it par∣ticularly to the House of Commons. You have you know a warre with Spain, car∣ried on by the advice of Parliament: he is an old enemy, and therefore it will be necessary both for the honour and safety of these Nations, that the war be vigorously prosecuted. Furthermore, the constitution of Affairs in all our neighbour Countries and round about us (as well friends as enemies) are very considerable, and calls upon us to be upon our guard both at Land and Sea; and to be in a posture able to maintain and conserve our own interest. Great and powerfull Fleets are preparing to be set forth into these seas, and considerable Ar∣mies of severall Nations and Kings, are now disputing for the mastery of the Sound with the adjacent Islands and Countries, among which is the Roman Emperour, with other Popish States; I need not tell you of what consequence these things are to this State. We have already interposed in these affairs, in such manner as we found it necessary for the in∣terest
of England, and matters are yet in such a condition in those parts, that this State may, with the assistance of Gods provide, that their dif∣ferences may not prejudice us. The other things that are to be said, I shall refer to my Lord Keeper Fines, and close up what I have to say, with only adding two or three particulars to what I have already said. And first I recommend to your care the people of God in these Nations with their concern∣ments: the more they are divided among them∣selves, the greater prudence should be used to ce∣ment them. Secondly, The good and necessary work of Re∣formation both in manners and in the administra∣tion of Justice, that profaneness may be discoun∣tenanced and suppressed, and that Righteousness and Justice may be executed in the Land. Thirdly, I recommend to you the Protestant cause abroad, which seems at this time to be in some danger, having great and powerfull ene∣mies, and very few friends, and I hope and believe that the old English zeal to that Cause is still a∣mong us. Lastly my Lords, and you Gentlemen of the House of Commons, That you will in all your debates maintain and conserve love and unity among your selves, that therein you may be the pattern of the Nation, who have sent you up in
peace and with their prayers, that the spirit of wisdome and peace may be among you, and this shall also be my prayer for you, and to this let us all add our utmost endeavours for the making this a happy Parliament. This was the Protectors so much applauded Speech to his Parliament: which finisheed, the Lord Fines began, and after having enumera∣ted the deceased Protectors great endeavours, &c. for the peace of the Nation, and his Highnesses following his steps in the calling of this present Parliament for the three Nations joyntly, he recommended more effectually to them the wars abroad, and the probabilities of homebred disturbances, desiring their provision to maintain the one, and care to prevent the other: the Parliament having every one ta∣ken the Oath formerly taken by Olivers Par∣liament, not to alter the Government, were returned to their House, and the Protector to Whitehall. The House of Commons being returned to their House, spent muce time about the recti∣fying of their Elections, and expelling severall Members out of the House (but causing others to be elected in their steads) under pretence of being Malignants, and having born Arms a∣gainst the Parliament in behalf of their lawfull Soveraign; and not only expelling them, but
disabling them from being elected or chosen as Members of future Parliaments; so though this Parliament was esteemed one of the freest that had been called since 1641, yet it was not free indeed. The House having as far as they could recti∣fied their Members and Elections, proceed to the calling to an account of all those who had been entrusted with the Customes, Excize, Taxes or other Revenue of the Common∣wealth, and to consider of the present state of the Revenues, and some ways to pay the ar∣rears of the Army, Navy, &c. and other Nati∣onall Debts; but this business being put off, by delays never came to any effect. They likewise proceed to the drawing up of a Bill (for it never came to be either Act or Or∣dinance) which should be intituled, An Act of Recognition of his Highness right and Title to be Protector and Chief Magistrate of the Commonwealth of England, Scotland and Ire∣land, and the Dominions and Territories there∣unto belonging. Many demurs were there in this debate, and severall praevious Votes to be passed before this Bill could be committed; as whether the Parliament should consist of two Houses; and whether this House should trans∣act with the Persons sitting in the other House, as a House of Parliament: This business took
up a great deal of time; the Protectorians stood stifly for it, and the Commonwealths∣men as stong against it, alledging, that to treat with those men as a House of Lords, was to enslave themselves more deeply then ever they had been before. That they should now by it clearly evince to the world their folly, perjury and villany, that whilest they had taken their Oaths to be true and faithfull to govern with∣out a House composed of the Peers of the Nati∣on, they should now both break their Oath, and subject themselves to such as were scarce Peers to the Commons: That if they did but consi∣der the Creator of this House of Peers (as they were called,) they could not but foresee the necessary thraldome they must run themselves into, these being all such as were made sure to his interest, and were so many sure Votes for whatever arbitrary actions he might under∣take; and if it were thought unlawfull for the Bishops to sit in the House of Lords, because they were accounted so many sure voices for the King, how much more might these be ex∣cepted against, who were certainly so many sure voices for the Protectorall interest, being all created by it. Yet notwithstanding these Arguments, the Vote was at length carried on the Protectorian side, and Resolved, That the House of Commons would transact with the
Persons then sitting in the other House as a House of Parliament, during the present Parliament: but with this Proviso, that it was not intended thereby to exclude such Peers as have been faith∣full to the Parliament, from their priviledge of being duly summoned to be Members of that House. Whilest the Parliament are thus pursuing their Votes to settle the Protector in England, the French and Spaniard are endeavouring to conclude a Peace betwixt themselves, and to leave the English in the lurch; which howsoe∣ver, it then and ever since went vigorously on, yet are not the Conditions spoken of, perform∣ed on either side, to the full-consummating of it. During the Sessions of this Parliament, on the 24th of February, Mr George Strangways, formerly a Major in the Kings Army, was pres∣sed to death in the Press-yard in Newgate, for refusing to plead to his Indictment, for having caused his Brother-in-Law, one Mr Fussell an Attorney of Dortsetshire, to be shot in the head as he sate writing in his Chamber-window, of which he died. The magnanimity, nobleness and pe nitence of Major Strangways at his death, deserves this memory. This Parliament took into consideration the Cases of divers Persons who had been impri∣soned
in the time of the late deceased Prote∣ctor; Maj. Gen. Overton is sent for out of the Isle of Jersey and released: The Duke of Buck∣ingham is likewise released out of Windsor-Castle, upon the Lord Fairfax his giving 20000lb security, that he shall demean him∣self peaceably for the future, and not joyn with, abet, or have any correspondence with the enemies of the Lord-Protector, or the Com∣mon wealth. Severall other Persons of Quality were likewise by them released out of the Tower. Maj. Gen. Brown likewise who had by the long Parliament in 1649, been disabled from bearing any Offices in the City, is by them restored, and made capable of all Offices, priviledges and precedencies there, and the long Parliaments Vote of the 4th of December 1649, made in his prejudice, vacated. The Quakers to promote their Turbulencies, on the 16th of April sent a Paper into the House, sealed and directed on the outside, For the Speaker of the Commons assembled in Parlia∣ment; these are for him to read to the Commons. The inside contained a Declaration, entituled, A Declaration to the Commons assembled in Par∣liament: Delivered the sixth day of the second Moneth called April 1659, to the then Speaker of the said House. This Declaration contained many ignominious scandals, thrown by those
Fanatiques both upon the Magistracy and Mi∣nistry; for which the Parliament express their Resentment to the Declarers, requiring them to repair to their respective habitations, ap∣ply themselves to their callings, and submit themselves to the Laws of the Nation, and the Magistracy they lived under. But whilest we are talking of this crabbed sowr generation, let me give an account of one passage of them in New-England. The Go∣vernour there being troubled with their di∣sturbances, and abuses both of Magistracy and Ministry; made a Law for their banishment, that if any of them came thither again, they should at their first coming be whipt and sent a∣way; at the second lose their Ears; but if they still persisted, their lives should be forfeit. According to this Law, some of them still being obstinate, notwithstanding they had been whipt at Boston, returned. Whereupon the Gover∣nour ordering their ears to be cut off according to Law, shortly after he received a Letter from one Humphrey Norton a Quaker, from about fifty Miles from Boston; which because of the horribly blasphemous curses in it, I shall insert the heads of. Thus he begins: Accursed are thy Rulers thou Town of Boston, for they are become the High Priests servants, and have cut off the Saints right Ears.
Accursed are thy Teachers, for they are the troop of Robbers, which murther in the high way by consent. Accursed are thy people, who vote up and con∣sent unto their actions of bloodshed, murther, and cruelty. Accursed is that Counsell, that sits to shed the blood of the innocent, as hath been done in thee. Accursed is thy Governour, who past the sen∣tence against his own soul, he being forewarned in it by express words from me. Accursed is that Hangman that did it, as he is called so is his Name; he is servant to the De∣vil, one of his familiar spirits, (his Name in the Hebrew tongue is Abbadon) and his Master which first cast them into prison, and now hath caused him to cut off their Ears, must be bound in the Lake of oblivion for a thousand years; his Name there shall rot, and his posterity perish, &c. (and so he goes on in most horrid curses, and in the end) The curse of God light upon thee John Indicot; for my brethren and companions sake, the curse of God rest upon thee, thy deeds thou shalt answer for, as sure as ever thou consentedst to that deed, thou son of a Murderer. Lucifer thou cursed Bird, who darest attempt to say thou speakest from Heaven, get thee down
into the lowest hot Lake, thou lyar, for within the gates of Hell is thy habitation. This was the summe of his Letter, which was thus directed. Let this Letter be delivered with care to the hands of John Indicot, Governour of Boston so called: hast, hast, hast. But I have digressed too much, in discoursing thus long about this perverse generation. Let us now return to the Parliament, who had long been debating about the Writs issued out by the Protector, for Election of Members for Scotland and Ireland, to serve in this pre∣sent Parliament. The debates hereon were the more long and tedious, in regard those two Nations had never yet by any President, the liberty to have their Members sit in the English Parliament; but at length a President was made, and it was resolved, that the Members that returned to serve for Scotlad and Ireland, should continue to sit as Members for that pre∣sent Parliament. About this time happened a very sad acci∣dent at Barbadoes, the Town of St Michaels being near wholly consumed with fire, to the great loss and utter undoing of most of the In∣habitants, besides the losses sustained by Mer∣chants, who had goods in Ware-houses on shore. But now about the latter end of March
1659, began the first sparks of discontent to break out, which afterwards burst into such a flame, that it consumed the Protectors great∣ness and Estate. The originall cause of this distemper, there's very few, but those that ef∣fected it can tell; but the first appearance of it was in a representation presented on the 6th of April, by the Lord Fleetwood to his Highness, in behalf of the Army, the heads of which were as followeth. 1. They pressed their urgent wants by reason of their Arrear-pay, and desired redress. 2. They complained that they who had born the brunt of the War, were now derided and like to be laid by. 3. That many Cavaliers were lately come out of Flanders, and had dangerous meetings in and about London. 4. That the faithfull servants of the Good Old Cause, were affronted by malignant and disaf∣fected persons. 5. That Lists of the actuall Tryers of the late King printed in red letters, were scattered about, as if they were appointed for destruction. 6. That Suits were commenced at common Law against many well affected persons, for things they had transacted as Souldiers. 7. That the famous actions of the Long Par∣liament, and his late Highness in and since
1648, were vilified and evil spoken of. That all these Circumstances clearly evi∣denced a declension of the Good Old Cause, which they were resolved to assert; and there∣fore they desired that his Highness would be pleased to represent these things to the Parli∣ament, and procure their remedies: And par∣ticularly, that he would recommend to them the present necessities of the Souldiers for want of pay, and that satisfaction might be given to the Militia-Forces. The Militia of the City of London took it ve∣ry kindly, that the Army had been pleased to mention satisfaction to be made for the Mili∣tia-Forces, they therefore instigated by their chief worthy Commanders Tichborn and Ireton, draw up a representation, confirming their re∣solutions with the Army to stick to the Good Old Cause, which they likewise accompany with a Letter to the Lord Fleetwood, to be communicated to the generall Counsell of the Officers of the Army, declaring their intenti∣ons to go along with them in whatever they should undertake, for the pretended good of the Nations. These Declarations and Remonstrances both of the Officers of the Army, and City-Militia, were foreseen by the Parliament to intend no good to them; they therefore in hopes to pre∣vent
them, vote that there should be no meet∣ing or generall Counsell of Officers, without consent and by Order of his Highness the Lord Protector; and that no person should have any Command either by Sea or Land in any of the three Nations, who should refuse to subscribe, that he will not disturb the free meetings in Par∣liament, of any the Members of either House of Parliament, or their Freedome in their de∣bates and Counsells. The Protector himself was likewise fearfull of these proceedings, and meetings of the chief Officers of the Army; he therefore sends to them these Votes of the House: Whereupon on the 22 of April after they had sufficiently sought God by prayer, Desborow, Fleetwood, and other the chief Officers, with most of the Army at their heels, came to the Protector, and forced him to sign a Delaration and Commission, ready prepared for the dissolving the Parlia∣ment. The Commission was directed to the Lord Nathaneel Fines, Lord Keeper of the great Seal, who coming to the House of Lords, sent the Ush∣er of the black Rod to the House to desire their attendance on the Lords, but they refused to give him entrance; but understanding there were Guards in Westminster-Hall, they thought it best to adjourn, which they did till the fol∣lowing Munday being the 25th of April,
whereby they prevented both their formall and forceable dissolution. But the next day being the 23 of April, the Proclamation signed by his Highness the Lord Protector, for the dissolution of the Parlia∣ment, was published; the Contents of it were as followeth. By the Lord Protector. A Proclamation for dissolving the Parliament. Whereas we assembled our high Court of Par∣liament, to assemble and meet at our City of Westminster the 27th day of January last, which hath continued unto this present day: And whereas we did by our Commission under the great Seal of England, bearing date at Westminster this present 22 day of April, for divers weighty reasons declare our pleasure and resolution to dis∣solve the said Parliament; and to that end did thereby constitute and appoint our right trusty and right wellbelovod Counsellour Nathaneal Lord Fines, one of the Keepers of our great Seal of England, and others our Commissioners in our name, this said present 22 day of April, to dis∣solve our said Parliament, which was by them done according to the tenor of the said Commission in the usuall place; and by vertue hereof our said Parliament is absolutey dissolved. Neverthe∣less we have thought it necessary by advice of our Privy Counsell, by this our Proclamation to pub∣lish
and make known the same, to the end all Per∣sons whom it may concern may take notice thereof. Given at Whitehall the 22 day of April, in the year of our Lord 1659. Yet notwithstanding this Proclamation, the Members on Munday the 25th of April repair∣ed to the House according to the vote of ad∣journment, which they found guarded by red Coats, whose Officers told them, that they should not enter the House any more. With the dissolution of this Parliament, we may put a period to the short Reign of Richard Lord Protector, no further use being made of him; besides what a Declaration of the 25th of April, (commanding all Cavaliers and Papists to depart out of London) upon these present disturbances, did amount to. Behold the visible hand of God, that those very persons and Relations that Oliver had ad∣vanced into the highest places of trust, for se∣curing his usurped power, are by the Almighty made instrumentall to pull down and destroy that, which he had so perfidiouslly got by mur∣ther and hypocrisie.
Various Revolutions of Govern∣ment in 1659, 1660. BY the dissolution of the late Parliament, the power over the Nations is devolved in∣to the hands of those who devolved it, they being then the only visible force (I will not say power) in these Nations, viz. the chief Officers of the Army, who first of all begin to modell their own Family, which they did by cashiering those of the Protectorian faction (for some such there were in the Army) viz. Okey, Ingolsby and Goffe, and some others, into whose places and commands, they by their own authority put Lambert, Haslerig, Gbey, and such others as had been displaced by the late deceased Protector. These men consi∣dering that as they now stood, they had no vi∣sible form of a Civil Government, but their proceedings in this manner would render them most odious to the common people, and in time ruin them; begin to think what Civill Power they might establish, which might be most concordant to their designes, and at last send for some of the members of that Parlia∣mentary Juncto, which were dissolved by Ge∣nerall Cromwell in 1653: to these they make
motion of returning to the exercise of their trust, desiring them to inform the Speaker and the rest, of the Armies intentions. They all rea∣dily and willingly assent; but the Speaker makes some conscientious objections against their re∣sitting, which notwithstanding (though I think they were never yet answered) he at length con∣sents to their desires: whereupon the Army publish a large and specious Declaration, as∣serting their resolutions to stand stedfast to the Good Old Cause (as they called it) with repen∣tance for their errors, and to that effect they conclude their Declaration to this purpose. That they amongst other things calling to mind that the long Parliament consisting of the Members, which continued their sitting untill the 20th of April 1953, were eminent assertors of that Cause, and had a speciall presence of God with them, and were signally blessed in that work (the desires of many good people concur∣ring with theirs therein,) they thought it their duty to invite the said Members to return to the exercise and discharge of their trust, as before the said 20th of April 1653. And therefore they did by this Declaration, earnestly desire the Parliament, consisting of those Members who continued to sit since the year 1648, unto the 20th of April 1653, to return to the exercise and discharge of their trust; that
they should be ready in their places to yeeld them their utmost assistance to sit in safety, for the im∣proving present opportunity for setling and secu∣ring the peace and quiet of this Commonwealth, praying for the presence and blessing of God upon their endeavours. This Declaration published, there were se∣verall Articles agreed upon, between the Offi∣cers of the Army, and severall Members of the then to be restored part of a Parliament; which accorded to and signed, on the next day being the 7th of May 1659, they convented toge∣ther in the Painted-Chamber, where those Members appointed to meet being all present, forty two in number: the Speaker with the Mace carried before him, and followed by the rest, went into the House and took their places. Upon notice that those men had taken their places in the House as a Parliament, severall of the Members secluded in 1648, (there be∣ing double the number of them in the City) came into the Hall, and agreed that some per∣sons of their number should go up to the House, to try whether they could find admit∣tance. The persons appointed to go up were Mr Ansley, Sr George Booth, Mr William Pryn, Mr James Herbert, Mr George Mountague, Sr John Eveling, Mr Eveling, Mr Knightly,
Mr Gewen, Mr John Herbert, Mr Peck, Mr Hun∣gerford, Mr Harly, and Mr Clive; these ac∣cording to the desire of the rest went up, but found restraint upon the House, so that with much ado they prevailed to get into the Lob∣by; but here they were opposed by Lieutenant Collonel Allen, though they earnestly dispu∣ted the undoubted right they had to sit in the House as well as the others; but no reasons could prevail. Yet on Munday May 9th, Mr Ansley, Mr Pryn, and Mr Hungerford, understanding that there were no guards upon the House, went to Westminster-Hall and found admit∣tance without any opposition at first, though afterward when Mr Ansley went forth to ac∣quaint those secluded Members, which attend∣ed their success in the Hall, of their admit∣tance, endeavouring to enter again, he and some others with him were forcibly kept back by Captain Lewson of Coll. Goffs Regiment. However Mr Pryn continued there, and dispu∣ted highly with the Juncto, of the priviledge which he and the rest of the secluded Members had to sit, which only a little disturbed, and made them (who were loath to hear right disputed) adjourn till the afternoon; when Mr Pryn attempting again to enter, was impe∣ded by a Troop of Horse and two Companies
of Foot, which were there ready to guard this piece of a Parliament, against those whom they pretended were intruders. And thus this Parliament sate in quiet a∣mong themselves, and to the end they might be no further disturbed, voted, That all per∣sons heretofore Members of that Parliament, which had not sate in this Parliament since the year 1648, nor had subscribed the Engagement in the Roll of Engagement of this House, should not sit in the House till further order of the Par∣liament. They likewise published a Declaration, wherein after a large and specious Preamble, they declared; That they were resolved (through the gracious assistance of God) to apply themselves to the faithfull discharge of the trust imposed in them, and to endeavour the settlement of this Commonwealth upon such a foundation, as may assert, establish and secure the properties and liberties of the people in refe∣rence to all, both as men, and as Christians, and that without a single Person, Kingship or House of Peers; and that they should vigorously endea∣vour the carrying on of Reformation so much de∣sired, and so often declared for; to the end there might be a godly and faithfull Magistracy and Ministry upheld and maintained in these Na∣tions, to the glory and praise of our Lord Jesus
Christ, and to the reviving and making glad the hearts of the upright in the Land. By such fair pretences did they begin to gull the people. And immediately, because they could not have time as yet to appoint a Counsell of State, (the usuall dependant of a Parliament since 1648,) they for the present erect a Commit∣tee of Safety, consisting of Fleetwood, Hasle∣rig, Vane, Ludlow, Sydenham, Salway, John Jones, Lambert, Desbrough, Berry and Scot. In imitation of this was that Committee of Safety I suppose erected afterwards by the Ar∣my. But the Counsell of State being shortly after nominated, whatever power they had, was void, though 'tis true most of the forementio∣ned were members of it. The Great Seal of England made by the Protectors is likewise by them broken, and the old Seal used by the Parliament in 1651, voted to be the Seal of the House, and no other. Easter Terme is also by them adjourned, to the great discontent of many persons, who had then suits depending against many Members, especially against Vane and Haslerig. This Parliament now thinking themselves fixt in their authority, begin to bustle strong∣ly, but especially they take care to please the Army who had made them a Parliament, which they do by passing Votes, That effectuall care
be taken for satisfying their arrears, and paying them their pay in due order for the future. At this Parliaments reentrance into the Su∣pream Government of these Nations, there happened a sad accident in the Town and Cor∣poration of Southwould or Soulbay in the County of Suffolk, where neer 230 dwelling-Houses were wholly consumed with fire; all which was but a spark to the fire might have been kindled in this State, had they continued in power. The Army likewise at this time put up a Re∣monstratory Petition to this Parliament, where∣in they desired severall things, as they pretend∣ed, towards the settlement of the Nation; to which the Parliament gave them these conten∣tive answers, for they durst indeed do no o∣therwise. 1. That the liberty of the persons, and property of the Estates of the free people of these Nations, should be preserved inviolable according to Law, under the Government of a free State or Com∣monwealth, without a single Person, Kingship, or House of Peers. 2. That there should be a just and due regula∣tion of the Law. 3. That all persons who professed one God in Trinity, and acknowledged the Scriptures, should have liberty of conscience, provided it ex∣tended
not to Popery or Prelacy. 4. That a godly and faithfull Gospell-Preach∣ing-Ministry should be encouraged. 5. That all Ʋniversities and Schools of learning should be countenanced and reformed. 6. That none but men of approved godliness, and whose interests suited with the Good Old Cause, should be admitted to employments in State. 7. That an Act should be made for confirma∣tion of the sales of all Kings, Queens, Princes, Archbishops, Bishops, Deans, and Chapters Lands. Thus they endeavour to please the Army by complying with their desires. Yet notwithstanding the fickle establishment of this House, the States of Holland court them by their Ambassadour, who on the 24th of May had audience in the House; but perhaps those States might have more reason to do so then others, these being the men who first be∣gan that War with them, which almost totally ruined them. And now on the 25th of May, Richard Cromwell Esq; late Lord Protector of these three Nations, makes a free resignation of that Government to the Parliament, which the Ar∣my had before taken away without his leave or consent. His resignation or rather submission ran thus:
I have perused the Declaration and Resolve you were pleased to deliver me the other Night; and for your information, touching what is men∣tioned in the said Resolve, I have caused a true state of my Debts to be transcribed and annexed to this Paper, which will shew what they are and how they were contracted. As to that part of the Resolve whereby the Committee are to inform themselves, how far I do acquiesce in the Government of this Common∣wealth, as it is declared by this Parliament: I trust. my past carriage hitherto hath mani∣fested my acquiescence in the will and good plea∣sure of God, and that I love and value the peace of this Commonwealth, much above my own con∣cernments; and I desire that by this, a measure of my future deportment may be taken, which by the assistance of God shall be such as shall bear the same witness, having I hope in some degree learn∣ed rather to reverence, and submit to the hand of God, then be unquiet under it. And (as to the late providences that have fallen out amongst us) however in respect to the particular engagements that lay upon me, I could not be active in making a change in the Government of these Nations; yet through the goodness of God I can freely ac∣quiesce in it being made, and do hold my self ob∣liged (as with other men) I expect protection from the present Government, so to demean my
self with all peaceableness under it, and to pro∣cure to the uttermost of my power, that all in whom I have interest do the same. Thus he who was lately Protector of these three Nations, craved protection from his Quondam Subjects; and thus easily did he re∣sign those three Kingdomes, which his Father had got with so much hazard of his body, if not of his soul. His Brother also Henry Cromwell, late Lord Lieutenant int Ireland, upon the Parliaments advice surrendred his Government; and Col∣lonel John Jones, William Steel Esquire, Collo∣nel Mathew Thomlinson, Robert Goodwin, and Miles Corbett Esquire, were in his stead ap∣pointed by the Parliament, to be Commissi∣oners for the Government of Ireland. In Scotland Generall Monke though he re∣signes not up his Government to the Parlia∣ment, yet holds a fair correspóndency with them, and by his and the rest of the Officers of his Armyes, declare and keep a complyance to their Government, which he punctually per∣formed. The Parliament endeavouring still more and more to oblige the Army, pass an Act of oblivion and indemnity for all force or violence formerly put upon the House; yet nevertheless to restrain them for the future, the Commissions are issued out by the Speaker in
the Name of the Parliament, and not by a Ge∣nerall as formerly. Yet the Parliament take so much care to per∣form their promises to them, that they order the immediate sale of Whitehall, Hampton-Court, and Sommerset-House, towards the present payment of some of the Armyes Ar∣rears. About this time on the 11th of July 1659, happened a strange kind of Tumult in or about Enfield, some part of the Chase which former∣ly lay common, and was the chiefest stay and sup∣port of the Country people thereabouts, for the feeding of their Catttle, from whence pro∣ceeded the chief support and maintenance of themselves and Families; being by the Parlia∣ment given to some of the Souldiers for their ar∣rears, was by them built upon, and euclosed; which so incensed the poor of the Country, whose Families were almost ready to starve for want of such relief, that notwithstanding Soul∣diers were sent to secure those Grounds, the common people made a head, fell upon the Souldiers, took nine of them prisoners, threw down a Barn, and levelled the enclosures. The Parliament upon audience given to an extraordinary Ambassador of the King of Swe∣den, appointed three persons to go over as Ple∣nipotentiaries to Coppenhaguen, to treat of such
a reconciliation between the two Kings of Swedeland and Denmarke, as might best stand with the interest of England; but their Ambas∣sage hath as yet produced no considerable ef∣fect. And now further to secure themselves in those designes they had in hand here, they ba∣nish all Cavaliers, under the stile of Malig∣nants, from London, and twenty Miles about; and pass an Act for the settlement of the Militia, in the respective Cities and Countries of Eng∣land, and Wales. But though this Parliament had taken away the Government of these three Nations from Richard Cromwell, yet they are so kind to him, as to protect him from all arrests, and take care for the payment of his Debts, which amounted to 29640lb; and besides order him 10000lb per annum for his life, out of the Common∣weal hs Lands; as much of which 'tis probable he received, as his Creditors did of what was owing to them. And now the Parliament discover a female-Plot of the shee-Cavaliers, for the subverting of their Government; the Lady Mary How∣ard Daughter to the Earl of Barkshire, and one Mrs Sumner are committed to the Tower, upon pretence of being pryers to a horrible terrible design against the Government, upon whose
Examinations all the Horses about Town are taken. Sr Ernestus Byrom and others com∣mitted to prison. But now somewhat begins to appear, seve∣rall Troops of Horse are sent into Kent and Surry, to prevent infurrections there; where they take severall Cavaliers, to bring them up to London. Major Generall Massey being likewise in Glocestershire, endeavouring as it was pretended to raise Forces there for the King, was surprized by a Troop of Horse, who for the better securing him, set up a Trooper behind him, with whom coming down a Hill, the Horse stumbled and fell, and the night be∣ing dark, and Massey nimble legged, escaped from them into the Wood. The Parliament now begin to discover the reason of the buying up of so many Arms in London; for Sr George Booth, Sr Thomas Mid∣dleton, and some others of the secluded Mem∣bers, having got a considerable quantity of Arms, raised a Party in Cheshire, Flintshire, and Lancashire, to the number of between three and four thousand men; and declare for a Free Parliament, and the due rights and pri∣viledges of the Nation, against that Fanatick and unlawfull power, which now usurped domi∣nion over them. With these they rendezvows at Routon-Heath; and from thence march to
Manchester, endeavouring to augment their Party; Collonel Ireland in Lancashire, and Governour of the Cattle of Leverpool, promi∣sing them what aid and assistance he could, though he never performed it. This great rising at first startled the Parlia∣ment, who immediately dispatch the Lord Lambert with three Regiments of Horse, one of Dragoons, and three of Foot, to march with all possible hast to suppress them; whi∣lest severall Parties which endeavoured to rise in other Counties, are prevented either by the Militia, or the Parliaments Forces. But Sr George Booths number daily encreases somewhat, by the confluence of the Gentry of those parts unto him; so that he made up a very gallant body of Horse. He sends his Let∣ters and Declarations up to London, inviting them to joyn with him to maintain their pri∣viledges, and redeem themselves from the sla∣very they were now in: But all proved inef∣fectuall, that great City being over-awed by a small Party of the Parliaments Forces. In the mean time Lambert makes a speedy march towards them; two Regiments, the one of Horse, the other of Foot, are by Or∣der of Parliament sent out of Ireland, under the Command of Collonel Axtill, Collonel Hierom Zankey, who joyn with Lambert neer
Nantwich, notwithstanding some endeavours of Sr George Booths Party to hinder their con∣junction; and on the 16th of August the Ar∣my faced one another, the one on one side the River, the other on the other. Hereupon Sr George Booth sends a Trumpet to Lambert, to tell him the reasons of his taking up of Arms; and desiring, that to a∣void shedding of blood, some persons might be ap∣pointed to conferre in order to a Treaty. But Lambert returns him a short answer; telling him, that the readiest way to avoid shedding of blood, was for them to lay down their Arms, and surrender Chester and other Strengths; which if they refused to do, that he was sent to reduce them to their due obedience, which by the help of God he did not doubt but to do. Hereupon the next morning Lamberts Army advanced towards Nantwich-Bridge, which was kept by a Par∣ty of Sr George Booths. Sr Georges Horse and Foot were drawn upin Battalia in a Meadow just below the Bridge. Lambert seeing that he could not draw his enemy out of his advan∣tage, resolved to beat him out; and there∣upon comands a stout Party of Foot to assault those which kept the Bridge, which they did with a great deal of courage and resolution, and were as stoutly resisted on the other side, some∣times one gaining the advantage, and some∣times
the other; till at length Sr George Booths Party giving back, made way for all Lamberts Army to get over, who immediately fell up∣on Sr Georges Foot, and put them to the re∣treat, but with little execution, by reason of the enclosures, which gave them liberty to make good their retreat from hedge to hedge. The Horse then on both sides charged likewise with good courage and resolution, but the Cheshire men being overpoured, turned their backs; and after a quarter of a Miles consused retreat, rallied again, but were presently rout∣ed: And so both Horse and Foot betook them∣selves to flight. The Foot by reason of the en∣closures made their escape; and the Horse di∣viding fled some towards Chester, and others towards Warrington, whither they were pur∣sued by Lamberts victorious Cavalry; who notwithstanding could proceed no further, the Town being garrisoned with four Companies of Foot, and a Troop of Horse of Sr Georges Party. In the time of the fight there were left in Nantwich two Companies of Foot, and two Troops of Horse of the Cheshire Forces, who were immediately forced to fly towards Man∣chester, where they dissipated themselves. The grand Body of the Cheshire men being thus broken, the remainder of them quickly sur∣rendred
themselves; and Chester it self seeing no hopes of relief, should they stand out, sub∣mitted themselves immediately to Lamberts mercy, whose example all other places like∣wise followed. The number of the slain in the late action was not great; but there was scarce any per∣son of quality, who either before or after the Fight became not Lamberts prisoners. Sir George Booth seeing all things thus lost, and himself reduced to the extremity of saving him∣self by flight, left Chester in disguise, with in∣tentions to come up to London, the better to make his escape; but by the permission of Al∣mighty God, this noble Gentleman (who when all the Nation almost was buried in a sla∣vish lethargy, did endeavour to rouze them out of their sleepy slavery) was discovered at Newport Paynell in Bedfordshire, and fell into the power of his merciless and tyrannicall ene∣mies, by whom he was committed prisoner to the Tower of London. As soon as they had thus got him into their power, they send two of their chiefest bloud-Hounds, Sr Henry Vane and Sr Arthur Hasle∣rig, to draw what they could by his Examina∣tion; but he notwithstanding their reiterated threats of death and Scaffolds, and the scan∣dalous report of perfidious friends, and mali∣cious
enemies, with undaunted courage refu∣sed either to excuse himself, or accuse others by a pusillanimous confession. The Parliament being now overjoyed with their success, immediately in token of their favour and thankfullness, order a thousand pounds, as a remuneration of Lamberts so sig∣nall service, to be immediately sent him; but he having other designs in his head, then tend∣ed meerly to the advancement of their interest, presently distributes to his Souldiery, with high carouses for their worthy deserts of it. The attempts which were made in other parts of the Kingdome, to have risen at the same with Sr George Booth, being all of them nipt in the bud, deserve nothing else but si∣lence: Though there were divers worthy and eminent persons engaged in them, who deser∣ved the thanks and praise of their Country, for those their willing (though fruitless) endea∣vours. The Parliament had (whilest Lambert is fighting their enemies) in the mean time ta∣ken care for dividing the spoil, and prepared an Act for Sequestrations, which now they im∣mediately pass, and appoint Commissioners for the prosecution of it, by which they intend∣ed the utter ruining of most of the Nobility and Gentry of the Nation, that so they might ren∣der
them incapable for the future of making head against their arbitrary usurpation. And this Act was to continue to the first of May 1660, a day which it pleased God to ordain to a better use, and another manner of terminati∣on for their tyranny, then these notorious Traytors had intended. The next thing they do, is to endeavour the extinction of those small sparks, which seemed to remain of the late insurrection. And to this end they put out a Proclamation against John Mordent Esq; Son to the Earl of Peterborough, Major Generall Massey, the Earl of Litchfield, Sr William Compton, Thomas Fanshaw Esq; and Major Generall Brown; and declared the reward of a hundred pounds, to whomsoever should apprehend any of the said persons; some of which rendered themselves to the Counsell. The House about this time having now lost the affections of the whole Nation besides, that they might the better engage the Schismaticks, order the release of James Nailor out of Bride∣well, to the great satisfaction of the Quakers and Fanaticks, upon whom they now chiefly relied. And now the Parliament thinking the longer keeping up the Militiaes of the Counties, to be both useless and dangerous, order their dis∣banding;
which whether it was promoted by some friends of Lamberts in the House, is ve∣ry uncertain; but the consequence shewed it very much conducing to his succeeding de∣signes. For now Lambert having finished his work in Cheshire, was advancing towards London, but all the way had by Agents under hand so tampered with the Army, as might render them ready for his devotion and interest. To which purpose a Paper is promoted amongst them, entituled, The humble Petition and pro∣posalls of the Army, under the Command of the Right Honourable the Lord Lambert, in the late Northern expedition: in which they ex∣postulate their deserts and affection to the Par∣liament; and desire that the Command of the Army might be under the Command of Fleet∣wood, as Captain Generall; Lambert, Major Generall, &c. This was sent up to London to Collonel Ashfield, Cobbet, and Lientenant Collonel Duckenfield, to be by them present∣ed to Fleetwood, and by him to the House. The forementioned persons acquaint Fleetwood with it; and he for the better promoting of it, desires a Conference with Sr Arthur Haslerig, and Sr Henry Vane, in order to its presentation to the Parliament; but Sr Arthur immediately informs the Parliament of the Paper (as he
said) of most dangerous consequence. Where∣upon they presently order that the said three persons, or one of them in whose hands it was, should immediately bring in the originall Co∣py, which was by one put off to the other, and so not to be found amongst them. But the Officers of the Army immediately meet in Counsell, in order to the drawing up of a Re∣monstrance of their submission to the Parlia∣ment, and disclaiming the said proposall. The Parliament having thereupon passed a Vote, That the having of more Generall Officers, was a thing needless, chargeable, and dangerous to the Commonwealth. Whilest the Officers are thus meeting, seem∣ingly in order to their quiet submission to the Parliaments resolves, the House had ordered a day of Thanksgiving for their Cheshire-victory, on which together with the Counsell of State, and the Officers of the Army, they dined to∣gether with the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Common-Counsell at Grocers-Hall. They now put out an Additionall Act for Sequestrations, intending that the severity of their arbitrary justice should provide them with rewards for the present, and security for the future. And now comes out the humble Representa∣tion and Petition of the Army; wherein though
they seemingly professed all obedience, yet they tacitly harped upon the former string, and drove at the maintaining their own power, in opposition to the Houses interest. This was te∣diously discussed in the House, and every par∣ticular exactly scanned: some of which the Par∣liament utterly disliking, as tending to the o∣verthrow of their Power; and perceiving the Army still to go on in their clandestine designs, they resolve to make provision against them. And the Army seeing their resolution, proceed vigorously likewise, though privately, yet they put out the former Representation in Print, and endeavour as much as they could to encrease the number of the Subscribers. The Parlia∣ment on the other side, to cut off all hopes as they thought of the Armyes subsistance, ex∣cept in and by them, and so prevent their de∣signs, pass an Act, that it should be treason in all persons whatsoever, to raise, levy, or collect Money without consent of Parliament; and like∣wise make void the Acts for Custome and Ex∣cize; that if the Army should proceed in their designs, they might be cut off from mainte∣nance. This being thus ordered, they like∣wise vote the Commissions of those nine noto∣rious Worthies, and so infamous Patriots of their Country, and promoters of its good and settlement, the contrary way, viz: Lambert,
Desborough, Berry, Kelsey, Ashfield, Cobbet, Creed, Packer, and Barrow, to be null and void, and disposed their Regiments otherwise; and likewise order the Government of the Army to be by seven Commissioners, in whom the pow∣er should joyntly reside; these were Fleet∣wood, Ludlow, Generall Monke, Haslerig, Wal∣ton, Morley, and Overton, thinking hereby to cure this hot distemper, and reduce them to o∣bedience. But whilest they are thus quick and nimble in their resolutions, Lambert and the rest of his complices are not behind them in diligence; but having strengthened their Party as much as time would give leave, and drawn as many of the Souldiery as they could from the obedience of the Parliament, resolve once more to put an end to their sitting, and rather turn them out of doors, then sit down quietly with the loss of their Commissions. The Parliament having over night notice of what was intended the day following, had gi∣ven order for the drawing of what Forces were yet faithfull to them to Westminster; in order to the guarding them the next day. Collonel Mosses and Collonel Morleys Regiments im∣mediately obeyed their Commands, and re∣paired to the Pallace-yard in the night, and early in the morning; but Lambert having
gathered the rest of the Army together, did immediately there surround them, stopping all the avenues, so that there was no hopes of any more assistance: and whilst they were thus in opposition, the Speaker was by Major Creed turned back again, and not suffered to passe to the House; and at last both parties having stood almost all the day at bay, were on a sudden reconciled, with mutual reso∣lution to advance a Lambertonian fa∣ction. Lambert having thus over-master'd his Ma∣sters, and dismissed them from their Power and Authority, upon consultation with his fellow-Worthies, cals a Counsel of Officers, who immediately post away Collonel Bar∣row for Ireland, and Collonel Cobbet for Scotland, to winne the Armies there, if possible, to a compliance with their actions. And that these migh be thought Devils, which did believe and tremble, they order a Day of Humiliation, intending to mock God, that they might, according to the custome of their Predecessors, with greater ease and secre∣cy gull the people. They proceed in the next place to the settle∣ment of the Army, and make choice of Fleet∣wood for Captain General, or rather stalking-horse
to Lamberts all-commanding power; Lambert Major General, and Disbrow Com∣missary General of the horse; and appoint a Committee for nomination of Officers, in the rooms of those, who for their taking part with the Parliament against them, they had dis∣carded. Having in some sort setled their military Power, that they might not be seen to do what they really intended, that is, to rule by the Sword alone, they make out a kind of spuri∣ous Oligarchy, or rather Anarchy, in whose Power without more ado, they put the Laws, Lives and Liberty of the English. This they call a Committee of Safety; which, how it de∣serves the name, I will leave the Reader to judge, giving him the names of the members thereof, men either of lunatick and crack∣brain'd principles, as having been all along the grandest ringleaders of the Sectaries; or such, whose ambitious spirits would terminate no where, but in the slavery and ruine of their native Countrey, most of which was ingaged in the horrid murther of their lawfull Sove∣reign. But let Posterity know and detest their memory. Charls Fleetwood Ge∣neral. John Lambert Major General.
John Disbrow Com∣missary General. Lord Chancellor Steel. Bulstrode Whitlock. Sr Henry Vane. Lt General Ludlow. Col. Sydenham. Major Salway. Lord Strickland. Col. Berry. — Lawrence. Sr James Harrington. Sr Archibald Johnston, alias Lord Ware∣ston. John Ireton Ld Maior. Robert Titchburn Ald. Henry Brandrith. Robert Thompson. Col. Hewson. Col. Clerk. Col. Lilburne. Col. Bennet. Cornelius Holland. A happy case was the Nation like to be in, when such a crew of mechanical and fanatical persons (excepting two or three) was to have the Command of its Sword and Laws. These are the men, who now must model our Govern∣ment, and bring us into a free and equal Com∣monwealth; alias, the most intollerable of all bondages and slaveries. But whilst they go on thus jocundly in their proceedings, conceiving now all was their own, and that the Government would be per∣petuated to the Saints and their children; there comes a Letter from General Monck out of Scotland, declaring the dis-satisfaction of himself, and several Officers to their proceed∣ings; this awakes the worme of their consci∣ences,
though for the present they take no pub∣lick notice of it. But that they might give their former acti∣ons the best gloss they can, they put out a De∣claration, showing the reason of their late transactions, and highly rail against the inju∣stice and arbitrary Power of the Parliament, who without any reason given, would have turned away their good servant Lambert, and his associates, which might have made such a president, as must have laid the Officers of the Army at the feet and mercy of the Parliament at pleasure; to prevent which, and other in∣conveniences, they thought good to dissolve them; and did likewise declare their late hasty and irregular Acts against levying of money, and for governing the Army by Commission∣ers; acts which tended absolutely to the ruine of the Army, and so consequently (as they said) to the destruction and confusion of the Nation, to be null and void.
THE Renowned Actions OF General MONCK, The true Politician, 1659, 1660. BUt now the noble General Monck (a man of other principles then to joyn hand in hand with a company of such perfidious Traitors) is not idle; he seises upon, and secures such Officers of the Army there, as he knew any wayes inclining to such dangerous attempts, and presently pos∣sessed himself of Barwick, and other places of strength, committing all the suspected persons prisoners, first to Tyntalian-Castle, and afterwards to the Basse-Island. This news extreamly startles our Reforma∣does, and make them begin to look about them; and to think what way they might ei∣ther
compose the differences, or reduce them to reason by force of Arms. But they are resolved to use all means, to compasse both Land and Sea to make him a proselyte; and to this purpose, in hopes to winne him by fair means, they send down his brother-in-law Dr Claerges, with Collonel Talbot to mediate with him, their former agent Collonel Cobbet having found no better reception then the pri∣son of Edinburgh Castle. Nay, and least these two should not have power enough to prevail, they order after them Commissary General Whaley and Collo∣nel Goffe, both formerly grand Protectorians, and with Mr Caryl, and Mr Barker, two In∣dependent Parsons, that so he might have all argument alledged to him, which either the Sword or the Spirit could furnish them withall. Whilst these are on their journey, Major General Morgan, a man too honest for such knavish association, takes his journey out of Yorkeshire to General Monck, with whom he hath demonstrated himself a good help to the restoration of his King and Coun∣trey. General Monck having new modelled his Army in Scotland, and weeded those noxi∣ous plants, which by their infection must
needs have given poison in stead of nutriment, resolves to advance towards the Borders, ta∣king Oath in the mean time of the Nobility and Gentry of Scotland, an Assembly of whom he convened to acquiesce themselves, and likewise endeavour to keep all others in quiet in the time of his absence from them. The afore-said Commissioners of the Army coming to him, he received them with all de∣monstrations of civility, and professed his readinesse to joyn with the Army in England, provided they would restore the Parliament to its due Rights and Priviledges; and that then he would use his utmost endeavours for the composing of differences, and obtaining an Act of Pardon and Oblivion for all in gene∣ral. But that they might see in the mean time, how unwilling he was to be any cause of blood∣shedding, and to avoid bringing a warre into his native Countrey, which though raised for the defence of it, must needs be its ruine and destruction; he had ordered three Commissi∣oners, viz. Collonel Wilkes, Lieutenant Col. Clobery and Major Knight to go up to London, and if possible to make a fair end of the Con∣troversie. And this signified to the Of∣ficers at London by their Commissioners there. This was the way of their endeavours by
peace; but lest this should prove ineffectual to to reduce him, they had prepared for Warre likewise. Lambert was already on his march thither, with all the strength of the Army both Horse and Foot, in so numerous a body, that in all probability, had they had to doe with a person lesse wise and prudent than this noble General, they would quickly have consummated their own victory and his, and this Nations ruine. They likewise upon Lambert's departure, had ordered and chosen new Commissioners for the Militia in London, picking out such persons for the most part, whose schismatical principles, or else former notorious crimes, were like to make them stick surest to so bad compartners; and into these mens pow∣er, they put the whole Command of the City. Lambert being already advanced North∣ward, coming into Yorkshire, doth there joyn with the Irish Brigade, and those forces under the Command of Collonel Lilburne; and whilst every body expected that a sudden fight would make a decision of the contro∣versie; General Monck by extraordinary prudence keeps off at swords point with fair words, and as we may truly say pious fraud de∣ceives this so grand jugler and deceiver.
The Commissioners of General Monck, which we aforementioned, were now arrived at London, and by the appointment of the Counsel of Officers, persons were ordered to treat with them, who after several debates, brought businesses almost to a period, by the fault of Collonel Wilks, who transcended the bounds of his Commission, and for his pains was upon his return justly imprisoned by the General. By his simplicity I say, things were brought to a result or agreement, the heads whereof were these. The utter renouncing of Charles Stuart, or any other claiming from that Family. The Government to be by a Free-State, and not King, single Person, or House of Lords. That a godly and learned Ministry be main∣tained and encouraged. The Ʋniversities to be reformed and counte∣nanced, so as to become the Nurseries of Piety and Learning. That the Officers and Souldiers, and other Persons on either side be indemnified for what is past, touching their late differences, and that all unkindnesses betwixt them be buried in ob∣livion. The Officers prisoners in Scotland to be set at liberty.
The Armies on both sides presently to depart to their respective Quarters. And lastly, That there be a Committee of nineteen, consisting of five persons for England, and five for Scotland (not Members of the Army) and three for England, three for Scot∣land, and three for Ireland; all of which, except one, are Members of the Army; and of these nineteen nine shall be a Quorum, and are to meet to determine and conclude what is necessary for the Qualifications of Parlia∣ments, &c. This is part of that Agreement which was pretended to be made between the Army here, and the Commissioners of the Lord General Monck, which because it did prove vain and abortive, deserves no further particular men∣tion. About this time several designs of the Rump to restore themselves to their former power, began to be glimmeringly perceived. Collo∣nel Morley, and several other Officers of the Army making protests against the present pro∣ceedings. But the Committee of Safety perceiving the danger their new Government was in of being stifled in the birth, and finding City and Countrey to be generally disaffected with them, except those who were of schismatical
principles, do order Commissions to be issued out for raising several Foot-Regiments of these throughout the Nation, under the notion of the well-affected. And that they might seem to have conquered some difficulties, they daily by their Pamphleteer, publish the best of their own Condition, and produce Letters from Ireland of Novemb. 10th, 1659. wherein they declare the Armies in Ireland non-approbation of the actions of General Monck, and their free concurrence with their Brethren in Eng∣land. But as this was only a pretence from some persons there equally interessed with themselves in the late irregular actions, so did it suddenly after vanish into nothing; the ge∣nerality there under Sir Hardresse Waller perfectly declaring for their enemies the Rump. But here I must make some short digression. For this Moneth it pleased God that that mon∣ster of men, and unparallel'd murtherer Brad∣shaw died in his bed; a man whom I need not much defile my pen to set forth, since that ve∣ry name doth now, and will to eternity con∣tain, all that is matter of shame and detestati∣on to the English Nation; and yet it pleased the wise God to suffer him on the 22th of this November, to be laid quietly in his grave; who may, according to the judgement of
some men have deserved better to be buried alive in the entrails of dogs, then to have en∣joyed the benefit of Christian Funerals; but we are not to censure the pleasure of Divine Pro∣vidence. On the 23th of this Moneth Lambert arrived at Newcastle, where he found several discard∣ed Officers to be come from General Monck, which though they cried up at London, as a weakning of his party, yet they found it by experience to be a wise strengthning of his in∣terest, by ridding himself of those, which he knew neither could, nor would be true to any sober designs. Now were Letters from General Monck, sent to the Common Counsel of London, and delivered to them by Collonel Markham, and Collonel Atkin, which containing things di∣rectly in opposition to what the Committee of Safety had flattered their party and the people withall, were by them given out to be forged, and thereupon they ordered the confinement of the two fore-mentioned persons. But in this interim the Parliament (which as I said before the General had summoned) in Scotland were assembled, to whom he delivers his sentiments of the present posture of affairs, which terminated in these three Propositions.
First, That he having a call from God and man, to march into England for resetling the Parliament, they would, during his absence, which would not be long, preserve the peace of that Nation. Secondly, That if any troubles should arise, they would assist him in suppressing them. Thirdly, That they would raise him some money. To which Propositions the summe of their answers, was briefly thus. First, That they could not engage to pre∣serve the Peace of the Countrey, wanting Armes, but should notwithstanding use their endeavours. Secondly, They were incapable to answer his desires; and besides thought it imprudent and in∣convenient, to ingage in a Warre, whereof the successe was dubious, and the advantage to them uncertain, and not intelligible. Thirdly, They were content to levy him twelve moneths assessement. Though in the two first they did not qua∣drate their answer to the affirmative of his Propositions, yet in this last (I suppose) they satisfied the whole of his intentions, it being that which he chiefly stood in need of, for car∣rying on the great work he had in hand.
whilst Gen. Monck is thus vigorously providing against them in the North, they are not lesse violently attached, by discontents of the peo∣ple at London, and open force more South∣ward. At London the Apprentices, whose tumultuary Assemblies, and confused Petitions had been instrumental to the first disturbances, 1640. begin now to recollect their spirits, and (as was thought) abetted by some con∣siderable persons, resolve to petition the Heads of the City, to endeavour the restitution of them, and the whole Nation to their due Rights and Priviledges by a Free Parliament. The noise of this extreamly startles the Army and Committee of Safety; so that they en∣deavour all means of prevention; and to this purpose they publish a Proclamation against it, and send their forces into the City, on the day whereon they heard it was resolved to be pre∣sented to the Common Counsel; where not∣withstanding the violence, and other high misdemeanours committed by Hewson the Commander of the Souldiers, yet the Petition was by six noble spirited Apprentices presented to the Common Counsel, and the thanks of it returned to them for it. Several other Petitions and endeavours were promoted likewise in order for a Free Parlia∣ment; not was the Designers for the Rump
lesse active, but sate daily in consultation for the undermining the present Usurpers, but their designs in London came to no head; but on the fifth of December news arrived of the appearance of the grand Heads of them at Portsmouth, whether Morley and Hasilrig were arrived; and the Governour Collonel Whetham sided with them, and immediately secured Captain Brown, Captain Peacocke, and such other Officers of the Garison, as they knew were principled contradictorily to that interest. These in power here, though they had little hopes to cope with so many adver∣saries, yet immediately order a Body of Horse and Foot that way, if possible, to blow the storm over, and reduce that revolting Garison. Major Cadwell was the first that with a party of Horse marched towards them; but he was no sooner going that way, but part of his Forces desert him, and took part with the contrary faction. But this was not all the misery that attended them; they had an enemy nearer home to deal withall, the City was to the height discontent∣ed, and having recovered some part of its former vigour, resolved no longer to be fool∣ed. The Common Counsel met daily, and their results produced nothing but was hete∣rodox
to the Army interest, who finding all their threats and force to be now of no effect, resolve to see what they can do by treaty, and whither or no they could still these neighbour storms by fair and gilded promises. The Com∣mon Counsel elected a Committee of worthy and eminent Citizens to conferre with them, esteeming them not worthy any other owning, or any way deserving the acknowledgement of an Authority. With these Fleetwood, and the rest of the Grandees had a conference, and that they might to the vulgar give them some seeming satisfaction, they are willing to con∣descend to these particulars. That a Parliament shall be called and appoint∣ed to sit down at or before the first of February next. That the said Parliament shall be according to such qualifications as are, or should be agreed upon, and may best secure the just Rights, Li∣berties and Priviledges both Civil and Re∣ligious of the people of this Commonwealth. This they thought enough to stop the mouth of the City for the present, intending what performance or after-termes themselves plea∣sed; but their endeavours remained fruitlesse, the City keeping still the same face of dis∣content. But upon the neck of this news, comes still
of severall endeavours for insurrections against them, in defence of the Rump. In Sussex a Party had been formed under one Collonel Fissenden, which notwithstanding were disper∣sed; and Collonel Fagg likewise, who was raising Forces, with intentions to strengthen the Party at Portsmouth, was taken and brought up to London. But their Portsmouth enemies grew daily stronger and stronger. Major Bremen, Ma∣jor of Collonel Rich his Regiment, and seve∣rall others, instead of resisting them, going in to their assistance, and so adding daily to their number. And at this time was a design framed to have seized on the Tower of London, for the behalf of the late Peer of a Parliament, which was thus to have taken effect. The designers ha∣ving brought over Collonel Fitch to their Par∣ty, and engaged him to the promotion of the enterprize, he was on Munday the 8th of De∣cember about eight in the Morning, to have come out of the Tower in his Coach, and re∣turning about ten, to have carried in with him in the Coach Collonel Okey, Major Wagstaffe, and John Streater, late Comptrollers of the Armies train of Artillery; and immediately after the Coach were four Companies of Foot, ready prepared for that purpose, amongst the
Sectaries in London to have rushed in, upon Pretence of Orders from Fleetwood for strength∣ning the Garrison; and so bing entred, to declare immediately for the late disturbed Rump. But this design of theirs was not so privately carried, but that it was discovered to those at Wallingford-House, who on the Sunday before sending for Fitch, did there se∣cure him, and forthwith Desborough and Col∣lonel Salmon to take care of the security of the Tower; and so this machination vanished into nothing. But now the Generall Counsell of Officers sit daily, that they might conclude something concerning the mock-Parliament they intended, which they resolved should have nothing of a Parliament but the name, being to be curbed and kept under by the negative voice of a com∣pany of ridiculous and schismaticall persons of their own faction, whom they termed Conser∣vators, and were in number twenty one. On the 15th of December they publish the Proclamation for this their Parliament, and re∣solve Writs should immediately go forth, as soon as they had considered what number it should consist of, and what persons for best conducement to themselves. On the 17th comes news far worse then all the rest, they are now like to be forceably set
upon at their own doors; Lawson with a squa∣dron of Ships comes into the River, and makes protestation against them and their proceed∣ings, resolving the restoration of the late pre∣tended Parliament. To remedy this if possible, they send down with all speed Sr Henry Vane, Major Saloway, and Collonel Salmon, to treat with him, who were no sooner come aboard, but they find with him Sr Anthony Ashly Coop∣er, Mr Scot, and Mr Streater, three of the Rumps great Agents; so that instead of a friendly complyance, this conference ended in nothing but taunts of these Adversaries. Nor was London and the adjacent places in this interim, free from designs against them; a plot was formed generally over the City, to have made a generall insurrection in vindicati∣on of their liberties; but this being (as was supposed) discovered by some of the chief un∣dertakers, was broken, and severall persons taken and secured for it, both at London and at Greenwich, where a Party was likewise to be formed to second these. The Common-Counsell of London seeing these strange distractions and tumults which e∣very day happened, and knowing of how dan∣gerous consequence they were to the welfare of the City, which by these means might be made the seat of War, resolved to take the liberty to
themselves, since they were absolutely denied it, of setling their own Militia in such hands, as they might confide in for the safeguard of it; and accordingly made choise of their re∣spective Officers, which was since presented to the Rump, but denied, though afterwards confirmed upon the re-admission of the seclu∣ded Members. But now comes the period of this Embryo of a Government; for messengers coming hour∣ly, bring news of the advance of Sr Arthur Haslerig, and the rest from Portsmouth to∣wards London. Whereupon the Officers them∣selves begin to be various and uncertain in their ridiculous determinations, concluding on one thing, and then resolving the contrary, and the Souldiers perceiving how unable they were to help themselves, resolve to provide for their own security, and leave their Officers to shift for themselves. Upon the Summons there∣fore and Orders of the Rumps Agents here in Town, they muster themselves in Lincolns Inn-field, under the Command of Collonel Okey, Collonel Alured, and Collonel Markham, and there with shouts testifie their resolutions to return to the obedience of the Parliament; and so from thence marching into Chancery-Lane, and by the Speakers door, they all sub∣mitted themselves to his command, as the Par∣liaments Souldiers.
That night the Speaker accompanied with divers others, comes into the City, and ac∣quaints the Maior and Sheriffs of the Parlia∣ments intentions to sit again very shortly; and therefore desires him to endeavour, that seeing they were again restored to the exercise of the Government, he would endeavour to still and quiet the animosities of the City, that they might acquiesce and submit to their determi∣nations. From thence he goes to the Tower, and having distributed twenty pounds amongst the Souldiery, commits the charge of it to Sir Anthony Ashly Cooper, Mr Weaver, and Mr Josias Barnars, who were confirmed a while after by the Parliament, with addition of Mr Scot. And no sooner were things thus overturned at London, but news comes likewise of the o∣verthrow of the Army-faction in Ireland; Sir Hardress Waller and other his associates, de∣claring publikely in behalf of the Rump, ha∣ving imprisoned Collonel Jones, and the rest of his Party. Desborows Regiment had advanced out of the North from Lambert, in order to help to quiet their disturbances here, but the work be∣ing done before they came, their labour was lost; and so they thought it better to submit to the mercy of the Parliament, then by standing
out in defence of their Collonel, to hazard both their lives and Arrears. Munday December the 26th was the day of the Rumps re-installment, and finall perdition of the late imaginary Government, the ficti∣tious Embryo of Sr Henry Vane; but it's hard to say, whether England had not as much rea∣son to be sorry for the restoration of the one, as for the destruction of the other, since both of them made it their aim and interest to inslave and oppress their native Country. But the Rump being thus reseated, conferre without delay the Government of the Army upon Collonel Alexander Popham, Collonel Thompson, Mr Scot, Collonel Okey, Sr Anthony Ashly Cooper, Collonel Alured, and Collonel Mark∣ham, who, or any three of them, were to be Commissioners for that end and purpose. They next take into consideration the busi∣ness of Moneys, and order the continuance of Custome and Excise: For though they had voted it down as oppressive to the Nation, that they might thereby deprive the Army of the benefit of it; yet were they resolved they would not themselves lose the profit, though never so much to the prejudice of the people; it being envy and not good will, which made them formerly vote it down. That they might likewise seem to give some
satisfaction to the desires of the Nation, they appoint a Committee to consider of the cases of absent Members, and filling up of the House; a thing they would never have done, had not Generall Monck so nobly forced them to it. But next that they might dissipate the grand enemy which they had in the North, to wit Lambert, they order, First the disbanding of all such Forces, as had been raised without Au∣thority of Parliament. Secondly the returning of all Arms which had been taken out of the publike stores. Thirdly that all the Regiments of Horse and Foot in the Northern Counties, do forthwith repair unto such Quarters, as shall be appointed for them by the Commissioners for ma∣nagement of the Army, and observe their order inddirections for time to come. And then they ordered thanks to be returned to Generall Monck, Vice-Admirall Lawson, and the Portsmouth Commissioners, as an acknowledgement of their fidelity and good service. And this was their first Act, upon their resetling their Rump in its former seat. Divers were the other Votes and Orders which they made, for setling their Army, and securing their power, which because not much materiall for our purpose, we shall pass on to what is more properly historicall; namely the actions of Generall Moncke, and his march
towards London; yet not forgetting such things, as in the mean time passed at London or elsewhere, and ought to be considerable. Generall Monck had after his first Treaty at London by his Commissioners, and that he might keep things from running to bloodshed, and prevent the hazard of a Battle, knowing that time it self must certainly make him victo∣rious, upon notice of the agreement made by his Commissioners here, contrary to the tenor of their Commissions, or his intentions; had I say agreed upon a second Treaty to be had at Newcastle. By which means he delayed time so long, that Sr Arthur Haslerig and the rest, making that diversion at Portsmouth, the Par∣liament was on a suddain restored, and his ene∣mies immediately upon news vanished like smoke, all the Forces being by the Parlia∣ments Order to submit to his command and disposure. Having therefore setled all things according to his pleasure, and as was most convenient to his purpose, he resolves upon his march to London, and for that purpose took up Horses in the Country to horse his Foot, the Parliament approving of his actions, for fear to displease him, though they had ordered his coming up only with 500 Horse, and dis∣posed his Army in their respective Quarters. But he who was to do other things then barely
the restoring of a putrified Rump, resolves to march up with his whole strength; but in the mean time lulls them asleep with a smiling complyance with their humors and desires. His march towards London was but slow, he being resolved to keep his Army in such a po∣sture, as might provide security for the Soul∣diery, and testifie the prudence of the Gene∣rall. In Yorkeshre he was met by the Lord Fair∣fax, and other Gentlemen of the County, (who before Lamberts dispersing, had raised a considerable Body, and with the assistance of the Irish Brigade had secured Yorke) and by them was caressed with all testimonies of af∣fection, and courted with their desires that he would be instrumentall to make the Nation happy, by restoring the Members secluded in 1648, or in helping them to a full and free Par∣liament. This likewise was the substance of ma∣ny Declarations, which at this time were ten∣dred to the Speaker and City of London from se∣verall Counties. And this likewise was the sub∣ject of those other addresses, which he received from the Gentry of all places in his march. But the Parliament a little alarmed by this news, and sensible of the danger was thereby immi∣nent to themselves, should the intentions of the Generall be otherwise then they seemed to them, order Mr Scot and Mr Robinson to go
down to him, under pretence of congratula∣ting him for his signall services; but indeed to search if they could into the depth of his inten∣tions. But he who was too wise to be caught by such gulls, carried himself with such an even poise, that both Parliament and Country thought him surely inclining to their severall Parties. And notable was his Letter, in an∣swer to one the City had lately sent him by their Swordbearer; in which he both resolved as he said to satisfie their desires for a Free Par∣liament, and yet resolved to continue faithfull to this Parliament, giving the City matter of hope, and taking from the Rump all cause of discontent. But the Parliament having sent persons to search into his thoughts, the City likewise whom it as nearly concerned, were resolved to do the like; and therefore made choise of Alderman Fowke, Alderman Vincent, and Collonel Bromfield, to go down and present him with their affections and desires, together with their resolution to stick by their former resolu∣tion; who were received by the Generall with all expressions of civility; but nothing was promised to them, which might give the Rump any suspition or jealousie of his intenti∣ons. After a long and tedious march on Ja∣nuary 28. 1659. he arrived at St Albans, where he was presented with the Addresses of
severall Counties, together with one from the City of London; all which containing the fore∣mentioned subject received from him the like courteous, though dubious answers. The same day he arrived at St Albans, his Lady ar∣rived at Whitehall, and took up those lodgings, which had been prepared for her. On Friday February the third he arrived at London, the Army which was quartered there, having mar∣ched out the night before, though with a great deal of discontent, and some disorder and mu∣tiny. He was the next day by the Parliament desired to come to the House, and Mr Scot and Mr Robinson sent to attend him; where being come, the Speaker in the highest expressions might be, did endeavour to testifie the grand esteem the House had of his merits, and the hearty thanks they did return to him for them; and he afterwards retaliated his language, in an excellent speech, whereof though in all things he seemed to comply with their desires, yet in some sort he put them in mind of the peoples desires and inclinations, which notwithstand∣ing he left to their determination, and upon parting left them well satisfied with him, in all outward appearance. There were not many things remarkable which fell out at London or elsewhere, in the interim of the Generalls march thither, only
the ejection of Sr Henry Vane, and Major Sa∣loway, (who had been instruments in the late interruption) out of the House, and confine∣ment of the first, with Lambert, and the rest of the nine Worthies, to their severall Houses, and the committing the last to the Tower. There happened likewise two mutinies, the one at Gravesend by the Souldiers of Sr Brice Cockrains Regiment; and the other at Bristoll by the inhabitants, in relation to a Free Par∣liament; but both were sunddenly quelled. The Generall being as aforesaid come to London, the Parliament, alias Rump, (for by that name they may be best known,) being ex∣traordinary jealous of him, and the power he might at pleasure exercise over them to their prejudice, consult amongst the grandees of them, how they might best abridge his power, and overtop him; and for this they designed this expedient. The City continuing as be∣fore malecontent, and denying to pay any Money without the consent of a full Parliament, and refusing to be satisfied with any thing could proceed from the Rump, whose villanies were now grown execrable to them, and his strength likewise chiefly consisting in the affection and interest he had in the hearts of the Citizens; they resolve to kill two Birds with one stone, undoe the City, and make him the instrument
of the action. On February the 9th they send him with part of his Army into the City; and he according to their Order marched in that day, and took up his Quarters at the three Tuns at Guild-Hall gate, where he was cares∣sed, and saluted by divers principall Citizens. But he who knew times were not yet ripe for his after comfortable actions, granted them no∣thing, but sends up to the House to know what he should do; who immediately return him these Votes for an answer, That he should im∣medihtely pull down and destroy the Gates, Posts, Chains, and Portcullises; which accordingly he put in execution. And moreover sent these following persons, who had lately been very active for the interest of the City, to take up their lodgings in the Tower of London; viz. Mr alias Alderman Thomas Brown Grocer, Mr Daniel Spencer, Collonel Bromfield, Ma∣jor Chamberlain, Mr Richard Foord, Major Cox, Mr Bludworth, Mr Penning, and Lieutenant Collonel Jackson; all of them Common Counsell men, and persons of highest repute and desert. These actions of his exceedingly startled the faith of all men, who had grounded the opi∣nion in themselves, that God had appointed him for the onely instrument of his Countreys deliverance, and were now in such a maze, that they almost gave over the good hopes
they had conceived of him. But he who un∣derstood well enough what he went about, and knew that by this action he should per∣fectly understand, whether the City would not be wavering and inconstant, should he make a neerer conjunction with them, which must have ruined him and his good purposes together, did fullfill this execrable Command of the Rump, that so he might set them and the City at the utmost variance, and so make them surer and faster for an after compliance with him, which he not many hours after did make with them, and so plenarily satisfied the longing desires of the City, and deceived the Parliament with their own snare. For that they had perfectly designed this action to cast dirt in his face in the eyes of the City, may be seen, in that whilst he was about this hatefull drudgery, they already fell to abridge his power, by joyning several others, as Hesilrig, Walton, Morley, &c. in Commission with him for the Government of the Army, that so they might restrain and curb him at plea∣sure. But he, who understood them well enough, had no sooner finished this dirty work, but upon his return to White-hall, he sends them a Letter, which rang another peal than they expected after their City-Victory, wherein he notably expostulated with them
for their last injurious commands, tels them, Of their countenancing and abetting such as they had seemingly declared enemies, and had been the occasion of their last overthrow, which were then in Town hatching designes for the ruine of all. And then concludes with a prefixed time, by which they would resolve to issue out Writs for a new Parliament, that so they might terminate their sitting, and come to a dissolution, which both Army and Nati∣on longingly expected. After this Letter, he sent on Saturday, Febr. 11. in the morning, and forthwith he gives order for his Army both Foot and Horse to be in a readiness, and with them he marches by the backside of the Town into Finsbury-field, where he musters them, and goes himself with several of his Officers to Dinner with the Lord Maior at his house; at night he marched them into the City, where Quarters were provided for them, with the hearty good will of the Citizens, whose Bon∣fires and Bels did in some measure testifie the unmeasurable joy they had conceived, by ha∣ving got so noble a Guest. But I must not omit one passage in his Let∣ter, which was the detestation of that damna∣ble and hellish Petition which was presented to the Rump by Praise-God Barebones, contrived by themselves, and pretended to come from
many thousand well-affected Brethren in Lon∣don, Westminster, and the places adjacent, Wherein they bitterly rail against King, No∣bility and Clergie, casting all the scandal possible upon those worthy persons, who were by armed vio∣lence excluded in 1648. because by a Treaty with the King, they would have composed the bleed∣ing differences of the Nation: and likewise they utterly cried out against the restoring those Members, or bringing in a Free Par∣liament, as that which must inevitably ruine the godly of the Land. For prevention of which they desired no more than the bare ruine both of Church and State, in these following particulars. That no man might be admit∣ted into any place or function, either in Church or State, but who would absolutely abjure and renounce the King, and all his Family, and any single Person whatsoever. By this means intending the overthrow of that small re∣mains of Magistracy and Ministry they had left us. That whosoever in Parliament, or elswhere should make any mention of restoring the King, should be adjudged guilty of High-Treason. Intending hereby to cut off the hands, and stop the mouths of those, who had not such per∣nicious resolution for their Countreys ruine, as themselves.
And yet notwithstanding this cursed Petition, contained things in it thus horrid and villain∣ous, their Rumpships was graciously pleased, to think it deserved the thanks of the House, which by Order the Speaker returned to them. But this our Noble General makes one rea∣son of his so sudden desertion of them; and happy was that action of his for London. For the Rump (as was reported and believed) had designed the utter overthrow of the City-Go∣vernment, by taking away both Maior and Common Counsel, and hanging up divers of the most eminent, both Aldermen and Commoners. But when now they see their pregnant hopes of compassing their mischievous ends prevented, they seem to approve of General Moncks acti∣on; and that they might leave no stone un∣turned, which might serve for some support to their now falling interest: They return hearty thanks to the Lord Maior for his good affecti∣on to them; hoping thereby to create such ani∣mosities between the City and him, that might render him uncapable of doing them a mis∣chief, by the affection of the Populacy to him. They had likewise designed a new Mi∣litia, made wholly of factious and mechanick persons, who should have exercised what ty∣ranny they pleased over the City: But blessed
be God, these their machinations were bla∣sted by the care and wisdome of our thrice no∣ble General. But to content him, if possible, they order a Committee to consider what Lands were fitting to be conferred upon him; and to satisfie him in one particular, they or∣der a Proclamation to be published against John Lambert, wherein he was required to render himself within four dayes, upon the forfeiture of his Estate. And then as for ano∣ther Parliament, they make show, to resolve a speedy sending out Writs, but resolve to tie up their hands to their blocks, by previous engagements against King, House of Lords, &c. But this was no satisfaction to the General. For he having taken away those arms which were in the hands of the Fanaticks, and such as might have caused disturbance in the City, on Tuesday the 21th of February (a day not to be forgotten, as long as England endureth, being the first light which glimmered some chearfulnesse to us) having drawn his Army together, he marched to Westminster early in the morning; and having before-hand prepa∣red the secluded Members to be ready, who were then very many of them in Town, and had had divers private meetings; he met them at White-hall, where having recommended to them the care of the National interest, yet
in such termes as the Rump might not abso∣lutely despair, he saw them admitted into the Parliament House, to the great grief and amazement of the former House-keepers, who look upon these as Intruders. That night there was Bonfires, and great rejoycing in Lon∣don. But the secluded Members being in, they fall to their work in good earnest; they had not such by-ends, or corrupted interests to drive on, as their Predecessors; and therefore found no such haltings in doing things, which the Nation required. But in the first place they order the release of those prisoners, which for Free-Parliament-Petitions had been lately clapt up, as likewise the Members of the Com∣mon Counsel of London. They disanull the Militia which the Rump had instituted, con∣sisting only of persons both Fanatick and Fa∣ctious, and order a new Militia throughout all England, wherein they nominated the most principal of the Gentry, who were thought most willing and ready to promote the settle∣ment of their Countrey; yet with this proviso, that they should subscribe that they should ac∣knowledge the war was lawfull against his late Majesty till 1648. the Parliament by violent force was broken. And that they might be furnished with that which is the sinews and
strength of all, money, they send to the City to desire them advance some money before∣hand upon security of the next six Moneths assessement, which was freely granted by the City, and 27000lb. immediately lent them. Whereupon the City petition for the con∣firmation of the Militia, which the Parlia∣ment presently setled according to their desires. The next work they did, was to chuse a Counsel of State, which was done by lot (of all manner of choise the most equal, by reason no man can find himself aggrieved, not know∣ing who is pro, or who is con) which prevents all rancour and animosity. The persons which were by them chosen, being for the most Gen∣tlemen of eminent worth, and such as have to the height testified their abilities for the good of their Countrey in this last emergency; al∣though there were some Rumpers amongst them. I have thought it not amisse to give you a Catalogue of them, that we may pay due ho∣mage to their names and memory.
Arthur Ansley Lord President. William Pierpoint. John Crew. Richard Knightly. Collonel Popham. Collonel Morley. Sr A. A. Cooper. Sr Gilb. Gerhard. Lord St John. Sr Tho. Widdrington. Sr John Evelin. Sr William Waller. Sr Richard Onslow. Serjant Maynard. Sr William Lewis. Col. Montague. Col. Hanley. Col. Norton. Denzil Hollis. Sr John Temple. Col. Thompson. Sr John Trever. Sr John Holland. Sr John Potts. Col. Birch. Sr Herbottle Grimston. John Swinton. John Weaver. Col. Rossiter. Lord Fairfax. L. General Monck. Then they repealed such Acts of the Rump, as they had made meerly for the satisfaction of their own self ends, and were exceedingly de∣structive to the interest of the Kingdome; ta∣king off those Sequestrations which they had laid on Sr George Booth, and his party, which must have proved almost a general calamity to the Nation: and they likewise released them from that confinement which they had for a long time lain under. Making moreover such acts as might best secure the interest of the peo∣ple, and conduce to the settlement of the Na∣tion,
some of which were directed to the ta∣king away all places of power or profit, out of the hands of the Fanatick or Commonwealth party, and putting in those who were like to prove better Patriots. But these acts being ve∣ry numerous, I think not convenient to insert the particulars. In the next place they commissionate the Lord Monck to be Captain General of all the Forces in England, Scotland and Ireland, a place of the highest honour, and which he had as highly deserved. And now to show that God was pleased, notwithstanding the conti∣nued sinnes of the Nations to remit his punish∣ing hand: no sooner were the Members seated in the House, but news came that Ireland was by his good providence, through the endea∣vours of Sr Charles Coote already put in such a posture, as might make it capable of receiving the first state of affaires; he having secured Sr Hardresse Waller, and others of the Rumps faction. But now some signe of discontent appeared in the Army here, which had formerly been under Fleetwoods and Lamberts command. For Collonel Rich's Regiment upon news of this change at London, began to mutany at St Edmondsbury; but the Parliament hearing of it, instantly sent out Collonel Ingoldsby, a
Lover of his Countrey, their former Com∣mander, with a party of Horse, to whom upon his approach they quietly submitted them∣selves. The Parliament now restored the Charter to the City of Chester, which had been taken away by the Rump upon Sr George Booths bu∣sinesse; as shortly afterward they likewise re∣vived the Dutchy of Lancaster, which had been voted down by the others, and made Sr Gilbert Gerrard Chancellour, Nich. Letch∣mere Attorney of the Dutchy; and the Speak∣er William Lenthal Esquire, Chamberlain of Chester. And perceiving that endeavours were daily used to sow sedition in the Army, and that there was designs on foot to draw them together to a mutiny, they order, That none either Offi∣cers or Souldiers should depart from their re∣spective Quarters without leave from the Lord General, and those that had, forthwith to return to their assigned stations. To gratifie Dr Claerges, and in him his bro∣ther the Lord General, the Hamper-Office, a place of good profit was conferred upon him. Febr. 29. Upon notice of some design con∣triving by the Fanatick party, several armes were seised in divers places of the City of
London, and Captain Kiffen a grand Ring∣leader of the Anabaptists, and several others were secured, though afterwards released, no matter of weight being then found against them. And now that they might testifie to the world they were other men than their prede∣cessours, who would have continued them∣selves a Parliament to posterity, they order their dissolution to be on the 15th of March, resolving before that time to take order for summoning a New Representative. They con∣firmed the Confession of Faith formerly made by the Assembly of Divines, and enacted, That it should be the Confession of Faith of the Church of England, except onely the thir∣tieth and one and thirtieth Articles concern∣ing Church-censure and Synods. They like∣wise constitute General Monck, together with General Montague to be Generals at Sea for the next Summers expedition, and accord∣ingly command Montague to go to Sea with all possible speed. And because several Members had impeach∣ments against them, and upon that score were secluded the House, they disanull those im∣peachments, and re-admit them, as namely Mr Denzil Hollis, and Sr Robert Pye. About this time the Deanry of Christ-Church,
which had for a long time been in the hands of Dr Owen (a man look'd upon at Oxford as a hair-brain'd schismatick) was ta∣ken from him, and confirmed to Dr Reynolds, a man who farre better deserved it. They likewise at the beginning of March released the Lord Lindsey, the Lord Sinclare, and Lord Lauderdale from their tedious imprisonments, to which upon various pretences they had been committed. Dr Walker and Dr Turner were made Judg∣es of the Admiralty, and Probate of Wils, and Dr Wiseman constituted the Commonwealths Advocate. And now was the Lord General invited to Dinner by the Company of Mercers, and af∣terwards by several other of the Companies, the Citizens striving mutually, who should in the best manner discover and expresse the gratefulness and esteem they bore for his noble and heroick actions. At this time there was an assembly of a Parliamentary Convention in Ireland, sum∣moned by Sr Charles Coote, and the Lord Broghill, for the better Regulating of affairs there, till all things in England might be in a better posture. The Parliament that they might testifie to the world, that they were not so forgetfull of
Oaths as their fellow-Members, order the so∣lemn League and Covenant to be set up and read in all Churches; and likewise to be set up in the Parliament, that they might remember they had sworn for the maintenance of the King and his posterity. Collonel Lambert being found to lurk up and down about the City, notwithstanding the Order of the Parliament, was (as a person too dangerous to be trusted to himself at such a time as this) committed to the Tower. Orders were sent down to Hull by Collonel Alured and Major Smith, that Collonel Over∣ton should immediately deliver up that Garri∣son into the hands of Collonel Fairfax, and to repair immediately to London; and he not∣withstanding his former Declaration, that he was resolved to keep it till the coming of King Jesus, presently obeyed the Order, and Col∣lonel Fairfax accordingly took possession of the place. Sr Arthur Haslerig and others were questio∣ed before the Parliament and Counsell of State; but nothing extraordinary being found against him, as to the designs were then on Foot, it was passed by. The Parliament made Sr Peter Killigrew, Governour of Pendennis-Castle; and worthy Mr Morris, Commander of Ply∣mouth-Fort and Island.
There was about this time a conference be∣tween ten of the Counsell of State, and ten head-Officers of the Army, the Generall being present, concerning the Government; but the conference being only for mutuall informa∣tion and satisfaction, it had no result. The Parliament ordered that the Examinati∣on of Sr George Booth and his Lady should be taken off the File, and given to him, he de∣serving to have his Encomium put on in the room of it. And now they obliterated the Engagement which was made by the Rump in 1649, (to free them from punishment, for the impious murther of their Gracious Soveraign) out of the Journall, and voted it to be null and void. And now the time of their dissolution being come, they put out the Act for summoning a new Parliament, in the Name of the Keepers of the Liberties of the Commonwealth of Eng∣land. The Qualifications which they put out, being only these. That all persons who have advised, aided, or any wayes assisted or abetted the rebellion in Ire∣land. All those who profess the Popish Religion. All that advised or voluntarily aided in the Warre against the Parliament in 1641, unless
they have since given a manifestation of their good affection, shall be uncapable of being elected Members for the ensuing Parliament; and no person elected and thus qualified, to sit in the House upon a high penalty. Though these Qualifications did seem at first to exclude a great number, yet divers eminent and worthy persons, though they had actually been in the Kings service in the late War, having been engaged in Sr George Booths quar∣rell for the naturall interest, were elected and admitted to sit in the House. The City having compleated their Militia, as well Auxiliaries as trained Bands, made choice of his Excellency the Lord Generall, to be Major Generall of all their Forces; Major Generall Brown being Collonel of the Regi∣ment of Horse. The Parliament ordered 9000lb to be given to Major Generall Brown, in satisfaction for those great losses which he had received under the tyranny of the Rump, for his noble and publick spirit. They likewise gave 20000lb, as a gift to his Excellency. And before their dissolution they released Dr Wren, who for about eighteen years had suffered imprisonment in the Tower of Lon∣don, a man who doubtless deserved better usage, but that the times then did not well un∣derstand
him. They gave power also to the Counsel of State to release what Prisoners up∣on State-matters, they should see good, and particularly Maj. Gen. Lambert. They ordered a stop should be put to the sale of the Estate of the Lord Craven and Lord St John, the first of which had his Estate taken away from him by more than hellish injustice. Some neglect being in the Printer concern∣ing the Printing of the Act for the Militia, and it being supposed, there was a designe of some of the late Rump, to make some altera∣tion in the Act, as might suit for their turn, or else upon the Parliaments dissolution, by violence to hinder it: The Parliament order∣ed a Committee to take care that it should be finished with all expedition, which according∣ly was performed. And so this part of a Par∣liament, which was chosen in 1640. was now finally dissolved in 1660. by their own Act, which was, That the day for dissolution of this Parliament be from the sixteenth of March 1660. Multiplicity of business ha∣ving caused them to alter the first appointed day. About this time our gracious Sovereigne King Charles the second, hearing of the tran∣sactions of affairs in England, and seeing how the face of all things began to alter, so that
great probability there was of being admitted to his undoubted Right, without the effusion of his Subjects blood, removed his Court from Brussels to Breda in Holland, a Town belong∣ing to his Sister the Princess of Orange; there expecting till England might be brought into such a posture, as might fit it for his happy and wished for reception. The Parliament at their dissolution had con∣ferred on the Counsel of State all Power what∣soever in the Interval, till the assembling of the Free Parliament, April 25. 1660. which accordingly they executed so prudently and wisely, and preserved the Nation in peace, and put the affairs of the Kingdom in such a po∣sture, as did give the ensuing Parliament, liberty to do what they pleased, or found convenient for the right settlement of the Government. The Counsel of State had nothing more to take care of then the Militia, which blessed be God was through the care of the Commissio∣ners in the respective Counties, and their ap∣probation of the same put into the hands of such considerable persons of the Nobility and Gentry, as were not like upon any occasions to prostitute their faith and Country, upon the base Mechanicall ends of self-profit or advan∣tages. And good reason was there for its spee∣dy and good setlement, the Fanaticks, and
discontented Officers of the Army, with seve∣rall of the late discarded Rump, did all they might underhand, to bring the Counsel of State and their proceedings into odium with the people, and to stir up their own followers, with the Souldiery to mutinie against their Com∣manders, and the present power; and to this purpose they put out severall most scurrilous, and abusive Libels in defamation of the Kings most Excellent Majesty; representing him to the guilty consciences, of those whose crimes had justly made them fearfull, To be of all per∣sons the most cruel and arbitrary, and that notwithstanding the thoughts of the Presbyteri∣ans, who so vigorously now promoted his inter∣est; he would shew them as little mercy, as to those they called Fanaticks; nor would they find any distinction from him when once resetled. These and the like most opprobrious calumnies were divulged concerning him, in generall Pam∣phlets, but especially in one, entituled a letter from Brussels, supposed to be writ by Marcha∣mond Needham, (a fellow who most highly deserves the prefixion of the black Theta) or the Rumps man Thomas, but printed by Live-well Chapman; who for his private profit had for a long time been the Devils instrument, in making publick divers erroneous and dange∣rous opinions of the hotheaded Sectaries; and
now was so impudent, as to endeavour the de∣struction of of his Countrey, by such inflaming Libels. But the prudent Counsel of State hav∣ing notice of it, immediately sent order for his apprehending, which he understanding, forth∣with fled, but was followed by a Proclamati∣on, which for sometime he avoided, by hide∣ing himselfe; but at last being by Gods just judgement discovered, is now in prison, ex∣pecting the due reward of such nefarious pra∣ctises. But they were not only blowing the bellows of sedition, by their incendiary Libels, but also by the old trick of Agitators (which were two out of every Regiment chosen to debauch the Army) the indeavour to draw the Souldie∣ry from their due obedience, and seduce them to side with their corrupt interest; and very busie were these instruments of sedition, till by a wholesome Order of the Counsel of State, which was a Proclamation, That whosoever should apprehend any of these Agitators, should have 10lb given him as a reward: there were divers of them seized on, and secured, and so their designes in a good manner rendred ineffectuall. Yet notwithstanding all care ta∣ken for suppressing their indeavours, they had formed a design, which had not it met with most timely prevention, must have proved
most dangerous to the Nations quiet, and in∣volved it in the confusion of a second War. For these infamous persons who so lately lorded it over the Kingdome, not able to indure them∣selves to be turned into their first Sphear, and fearing they should shortly feel the weight of their crimes, to sink them, under a just re∣venge, had throughout the whole Nation stir∣red up as many as possible they could engage, upon the first opportunity to make an insur∣rection; and so having prepared their design, in order to action, they find meanes for Lam∣bert's escape out of the Tower of London (as may justly be supposed by the conveyance and consent of some who had charge of the Priso∣ner) that so they might not want a head, who would in some sort be acceptable to their par∣ty. The Counsel of State having notice of his escape, proclaimed him guilty of High-treason if he did not within 24. houres render himself to the next Garrison; but he notwithstanding this escaped, and after a while appeared hard by Edgehill, together with Creed and other of his associates, in order to the framing of a par∣ty; for thither it was that all the Fanatiks, to∣gether with discontented Souldiers were to re∣paire, and make their rendezvouse; and there doubtlesse had they been suffered to remain a while, they would have made a very formida∣ble
party. But their appearance being heard of in the Country about, notice was given to vali∣ant Coll. Ingoldsby, Coll. Rossiter and others, whose Forces quartered about them, and so all the passages thither being on every side stop∣ped, these Rebels removed their quarter, and marched towards Daintry, whither they were followed by Coll. Ingoldsby with a party of Horse and Foot, and there dispersed, without scarce a drop of blood; the Party betaking themselves to their heels, and their grand Ringleader Lambet falling into the hands of stout and victorious Ingoldsby, was taken with∣out offering so much as to draw a sword in his own defence; and was presently after sent up to London, with Creed, Hesilrig's son and o∣thers; the Coach which brought them, com∣ing by Hide-Park corner, just when the whole Forces of the City were there Mustring, to be in a readiness to defend their Country, a∣gainst all such Traitors and Rebels as he had manifested himself. Being brought up to Lon∣don, he was with the rest committed to his for∣mer place of residence, and there remains till his due time. About this time a dangerous tumult had like to have happened at Glocester, about the com∣ing of Major Generall Massey thither, to be elected for a Parliament man; which was
briefly thus. He ariving there on Saturday night in cognito intended to lie private: but notice being brought to the Major, he came, and with an invitation, fetched him to his own house; and the next day took him with him to Church, but as he was going home from thence together with him, and the Minister who preached before them; the Captain of the Guard having notice, came and said hold of the Major General, and told him he was his Pri∣soner: and the rude Souldiery (the Minister steping up to speak in his defence) drew, and threatned to take away his life: which being heard by some of the Townsmen, who feared some violence would hereupon be offered to the life of their beloved Governour, immedi∣ately raised the whole Town in a commotion, and a party of Soldiers going to the Crosse with resolution to suppresse some which were there assembled, were set upon by the Towns∣men and dispersed, and their Commander with severall of them knockt down and wounded; and the mutiny being thus heightned it is veri∣ly thought it must have ended in the slaughter of all the Souldiers in the Town, had not the mediation of the Major, and his passing his word that the Major Generall should make his appearance before the Counsel of State at London, at last put an end to the fray and dif∣ference.
And the Major Generall being that afternoon made a Free-man of the City, did a day or two after come up to London, and ren∣der himself to the Counsel according to their Order, whereupon he was dismissed, and was by his Glocester friends chosen with free con∣sent for one of their Burgesses. Great were the expectations of this time, what the Counsel of State would do concern∣ing the King, many being of opinion and rest∣ing confident, that they would bring him in before the beginning of the Parliament, all men antedating the time of his restoration by their longing and earnest desires of that hap∣py day, wherein they might see him setled up∣on the Throne of his Ancestors, and the Nation restored to its true and ancient Li∣berties. The designes of the Fanaticks did now ap∣pear almost in every County; but the head be∣ing brok in Lambert, the Members could not long enjoy life and motion; but in every Coun∣ty they were dispersed, and the chief Ringlea∣ders taken, amongst whom Major General Harrison, who was taken in Staford-shire, was most considerable. But the 25th of April being now come, a day of greatest expectation by the whole Na∣tion, the Parliament met in their House, where
the first day nothing of moment passed, but on∣ly they chose their Speakers, and Sr Harbotle Grimstone for the House of Commons, a man of eminent parts and deserts. The next day the House of Commons ap∣pointed severall Committees to take care of such things as were first to come under conside∣ration; and the first was concerning double e∣lections, and till the business was determined, none but those who were returned in both the indentures, were to sit in the House. A Bill a∣gainst vagrants, wandring, idle and dissolute persons was read. And not long after, The Lords confirmed their old Speaker, the Earl of Manchester. Both houses likewise. Ordered Thursday May 10. to be set apart for a day of publick thanksgiving to Almighty God for his won∣derfull goodnesse in stirring up and assisting of General Monck and other worthy persons in being so grandly instrumentall to the restoring of happinesse to their Country; and Ordered to be observed by this House, and the Cities of London and Westminster, and late Lines of Communication; and that the Thursday fort∣night after, be likewise observed the whole Nation; and this their Resolve being by Mr Herbert carried up to the Lords, they im∣mediately concurred with them therein, and
so passed the Orders. The Commons resolved, that the thanks of their House should be given to Generall Monck, as an acknowledgement of his emi∣nent and unparalleled services for the good of these Nations, and likewise Ordered thanks to be returned to Coll. Ingoldsby for his late emi∣nent services; both which were by the Speaker elegantly performed accordingly. The Houses on Friday April 27. adjourned till the Tuesday following, appointing Munday to be observed as a day of Humiliation by both Houses, whereon Dr Reynold and Mr Hardy preached before the Lords, and Dr Gauden, Mr Calamy and Mr Baxter before the House of Commons. And now appeared that happy day, Tuesday May 1st which is not to be mentioned amongst English men without praise to Almighty God for his infinite mercy; it being the day where∣on he pleased at length to bring us out of that masse of confusion and misery, into which his just hand had suffered us to plunge our selves, into our former blessed and happy estate. For the Parliament having received by Sr John Greenvile, his Majesties most Gracious Letters and Declarations, it was unanimously passed by both Houses, That according to the ancient and fundamentall Laws of this Kingdome, the
Government is, and ought to be by King, Lords, and Commons. The Kings Majesty besides his Letters to both Houses and Declaration, had likewise sent a Letter to General Monck with the Officers under his Command; together with one to General Mountague and the Commanders at Seas: The substance of all which was, His Majesties free and Gracious pardon to all that should within fourty daies lay hold on the same, with resolution (as far as in him lies) to preserve them free from injury in their lives and Estates, liberty for tender Consciences, and such as differ in matters of Religion, pro∣vided they disturb not the peace of the Nation, and that all things relating to Sales and Purchases, shall be determined in Parliament; And the full satisfaction of the Arrears of the Souldiery, and receiving them into his Majesties pay. Upon the reading of the fore∣mention Letters and Declaration in the Hou∣ses, there was all reverence shown due to his Majesty and so Royall a concession; and one thing is worth observation, that the first who celebrated his Majesties grace and extraordi∣nary goodnesse was Luke Robinson, a man whose former actings had rendred him deser∣vedly odious, but now I hope he hath made a reall repentance.
Never was Vote received with more joy then this was, by the Citizens and all others who could hear of it, at night the Bels, Bonfires, and shouts of the people, did highly demonstrate their extraordinary content and satisfaction. On the next day the House of Commons agreed upon a Letter in answer to his Majesty, and resolved that the Superscription should be, To the Kings most excellent Majesty. And General Monck acquainted the House, with an Addresse made to him by the Officers of the Army, wherein they did with one heart testi∣fie their resolutions to demonstrate themselves the best and most loyall of his Majesties Sub∣jects. Which Addresse was presented to the Generall by Coll. Sr John Lenthall and subscri∣bed by all the chief Officers then in London. The House Resolved, that Dr Claerges have leave of the House to go to the King with the Lord Generals answer to his Majesties Let∣ter to him. They likewise Resolved, that Sr John Greenvile should have the thanks of the House and, receive 500lb to buy him a jewel as a restimony of their respect to him. Honest Ald. Robinson acquainted the House, That the Lord Major, Aldermen and Commoncounsel had likewise received a Letter with the Decla∣ration from his Majesty, to which they desired liberty of the Parliament to return an answer,
which was by this House accordingly granted. An Agreement was made between this Commonwealth and the King of Spain for me∣tuall exchange of all prisoners, which was signed by the Marquesse of Caracena on the behalf of his Catholick Majesty, and the Lord General Monck, in behalf of this Commonwealth; and the Orders taken according for the trans∣portation of such Spaniards as were prisoners here, which agreement is hoped will not end there, but that there will shortly be a finall con∣clusion of all differences between both Nations. May 3. The Lords and Commons Ordered a Declaration for continuance of all Sheriffs, Justices of the Peace, Major, and other Of∣ficers that were in office the 25th of April, 1660. and to exercise their functions in his Majesties name and stile, and suppresse all unlawfull Assemblies, and punish all misde∣meanours against his Majesties Royall Person and Authority, and to proceed against all such Offenders according to Law and Justice, which Declaration was published Munday May 7th. From Ireland arrived a Declaration of the General convention there, wherein they ex∣pressed their detestation of the most execrable murder of our late most Gracious Soveraigne Charles the first, and the illegall proceedings of the High Court of Justice against him.
The Parliament Ordered 50000lb to be sent over to his Majesty for a present, as a test of their duty and loyalty, and 50000lb more to∣wards the payment of the Arrears of the Army, and sent a Committee to the City to desire them to raise the money immediately, for which they should receive satisfaction by the next assessement, and receive in the mean the interest at 6. per cent. which was presently granted by the City and care taking for its spe∣dy provision. The Commoncounsell of the City of London to testifie their loyall gratitude to his Majesty Ordered 10000lb to be sent for a present to his Majesty, and 300lb to be given to the Lord Mordant and Sr John Greenvile, who brought them his Majesties Letter, to buy each of them a Ring. They likewise ordered that to the most illustrious Prince James Duke of York, and his Princely Brother Henry Duke of Glocester, a 1000lb be presented to each of them. The Parliament Order that a stop be put to the sale of the Estates of the Lord Craven, Sr John Stawell, and Alderman Bunce, and likewise to the estate of the Duke of Bucking∣ham, and that their names be inserted into the proviso of the Bill of of Grants and Sales. The Horse adjourned Easter Term to Quinque
Paschae being May 28th 1660. Upon the third of May the Lord Mounta∣gue having received a Letter from his Majesty, together with his Majesties gracious message to the House of Commons; the Letter to his Excellency and Declaration; presently called a Counsel of War, to whom he communicated the said Letters, which were received by them all with much hearty affections and testimonies of their exact loyalty and duty to his Majesty: whereupon the General firing the first Gun himself cried, God blesse King Charles; the Guns from the rest of the Fleet, with those from Deal and Sandwich Castles, did with loud Vollies re-eccho the joy for such a happy time, the shouts of the Seamen testifying their extraordinary cheerfullnesse and ala∣crity. But now comes the day, the like whereof was never enrolled in the Enguish Calender, nor ever was there known a day whereon the people did with so unanimous and generall consent testifie their unexpressible content and gladness. And well might they, since from this time alone we can truly date the restored hap∣pinesse of the English Nation, what passed be∣fore being as it were only glimmerings of this immense, and radiant light. The Parliament having the day before Ordered the Proclama∣tion
of his Majesty to be on the 8th day of May he was with the greatest solemnity possible, all the chief Lords of the Parliament attending in their Coaches; together with many eminent Members of the House of Commons, the Lord General, the Lord Major and Aldermen, with the whole Militia of the City, Proclaimed Charles by the Grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, the most potent mighty and undoubted King. Nor did they intend by this Proclamation to seem as if they thought his Reign was to be begun from that time, but confessed that forthwith upon the death of his Father, the Imperiall Crown of England, and the Dominions thereof did as absolutely bring unto him, as now after Pro∣clamation; so that this is the twelfth year of the Reign of our Soveraign Lord King Charles the second, whom God preserve. The House of Lords, the House of Com∣mons, and the City of London, made choice of severall most eminent and worthy persons of their number to attend his Majesty, which that they may not by posterity be forgotten, I have inserted their names.
For the House of Lords. Earl of Oxford. Earl of Middlefex. Lord Brooke Earl of Warwick. Lord Viscount Hereford. Lord Barkley. For the House of Commons. Lord Fairfax. Lord Bruce. Lord Falkland. Lord Castleton. Lord Herbert. Lord Mandevile. Sr Horatio Townsend. Sr Ant. Ashey-Cooper. Sr George Booth. Denzill Hollis Esq; Sr John Holland. Sr Henry Chomely. For the honourable City of London Sr James Bunce Bar. Alderman Langham. Alderman Reynardson. Alderman Browne. Sr Nicholas Crispe. Alderman Thomson. Alderman Fredrick. Alderman Adams. Recorder Wilde. Alderman Robinson. Alderman Bateman. Alderman Wale. Theophilus Biddulph. Richard Ford. Will. Vincent. Thomas Bludworth. Will. Bateman. J. Lowes Esq; Major Chamberlaine. Coll. Brumfield.
By Order from the Parliament that all Signs of the late Arbytrary Power might be rased, the States Armes were to be taken down from all Churches and publick places, that in the Parliament House and in Guildhall being taken down, and the Kings Armes set up in their room, the Statue of his late Majesty was likewise set up again at the Chappel in Guild∣hall-yard. The Votes of the Parliament were also for the Fleet to go immediately to receive his Ma∣jesties Orders, and be at his Devotion. That the Kings Majesty be desired to return spee∣dily to Parliament, and exercise of his King∣ly Office. That all Ministers shall in their publick prayers pray for his Majesty under the name of, Our Soveraign Lord Charles, by the Grace of God of England, Scotland, France and Ireland, King, Defender of the Faith, &c. And the most Illustrious Prince, James Duke of York, with the rest of the Royall Progeny. Which is the hearty and fervent prayer of the Author and all good Sub∣jects, and so let the conclusion be, Long live King Charles. II.
THere is now made publique Eighteen Books of the Secrets of Art and Nature, being the sum and substance of Na∣turall Philosophy. First designed by John Wecker, and now much inlarged by Dr. R. Read; Sould at the Star in St. Pauls Church∣yard.
