K324 E446_21 R202624 99862849 161785
THE KENTISH FAYRE▪ OR, The Parliament sold to their best worth. Good Oliver, lend me thy nose 'Tis darke, all lights are out: For now I meane to write in prose, But guided, by thy snout. Black Tom already's at the Faire, And in his Coach is carried: His men, mean-while blowne in the Ayre, And to the Friends, are married. Some Citizens, they say will ride, To buy Knacks for their Wives: Let Skippon, Skipp-on, as their Guid, He may protect their lives. At Rochester, the Faire is held, By all good tokens, know it: A thousand Saints, late, there were feld As yet the Bridge, can show it. Printed at Rochester, and are to be sold, to all those that dare buy them. 1648.
THE KENTISH FAYRE: OR, THE PARLIAMENT SOLD TO THEIR WORTH. The Cryer. O yes, ô yes, ô yes; All manner of Persons. KNow our most gracious godly Parliament Is set to sale at Rochester in Kent: All those who have a mind to buy, repaire Thither, and they may have their Choice of ware. A Faire is kept there, there to sale is set The Mischiefes did at first, the Warre beget: There you may Buy, pretended false Religion, Iealousies, feares, false-hearted, and Misprision. The cursed Plot, to take off STRAFFORD's head, And to send Canterbury to the Dead: To drive the King away, to carry on A most unheard of vile Rebellion. To Prison him, debarre him of his Wife: And lastly, to bereave him of his Life. Here now the Rebels reigne is at an end, You may by them, and what they did Intend. Two Knights in disguize, or Sir Tho: Palmer, and Sir Tho: Peyton. 1. Ped: How doe I show in this habit. 2. Ped: Like a perfect Canter, and with as sallow a Coun∣tenance,
as if thou hadst borne a Pack and laine in straw this seaven yeares. 1. Ped. I like that well, thou art as perfectly Metamorpho∣sed as my selfe; in these habits we may securely travaile, we must passe through all hazards for our King, how strong are the Kentish-men? Full sixteene thousand Sir, in Horse and Foot, they doe in∣crease their numbers every day, the Apprentices of London flock unto them. 2. Ped. If Kent that ne're was Conquer'd, now hold our stifly for the King, and conquer Treason and Rebellion, the latter Conquest will exceed their former Policie. 1. Ped. Eight of His Majesties Ships, have willingly sub∣mitted to their power, the rest is thought wil come in shortly; Rainsborough the Vice-Admirall is turn'd on shore, his teares and prayers saved his life, else they had cast him over-bord. 2. Ped. To see when as Rebellion was at highest, and Trea∣son graspt a Scepter, how soone the fickle Lady, turn'd her Wheele, now all things are reverst, miseries now threaten the Rebels from all quarters; behold brave Poyer, the first that shewed himselfe for his King and Country, now bravely de∣fending Pembroke Castle, having beaten Flemming, and Hor∣ton, yea Oliver himselfe, and now remaineth in a gallant po∣sture, with a strong Army in the field; see where the hardy Scots are comming dancing a Martiall measure, after their Drums and Bag-pipes; see where Sir Marmaduke Langdale in the North, having fortified Barwick, now is scowring the Country, having an Army of 7000 Men, with whom joynes Sir Thomas Glemham, that able and incomparable Comman∣der, who hath ceaz'd on Carlile, and fortified it for the King: See where the most renowned men of Kent, are in huge Bo∣dies joyn'd, have lately given the Arch-Rebell Fairfax a great overthrow neare Rochester, have kill'd a thousand on the place, have taken divers, dispiersed his whole Army, himselfe esca∣ping hardly; Essex, Surrey, and Cornwall, now putting them∣selves into a Military posture. Ha, who are these, what Wo∣men weare Armes.
Mrs. Webster, and Mrs. Maine, with Pistols and Swords. They Sing.Mrs. Web∣ster and Mi∣stris Maine, two Women yt are now in Armes in ent. Mrs. Web. MEn tardy growne, and deaf to good, remisse in every thing: Their owne great woes, not understood themselves slav'd, and their King. 'Tis time that Women armour weare, and teach Men for to fight: 'Gainst those, who their destruction sweare, and seeke it, day and night. Mrs. Maine. Wee two like Amazons of old, who fought for wretched Troy: Have vow'd, to Kill all those that would, persist us to anoy. Come Fairfax, thee I long to Charge at head of all thy Men: And send thee maimed in a Barge to London back agen. Mrs. Web. No Cromwell, though thou bath'st in flames, yet know thou Salamander: That thou shalt tremble at our Names, and wee shall send you yonder. Come all yee Sectaries that dwell within the cursed Citie: And wee will send you unto Hell, unto the black Committee. 1. Ped. Well met warlike Women, how many are there of your County, that walke in your equipage? Mrs. Web. Many Pedlar, whither art thou Sirrah and thy fellow going.
2. Ped. Going woman, why to the Faire. Mrs. Ma. Who are you for. 1. Ped. For our Customers. Mrs. Web. God and his Angels? Why this is Sir Tho: Pal∣mer; pardon us good Sir, we did not know you. Mrs. Ma. And this is Sir Tho: Peyton most noble Knights pardon our bold presumption, as you were Pedlars wee had power to taxe you, as you are Knights, we serve you. Sir T. Pal: Thankes to you both Viraga's, what men of note have you now at the Faire, who lead the rest a Cinque-pace, un∣to the martiall murmur of the Drum. Mrs. Web. Sir, we have these, Sir Robert Tracy, Sir Gamali∣el Dudley, Sir Iohn Many, Sir Tho: Godfrey: Sir Iames Hales, Sir Wil: Many, Sir Iohn Dorell, Sir Richara Hardresse, Colonel Washington, Col. Le'strange, Col. Hacker, Col Culpepper, and many other Esquires and Gentlemen, of knowne valour and integrity. Sir T. Pey: What new commodities doth this Faire afford, have yee any upstart Gentlemen to sell for Slaves, Parliament men to sell for knaves, Committee-men to dispose of for the galleys, and Excize-men for the gallowes, have yee any Citi∣zens that will make pimpes, and Common-Counsell-men that weare the Cuckolds armes. Mrs. Ma: Sir, wee have these, and all their Implements, here's the rich Pedlaresse Mrs. Fame, will afford you choice for your money. Mrs. Fame. What doe you lack or buy Gent: any Votes, Orders, or Declarations, any Plots, Covenants, or Protestati∣ons, will you buy an Ordinance of Indempnity, perchance one of you may be a Rebell or a Parliament man, will you please to buy a new Ordinance for putting Malignants out of the Ci∣ty of London, and the late lines of Communication; see what you want Gentlemen, see what you want. Sir T. Pal: Hast thou ere an upstart Gentleman to sell, one that hath formerly sat crosse-leg'd on a Shop-bord, hath been a Broom-man, or a Kennell-raker a Dray-man, or a Porter,
and now doth rant it and imitateth the Gentilest garb, and loves to Complement. Fame. Sir, I have choice of those, I have Col. Pride, Player. and others, but if you'l have a Prince and void of shame, take this man for your use, his name is Bark-stead, the proud Thim∣ble-maker, who walkes the round each night at Westminster, a Fool in folio yet a mighty Talker, whose Complements are tane from Martin Parker; yet fit him with a Whore that plea∣ses him, and you shall heare him wast his lungs in praise of her, untill he need some Aqua-vita, take this man on my cre∣dit Sir. Sir T. Pal: Hast thou ere a Parliament man a knave, I have some use of one. Fame. I have a hundred Sir, why they abound Sir, I can afford you twenty at cheape rate, buy these halfe dozen of me they are transcendent knaves Sir ile assure, or ne're buy of me more. Sir T. Pal: Where be they? Fame. Here Sir, there's Harry Martin, there's Weaver (who pronounced openly to the rest of his fellowes, That it was fit the King should be brought to his tryall, and hang'd, drawne and quartered, rather then Treated with, Hee being the only cause of all the Blood-shed throughout the three Kingdomes,) I have set a speciall mark upon this man Sir, and it is a T, and an R; the third, is Scot; the fourth, Vane; the fifth, Mild∣may; and the sixt Manchester, the wild Boare who hath roo∣ted up two famous Universities, and deadly wounded Lear∣ning and Learned men, there they be Sir. Sir T. Pal: These Ile reserve for Hawkes-meat, they will save me the charges of Buying, and my men the trouble of procuring Horses and Dogs-flesh, hast thou ever a Capritious Committee-man, to dispose of to the Galleys. Fame. O many Sir, three that will fit you to a haire. Sir T. Pal. Let me see them, what are their names? Fame. Here's Challoner the Athiest, Corbet the Cuckold, and Fouke the Fool.
Sir T. Pal: These, these will serve my turn excellently well, Challoner would make a good Devine amongst the Indians, Corbet I will sell to the great Turke, hee may have use for him in his Seraglio, and Fouke I will reserve for my selfe, and will provide him a Coat and a Cap, hee shall be my Iester; hast thou ere an Excize-man to dispose to the gallowes, for an ex∣ample to the rest? Fame. Yes Sir, here's Wilkins the Excize-man, I dare put him into your hands, for a Villaine worth hanging. Sir T. Pal: Bind his hands behind him, hee is ordained for death, and shall bee hang'd on a Gibbet erected on purpose; hast thou ere a Citizen that would make a Pimpe, a close and trusty Pimpe? Fame. O Sir yes, I have one will fit your turne ile warrant you, here's one Sir that was Pimpe to his owne Wife, for a yearly stipend, his name is R. D. take him Sir upon my word, hee will hold the doore with any man of his inches a∣bout London. Sir T. Pal: Hast thou ere a Common-Counsell-man, that weares branchers, and can derive the Pedigree of Cuckolds from Adams time to this day, who weares his branch in try∣umph, and takes a Pride to heare men praise his hornes? Fame. Sir, I can fit you to a Cowes-thumb, would you have an Alderman, a Militia man, or a Common-Counsell man. Sir T. Pal: I told thee before, a Common-Counsell man. Fame. Here then Sir, take this man with the Gold-chaine, perhaps you have heard, how he defil'd his Breeches, but that's nothing Sir, he is well read in the Science of Cuckoldry. Sir T. Pal: I like him well, what hast thou else worthy my money? Fame. Here's a mad Order Sir, lately put forth by the Re∣bels, which saith, that the Lives and Lands of these that keepe the Faire in Kent, shall be lawfull prize to the Souldiery, and further commands, That no quarter bee given either to Man, Woman, or Child.
Sir T. Peyton. Saist thou so Fame, their Order wee'l make good upon themselves, and crush their soules out with our y∣ron hands, have they sat seaven yeares to marre our Govern∣ment, and would they now ceaze on our Lives and States; thinke they for to build high upon our ruines, know Fame, and eccho it throughout the world, Kent will bee loyall to their King, should all the Kingdome else prove wicked, al∣though wee are not fearfull to find ayd, Surrey, Essex, and Cornwall, have promised to come in, to our assistance. Then let the Rebels, and their Fairfax know, That they must fall, for Fate will have it so: Wee have begun to rout them, nor will cease, Till with their cursed Liv, wee buy our Peace. Great CHARLES looke up, for now redemption comes, Peace speaketh, in the language of our Drums, By Blood they hold their power, by Blood must wee Restore our King, unto his Soveraigntie: Our selves unto our Rights, which wee have lost, By trusting seeming Friends, who hate us most. Sound Drums and Trumpets, let the Kingdome heare, The Rebels must not Reigne, another yeare. FINIS.
