L1557 E296_15 R200208 99861013 113140
A LETTER, IN WHICH THE ARGVMENTS OF THE ANNOTATOR, And three other Speeches Vpon their MAJESTIE'S Letters Published at LONDON, are Examined and Answered. Printed in the yeare 1645.
SIR, THAT I may continue our old freindships I have for some yeares endeavoured to serve you, by imparting to you the Occur∣rences of this place, and particularly by transmitting such new bookes to your veiw, as might both serve to entertaine you, and to keepe you in a good opinion of the Parliament Cause which you and I so long since made choice of, yet I cannot deny but my thoughts checked at it when I sent you the late Arch-bishop's Diary. And though I may not keepe from you a new booke entituled, The Kings Cabinet opened, a discovery so much cried up by our party here, that though I would smother it I conceive it could not misse your hands. yet seriously, Sir, I am not of the common opinion, and my hope is I shall not be held a Malignant for it. I conceive the publication of these two bookes hath done much mischeife to our cause, though it were advised by the close Committee, for though discoveries of this nature have upon the persons they concerne somewhat in them of a ridiculous infelicity, yet withall they have very much of advantage too, because they deepely worke into all wise men an exceeding strong beleife of those things which were let fall in so great secrecy. So that it should have beene well weighed before such Bookes had beene made publicke, whether, though they conteine some truths that make for our turne, they are not withall a full proofe of some others which
are downe-right destructive to us; for that Client sure hath weake Councell who produceth a witnesse, that in speaking for his cause concludes more strongly for his Adversaries. In the Arch-bishops papers there are I graunt some things we did make good use of in our declamations to our many pretty wiles, that did serve our turnes for a spurt to raise hoo∣bubs or get mony: but sadly Sir, is their any wise man you meet with (though heretofore perhaps either not his freind, or his Enemy,) who is not now throughly convinced, and by that same booke we set out, that he was a man of a very publicke composition, a man very much a Christia, exemplary in his Devotions to God, in his loyalty to his Prince? And for that tax of his inclinations to Rome, which was almost proverbiall in our mouthes, and stood us in so great steed, when we went to worke on the People, I would gladly know which way it was possible (considering the malignity of that vast popular aspersion) to have washt it quite out of all Considering mens heads, but either by his Death, or his Diary? And was this a worke fit for us? Nay I am more angry yet at our man of law, who would needes busie himselfe in that booke, that he should not onely want so much Logicke, as to conclude him a Papist, out of those proofes, which indeed evince the quite contrary; but to speake plaine that he should want so much wit, as to hope to perswade others to have as little sense as himselfe. And my great feare is, our publishing the Kings papers hath done us yet farre more mischeife, in as much as it farre more concernes the advantage of our cause to keepe him in scorne with the People. Indeed the Arch-bishop is dead, and bites not, but if the King once returne into a good esteeme with our party, farewell our Armies we so much confide in, and ere long our feares and our jealousies. Read the book, Sir, and tell me with that freedome that befits gentlemen and freinds, whe∣ther we have not long since both dranke of one common er∣rour. In your care I must professe seriously, that I now hold the King a Prince of very choice endowments; and I judge him so by his letters, which wise men have oft told me give the best Characters of their Authors. I finde his stile masculine,
his Counsells sharpe and rationall, his expressions full of a ju∣dicious fancy, he digests businesses throughly, and makes it all his owne. And for some of his Letters, they are of so elegant and so equall parts (for my breeding here and abroad makes me thinke I may judge a little) that in earnest I had rather have the abilities that might make me author of the like, then to be Lord of that Mannor that makes me neighbour to you; and yet you know it is a very faire one. And can you yet thinke it could be fit for us to expose these to publicke veiw? Beleeve it, Sir, he that writes thus deserves to governe, and my thoughts tell me, that this is the very man I should elect to a Throne were I to choose a King by Epistles. We oft you know tell the people that however in words and in practice the King makes Protestant shewes, yet that he is no lesse then a Papist in heart, and that when time shall serve he will be for Rome in profession. A course that hath beene to us of great use and gaine, and that which besides large summes hath brought us in store of rings and thimbles. And shall we now unluckily publish that selfe same letter too, wherein he tells the Queene that he differs from her in nothing else but Religion? and then sure he is no Papist. If we shall say that he deserves no credit in this point, men of eason will soone make reply, that you may as well call all the rest in question. And then I pray what gaine have we made by this great Cabinet discovery? or why do we tell the People, it were a great sinne against the mercies of God to conceale such evidences of truth? But if for our owne sakes we must now at least, grant this to be truth too, I pray consider, whether herein we have not published to high a proofe to those of our owne side, that King Charles▪ is in heart a Protestant, as could neither have beene made by all his States-men, nor Divines, no nor by his owne Letters neither, had not we our selves amongst braggs and taunts so vainely publisht them. For let the King or his servants or his papers either, (had they been only made publicke by him∣selfe) have been brought to confirme this, the best arguments in the world, yet the faith of our Party is so much in our owne
hands, that they do not only beleeve all that we do, but indeed all that we would have them▪ so that if it concernes us they should beleeve that we know to be Lies, they are so kinde, they'l not refuse us, But when we our selves have once told the world, that the King is a Protestant, now should it con∣cerne us in the highest degree to averre the contrary, so grosse an attempt would appeare nothing else but to be impudent to no purpose. 'Tis true, if this booke had never seene the light, you and I should have made no doubt at all of the King's Conjugall affe∣ction, yet I must confesse 'tis here set downe with so much virtue and elegance, and hence appeares to be so handsome a thing, that for the time to come I shall love my owne wife the better. And though for the Queene I know not so much as her person, yet I cannot but conceive her a Lady of great parts, because I finde the King so seriously protest his great con∣tent in her conversation, for I am so much a Philosopher as to know, that must come from a similitude of minde. And what reason I have to judge highly of his, I told you now from his Letters so that I must needes wonder upon what ground our Annotator seemes so angry with the King that he makes use of her advises, especially since he is safe in point of religi∣on, and that we cannot deny. For among all sorts of men are Kings only bound their wives shall be no helpers to them? And what though the Queene be of the weaker sex, must she therefore have no share in Counsells? Sure he that will thus argue against Queene Maries advise, makes Libells against Queene Elizabeth. Nor, are her abilities of the lesse use for being borne in France. For though a meere Alien may be suspected to incline too much to that Nation he was borne in, yet such suspicions vanish where greater reasons appeare; and sure none will deny me this, that to be a wife of England is a stronger tye, then to be a Daughter of France, especially when she is become the Mother of a Prince which she hopes may we are the English Crowne. And what our Annotator quotes in this kinde out of the King's Letters are me thinks very great impertinencies, Indeed he would seeme to intimate, that the
Queen governs the King, & doth something in his affaires that befits neither Her, nor Him. But when I read what he quotes, I am sorry that in this point we have no better arguments. The King nor the Prince do take no servant without her, And what then? Should I promise my wife that without her con∣sent I would admit of no servant at all, either about my selfe, or my Children, I should extreamely wonder at the Logicke of that man, that would conclude hence, I have given her the breeches; nay, that would hence but inferre, that either I my selfe when I allow this freedome, or the wife I love, that makes use of this allowance, do indeed the least thing that may any way misbeseeme either. I finde that in case of the reac∣ception of Onesimus a servant (And I heard this observati∣on preacht by a Divine of our owne Assembly) Saint Paul doth as well write to Apphia, as Philemon: It seemes they were so well agreed, that their freinds tooke notice the Wife had got a grant of a Vote too in things domesticke. And yet if this had argued that Apphia was not subject to her husband, or that she made use of what became not a wife, I make no doubt at all, but she had heard on't from that Apostle. But to averre the Queenes Councells are as powerfull as Commands,Pag 432 be∣cause the King professeth to preferre her health before his own affaires, is but to argue a bacillo in angulo; and so to make the Sophisters sport at Oxford. And indeed the next argu∣ment is not much better neither. He avowes constancy to her grounds and documents, and how proves he this?Letter 5. Because the King tells the Queene, Thou shalt finde me constant to those grounds you left me withall. But doth it therefore fol∣low, that those grounds were her inventions? or that thence they must be called her documents, or her dictates? It seemes then, that because in your next journey hither, you shall be sure to finde London on the banke of Thames, where you left it. Therefore I may conclude they were your hands that set it there. And so you are beholding to your old freind for making you a new Founder of London. Besides, observe what those grounds are among the Letters, pag. 6. you may read them, the same grounds he gave to his
Commissioners at Ʋxbridge, and this upon his word in ac∣cording to the little note she so well remembers. What? Are these dangerous grounds, those wise, and reasonable in∣structions, this makes not well for us, for all can be inferred from hence is the King acquainted the Queene upon what grounds he intended to seeke the Peace of this Kingdome. And therefore I well know not what he meanes by that quar∣rell, That the Kings Councells are wholly mannaged by the Queene; for to mannage a thing supposes it first is, before if be mannaged, so it seemes he thinks the King gives the Queene Counsell, and then she conceives 'tis her part to see them exe∣cuted. And what's here that befits not a Wife or if by man∣naging he intend the Queene counsells the King, first the phrase is no more proper, then if I should say you therefore mannage my horse, because you gave him me. 2dly. It is not onely not unfit for a wife to present advise to her husband, but indeed extreamely proper, especially when she is not only of great abilities, but of as great affection to her husbands affaires, as many of his owne instances makes it cleare in his third Para∣graph. But I must not hide it from you, Sir, That I find some good Cause to doubt that this Annotation prevaricates in our owne businesse, for though it appeares by the Kings Letters that to say the plaine truth, He dictates Counsells to the Queene, And those full of use and sharpnesse; Yet what need he to have runne into this kind of observation? What need be to have told us, That the King doth in many things surpasse the Queene? That he covers his acts of hostility with deeper and dar∣ker secrecy?Pag. 44. That he urges her to make personall freindship with the Queen Regent? (which indeed he doth, and that upon strong grounds of reason) That he furnisheth her with dexterous poli∣cies and arguments to work upon the Ministers of State in France? Are these notes fit to proceed from our pens, who would have the people thinke that the Queene we talke downe is not on∣ly the wife, but the very soule of the King? And yet doth he in many things surpasse the Queen? Are his reaches deeper and darker then hers? Can he go alone in these narrow pathes of State without the helpe of her hand? Nay can he lend a hand
to support her the more safely in them. Can he himselfe by his owne strength so dextrously find out what shall best make for his advantage? Beleive me, Sir, this Annotatour is no freind of ours, he will perswade our owne side that the King hath a cleare master wit. So that if we should againe a second time need to cry downe the King in point of his understanding, that Topicke is now gone, and we must lay the losse of so great an Engine not onely upon this that we would needs publish his Letters, but upon the score of our further folly, that these for∣sooth must be set out with Annotations. Put all this together, and you must perceive Sir the mischeife this booke will doe us. The people will hence see the choice Endowments of their King, and so be brought to love and ho∣nour him. They will descry the Protestant Religion in great Letters in his heart, which will yet adde more affection to that love, and more reverence to that honour. 'Twill take off that uxorious slirre that hath beene oft urged to our advantage. And 'twill let the world see, that He is not onely the Husband, but the King too of his Wife; and both relations so well tem∣pered in him, That no mervaile if vulgar eyes dazle at the beames of such a Sunne, and so sometimes cannot see the King, because he doth so well play the Husband. But notwithstanding this Sir, That at the first sight of this Booke I much wished it had not beene published, as being confident that these and the like passages will wrong more our cause, then all the rest will advance it. Yet I must needs say, I had a strange conceit that there were some clauses in these pub∣lisht Letters that might doe the King hurt enough. I thought it a wicked thing to take off the Penall Lawes, and thereby to give a Toleration to the Papists, because I have oft heard it from our best Divines, that their Religion is superstitious in the height, and in some sence Idololatricall. But to bring in For∣raigne Armes I held extreamely horrible, especially the King having oft assured us He would doe neither of these two un∣der strong vowes and execrations. But whil'st my thoughts remained fixed on these points, I here accidentally fell in with a freind of mine old Acquain∣tance,
no professed Divine, but yet a Person of great Learning and Experience, and well studied in Divinity: A Malignant I confesse, but yet so honest and to me so open a man. That upon the word of a Gentleman, I would not for a world tell his name. When I had shewed him my thoughts, he joined with me in this, That the booke indeed made against us, but when I replied that in those particulars I named it had hurt the King too, he freindly smiled, and then talk't me downe, as I'le tell you. First, he very gravely shewed, That it was unlawfull for sworne Subjects to take up armes against their King upon any pretence whatsoever. And that from Rom. 13. from the first of Peter, 2. And that the ancient Church had both so under∣stood and so practiced the doctrine of those two Apostles. That when Popes began to fall out with Kings the Divines of Rome were the first men that crossed that doctrine, and that when it made for their owne ends 'twas seconded by some who call themselves Reformed. And by the Calvinists more particularly. But when I rejoined, that those Texts had no such sense, and that they came not home unto that holy Cause we are set for. He gently let me see, that the replies I used were indeed plaine subterfuges, and made me clearely understand and gave me in∣stances too. That a witty Adulterer might as well defend there was no Sinne in Fornication. I still talk't on with much heate and noise, So that to this day he knowes not at all he wrought any change in my thoughts, but yet I must needs tell you this in your eare, that that night I slept not so soundly. The next day we met againe, and I fumingly asked him with what colour men could justify the Conscience of the King. In his taking off those Penall Lawes, giving Toleration to Pa∣pists; And that against the ties of those Solemne Vowes he hath expressely made to his people? He told me he much won∣dred, that Subjects who were resolved to use no Conscience at all should trouble the King so with his, but yet for my satisfa∣ction he willed me to weigh it well: That it was One thing to consider sinne in it selfe, Another
to consider it in it's punishment. Against sinne it selfe God made the Law Morall. And it's therefore a Law of unfading obliga∣tion. But what was decreed for the punishment of sinne, you shall find that in his Judicialls, which were alterable some thinke in Jury it selfe, but without doubt in all other nations. Should the King passe a Law Popery were no sinne, nay should he suffer no such Law as doth declare it sinfull, I might then thinke him sinfull too. But when we come to the Judicialls once, to the punishment of this sinne, we are then no doubt in a farre greater Latitude. And wise men have still thought, that such both well may and must be tempered sometimes to the Exigencies of that State we live in. So Divines thinke that in Case of Theft Solomon in those words did alter Gods Judiciall Law. If (sayes he) the theife be found he shall pay seaven fold, Prov. 6. When yet Moses we know required but foure for that sinne. And the reason of this change is conceived to be this, because the crime of theft grew more frequent with the Jewes in the time of Solomon. And for that Cause Christian States set it higher yet, and nothing now is more frequent then to punish a Theife either with a wheele or the Gallowes. By this instance you see Ju∣diciall Lawes might be heightned; By the next you'l find that it was commonly beleived by most sorts of men that they might be abated too. For Adultery in the Mosaick Law was punish't by death. A Judiciall that for some hundreds of yeares was continued in the Law Civill, and remained there without repeale even after the Empire was growne Christian. Yet Ju∣stinian after he had written his Institutions and his Code, began to lessen it in one sexe; And in succeeding times there were few Kingdomes or States that abated not of this rigour. So that what was of old punisht with the sword or the Gibbet, is now brought into a white Sheet, and that by some Lawes may be commuted againe into Almes. And here he told me he could not choose but smile at the zeale we seemed to carry against the abrogation of Penall Lawes, since a Statute of this Parliament (at least as we inter∣pret it) hath taken off all meanes to punish any sinnes of the
flesh. Popery you like well should continue punish't, bt A∣dultery shall goe bare fac't; and yet this foule sin is expresly a∣gainst the words of the Scripture, The other only by an infe∣rence. Truly Sir, said he, I neither am nor can be a Papist, nay as a private man I hold my self bound to doe the best I can That that superstition spread no farther, but yet by your leave I hold him no better then an Hypocrite who shewes great warmth of zeale that he may punish a Papist, and yet likes it extreme well That all Lawes are laid a sleep which should curb Adulterers. Now then said he, view the words of the Letter you doe so much quarrell at: The King writes to the Queen—I give thee power to propose in my name That I will take away all the penall Lawes against the Roman Catholicks in England, as soon as God shall enable me to doe it—So as by their meanes, or in their favours I may have so powerfull assistance as may deserve so great a favor and inable me to doe it—He promiseth to take away all the pe∣nall Lawes, All the Lawes which are now in being, which to some men are Capitall, to other pecuniary, and that in a sharp heavy manner; He promiseth not, that he will make none of a lower kind, He promiseth not his Lawes shall look with the like serene face upon the Popish side, as the Protestant. Let him but hold here, and no learned man will say he sinnes, especially in this great necessity of State; Though indeed, said he, I should extreamly grieve to see things in this sad condition. And he spake it confidently, so would the King too, And therefore he beshrew'd us (for he durst be bold with me) that we had brought a good Prince into the jawes of these sad extremities. But yet, sayes he, let him goe no farther, and he who shall call this a Toleration of Papists, may as well taxe the more famous part of almost the whole Christian World for a Toleration of Adultery. Indeed two of your three Orators, whom you set up to op∣pose the King (and the opposition was most proper, for his Letters are remarkeable both for reason and elegance, and their Declamations have neither) would needs collect out of this Clause, That the King's meaning was to abrogate these Penall
Lawes by Force. Grant it were so, are they so angry at that? I have read of some men Qui aliorum vitijs irascuntur quasi in∣videant, who are passionate indeed at the vices of others, but that passion of theirs is not a hate, but an envy that any man should make use of such glorious sinnes but themselves; for is't not your whole work to pull down Lawes by force? To pull the Sword out of the Kings hand, and Church Govern∣ment from the Bishops, both which our Lawes yet establish? Is not the Common-Prayer book confirmed by plain Lawes? and is't not by force that you teare it? The King, it seemes, must keep himself to Lawes, because that splendid dignity of breaking Lawes by force is the Priviledge of both Houses. But in earnest, because the King saies So soone as God shall inable him, And if he may be furnished from abroad with such a powerfull assistance as to be able to doe it: Can you necessarily conclude he meant to alter these Penall Lawes by meere force? Did the King tell you he meant so? If not, by your favour, this is to add to, and to make Conjectures upon the King's words, not to draw good Collections from them; And no man will be bound to receive such inferences, except those alone who conceive because your three Orators have neither Rhetorick nor Logick, therfore without doubt they are extreme good at Divination. Truly Sir, said he, I have reason to think, and that from the sence of some men who have the honour to hear the King discourse frequently, his meaning was but this, That if God should enable him, by such forraigne power, that he might againe sit in a free and full Parliament, He would en∣deavor, as much as in him lay, to take off those penall Lawes; And in that Case he made no doubt at all, but to gaine the votes of his people, because in this great extremity they had been so much beholding to his forraigne help; For in this conjuncture of things, what in plaine gratitude they were bound to doe. I leave honest men to consider. But that Lawes once establish't by the King and both Houses should be annulled by meer force, or by any meanes but by the same they were made, is a thing I assure my selfe the King hates more perfectly, then any man who is in the highest Vogue now at Westminster.
To that quere then of your Annotatour, how this Letter can stand with the King's frequent professions of no Toleration of Papists, No abolition of those Penall Lawes, and the like? The answere is now most apparent; for to whom but to his people were these professions made? and if his intentions be not to alter what he then professed but by the consent of his people, all this is most just and Kingly; for no man is bound to keep his promise to that man who is now willing to release him. If he be, the King can alter no Lawes, no not by consent of both Houses themselves, because he hath been once sworn to keep them. Nay since the King hath as deeply vowed to de∣fend the true Protestant profession (that is, as 'tis now establi∣shed by Law) if he find no meanes now to keep this vow, but by the help of forrainers, and that he may gain their help by letting goe those penall Lawes, I rather hold he is in Consci∣ence bound to make use of that help; and what inconvenience so ever shall fall out upon that usage, must needs be put upon the score of those men who have forced him to those great necessities. But your Annotatour tells us, That the King by his profes∣sions is as deeply bound not to make use of forraigne forces, And I remember, said he, that you but now held the introducti∣on of such forces to be extreamly horrible; and indeed it might well seem so, had not you first begun the course; but then vim vi repellere, to deale with wicked men as they first deale with us, doth in case of necessity free us from all guilt of wickednes; For good Sir, said he, are not the Scots forraigners? They should indeed be under the same King with us, but they have neither the same Lawes, nor at this day the same Religion, as the word Religion is now vulgarly used; for, flatter not your selves, wise and learned men know the difference is extreamly wide betweene a Knoxian-taught man, and an English Protestant. But the King hath obliged himself by his word, That he will make no use of such forces; True indeed, he told you so March 9, 1641. and againe March 26. 1642. But when in 1643. you traiterously brought in the Scots, with what face
can you affirm, That he is now bound by those engagements? When men expect others should keepe promise with them, they must be carefull so to keep it themselves, that by their own fault at least they doe not wilfully change, and per∣sist in changing that condition of their estate which drew men to make those promises; for then such ties will become no ob∣ligations. You may have an instance in God himselfe, in that solemn promise which he made unto the house of Ely, I said indeed, that thy House and the House of thy Fathers should walk before me for ever, but now the Lord saith, Be it far from me, for them that honor me I will honour, and they tha despise me shall be lightly esteemed. 1 Sam. 2. He had sworn the Priesthood un∣to Ely's House, because they were yet carefull that his Sacrifices were well kept, and his Service honourable; But when, wilful∣ly, his sonnes brought the people to abhorre the Offerings of the Lord, then straight it followes. Be it farre from me for my promise made unto the sonnes of Aaron, bindes me not to the sonnes of Belial. Apply but this ground, (which is as cleare as the Text can make it) and your Annotatour may with ease resolve all his queries. The King promised us he would make no use of forraigne forces; True, if good Subjects, as you should be, were not turned to Traitours, But then if ye will needs in∣vite in the Scots, you teach him to doe the like, eyther by the French or the Lorrainers. The King oft complaines of the I∣rish Rebels, exhorts the Houses that they would unite to cha∣stise them, yet now he makes Peace with the selfe same men. And how is this reconcileable? Easily, for if those Houses in stead of fighting with their King had made warre upon those Rebels, great good had come upon those complaints, and that union. But when they turn'd Rebels and opposed their Sove∣raigne, he was constrained to make Peace with his Irish Papists, that he might save the throats of his Protestants. The King pro∣fessed, he had no intent of war with his Parliament (so these still call themselves) and then how can this be reconciled that he is now in Armes against them? Thus, Because these have changed their condition; of Subjects they have turned themselves into Rebels, and going about to pull down both the Church and
State, the King according to his Oath must needs take up armes to defend them. But in this particular a passage cited out from one of the King's Declarations by Master Browne your O∣ratour might have fully satisfied your Annotatour. The words are—We will maintaine and observe the Acts assented to by Ʋs this Parliament without violation; and that we have not nor shall not have any thought of using any force, unlesse we shall be driven to it for the security of Our Person, and for the defence of the Re∣ligion, Lawes and Liberties of the Kingdome, and the just Rights & Priviledges of Parliament. A Limitation then there is put to this promise. He will use no force, unlesse he be first driven to it; but in that Case (and that's the case we are in) no ingenious man can reproach the King with a violation of his promise. So that you see, it's still a Truth the King tels the Queene in the 11 of his publish't Letters, That by equivocating to hide the breach of his word is that he hates above all things. A speech truly roy∣all, and that must needs gaine esteeme from your selves unto that soule that let it fall. For upon your owne grounds you can but say you beleive it lest your owne tongue should con∣fesse, That's no discovery of truth which you lately found in the Cabinet. I shall spend (said He) no more time in this, onely I must let you know, that it seemes probable to me that your Annota∣tour feared the strength of this plaine reply; And therefore takes great paines to perswade us to beleive, that they are still the same men they were; and that the King hath no cause to looke upon them now otherwise then he did, when on the se∣cond of June 1642. they presented Him with the 19 Propo∣sitions. If this be true he sayes something, but how doth he prove it? Because the Propositions of the Parliament lately treated at Ʋxbridge, Feb. 1644. were no other in effect then the 19 Propositions sent to the North in Iune 1642. A pretty argument; You speake to this day the same language you did; Therefore your Actions make your persons no worse then when you did but onely speake. The Articles at Ʋxbridge are the same with the 19 Propositions. Therefore to bid battell and to shoot at the person of your King, at Edge-hill, and other
feilds. Therefore to invite Foraigners, the Scots to invade England, makes you no worse, but leaves your Cause the same that it was before the warre began. Sir, said he to me, upon the word of a Gentleman, doe you thinke this to be reason? Might not Hophni and Phinees much better have replied to their God. That they spake still as they were wont, with their tongues, they still called him Lord, and that's more then you doe, to give good language to your King. And therefore he ought to have kept his Promise to their House, allthough in∣deed in some actions of theirs, they had since that promise a∣bused his Sacrifices, and runne themselves into some petty faults, as defiling the women at the very doore of the Taber∣nacle. But it's a true observation, Corruption of life breeds a blindnesse of understanding. And I shall not mervaile at all to see a man loose his sence, when I find he hath once lost his Loyalty. But in another place your Annotatour will needs furnish us with three motives more to induce us to beleive, that the cause is now the same it was when the King first tooke up armes, and as it was when the King made most of these Oathes and Prote∣stations: That their Cause is not altered▪ That they are noe worse Rebels then they were. Where first, said he, I must tell you, that there is a great difference betweene their demands, and their Cause; Their demands indeed are the same they were, or at the least they have received no remarkeable alteration. But he who is at first but saucy in his demands may prosecute what he seekes by such damnable meanes, that it may make his present Cause much worse then his first demands. In their de∣mands indeed they were insolent, but yet while they did but demand in a Parliamentary way let them for this once passe with that Tax alone; But when they tooke up Armes to con∣straine the King to yeild to their demands, this makes their cause plaine Rebellion. And when againe they called in the Scots that they might adde more strength to their decaying ar∣mies. This (talke they what they will) makes them yet ap∣peare in the sight of all good men more vile and more horrid Rebels. 'Tis a mistake then, that their cause is not altered.
And when the Annotator talks but of most of the Kings Oaths and Protestations, he himselfe it seemes frees him from the breach of some. And for the rest I conceive Sir, said he, I have given you satisfaction. But will you have those three motives too, whereby the Annotator would induce you to beleeve, that they are no worse Rebels then they were. These are his owne words. None can affirme otherwise who takes notice first of our late suf∣ferings,Ib. secondly of our strange patience even now after the dis∣covery of these papers, and thirdly after our extraordinary suc∣cesse in the field, Inducements if they be any, they seeme very inconsistent. For do both their sufferings and their prosperity too argue them to be no worse Rebels? 'Tis much that both those Topicks should be at once at their service, but weigh them all apart you will find they make piteous arguments. First, They have lately suffered, therefore they are no worse Rebels. Secondly, they have had strange patience after the discovery of these papers, after their victory at Naseby (and that's a virtue indeed to be patient in prosperity) therefore they are no worse Rebels. Thirdly, they have had lately in the field extraordinary successes, therefore they are no worse Rebels. They should do well to vote, that these reasons do conclude, and so make them good by an Ordnance, else there's little hope they will e're dowe with their owne Admirers. For the two first do scarce colour for reason, and the third, sure the Annotator tooke out of Bellarmine, who makes temporall felicity to be a note of the true Church, and so concludes the Protestants have no soundnesse in their Religion, because some time they had not victory in the field, and so you plainely see the third reason is Popery. I suppose Sir (said he) you have now altered your minde, and clearely perceive those two particulars you named can with reasonable men do the King no hurt at all. And though there be little else either in your Annotator or your O∣rators which the worst men can make much use of, yet you shall have what I conceive upon some few of their more mate∣riall passages. And first your Annotator is not ingenuous, to say no worse,
to charge the King with stirring tumors about his mothers chastity. No, they who examined witnesses and conferred circumstances and times, to finde a knot in that bulrush, they stirred rumours indeed, and those unchristianly traiterous.Pag. 42. But for the King privately to complaine of that horrid wrong un∣to his unckle of Denmarke, that he might thereby the more strongly incite him to his assistance was (as much as in him lay,) to revenge rumours stirred. And for you thus to publish what he privately wrote, is a second time to give the world notice of what you impiously stirred at first. And then your Annotator, to make this wickednesse fall, layes your owne fault upon your King. He is angry at this, The King calls us a Parliament publick∣ly (in his Commissions about the Treaty) yet acknowledges us not a Parliament secretly. And what then? The old Rule was Verba aulica non obligant, Ceremonies are no obligations.Pag. 45. And are there no complements to be used in Treaties. If I call a Clowne whom I know so, by the name of Master, may I not yet privately say, and stand to it too, that he is no Gentleman? Must I therefore be needes false, because I am Civill? Truly Sir, said he, were you your selfe to treat with a strong theife, I should not dare to say you were therefore a false man. because sometimes in hope to obtaine your owne you called him an honest gentleman. But the Kings words are—If there had been but two besides my selfe of my owne opinion, I had not done it— very likely: for no man is bound to be Ceremonious. And the Macedonians were not a whit the worse men, because in plaine termes they used to call a spade a spade. The words of his Letter run—The argument that prevailed with me was, that the calling did no waies acknowledge them (In law I suppose he meant) to be a Parliament, upon which Condition and Con∣struction I did it, and no otherwise, and accordingly it is re∣gistred in the Counsell bookes with the Counsells unanimous approbation. For Sir (said he) If in civility I call my selfe your servant, It doth not follow that in law I am so. And if I straight privately tell another, I will not do your commands, I cannot yet conceive that you would have cause to accuse me of falshood.
But the King seekes Treaties and winne upon the People by that shew, and yet chooseth such Commissioners and binds them up with such Instructions,Pag. 46. that all Accommodation is impossible. Mutato nomine de te fabula, That your Com∣missioners were thus tyed up all the world knowes. And at Ʋxbridge in open conference they did not sticke to acknow∣ledge it. But though the King caused those directions you have publisht to be read to his Commissioners, yet he openly declared (as they all well know) that he meant them not in the formality of Instructions, he meant not they should be ob∣ligatory to them, but he left them free to themselves, only he told them that by these directions he had acquainted them with his sence, and left them to do that which became men of Honour and his Commissioners. This I had Sir, said he, from a Person I dare trust, and I beleive it had beene better, when this shall come to be knowne, if your Annotator had held his peace. And is not that a pretty Collection made by your first Ora∣tor, Who because the King saies he will never quit Episcopacy nor the Sword,Pag. 5. concludes there was at the Treaty no hope of a happy and well-grounded peace. And why? because the sword is in the Kings hand, is he therefore still bound to draw it? Or hath no man a just right that he may weare a sword but that he's straightway tyed to be fighting? When Saint Paul affirmes, that Princes beare not the Sword in vaine, noe doubt he meanes the Sword as well of Peace, as of Warre. Nay the only way to see peace, is to see that the Sword is in the Scabbard, Is to see it in the Kings hand. But where Subjects begin to wrest away that weapon from him, This Orators argument is undoubtedly good, Where there is such a Sword there is fighting. Your second Oratour is not much more candid neither: In his City Rhetorick he would cast hatred on the King, because he would graunt an alteration of penall Lawes to the Irish Po∣pish Rebells,Pag. 8. but no alterance of Lawes for the settlement of the Protestant Religion, though they be desired from a Protestant King. If, said he, It were proved, that because King CHARLES
is a Protestant Prince, therefore he is bound to like of a Pro∣testant Rebellion; This discourse might have some reason in it. But if crimes are the more foule, when they are done by Protestants, something may be said in favour of a Popish Re∣bell, especially when he askes the penall Lawes alone, and the other at once gapes both at the Mitre, and the Crowne. When he will neither endure the sword in the Kings hand, nor excommunication in the Bishops, nor that God should be ser∣ved by our Liturgy. And yet declaimes at a Common Hall, that this forsooth is for the advancement of the Protestant Re∣ligion; which I wonder. Not that I am sure which is esta∣blisht by law, and that which we were all borne and bred in, And that which no more then five yeares since we all called Protestant in England. And for the settlement and advance∣ment whereof the King denies to do nothing. No 'tis plaine the man meanes the Religion of John Knox, which first wrest∣ed the sword out of Queene MARY of Scotlands hand, and is now doing the like to her Grandson. So that hereupon I desire this Oratour would turne Judge, and gravely determine which he thinkes better for the King: Whether he shall yeild his penall lawes alone unto his Irish Rebells, who then fight∣ing for his Crowne, fight by consequence for his Religion too, though indeed they themselves are Papists; or whether he shall yeild both Church and Crowne too unto his English Rebels, and so suffer them to alter his Religion it selfe, only upon this ground, because they call themselves Protestants? Your third Orator besides other his weake inferences, would hence conclude a breach of word in the King, because he promised to keepe all the Acts of this Parliament inviolable,Pag. 17. and yet had any two but joyned with him he would not have called them a Parliament: and there he cries, How can these stand together? Very well; except all mankinde were bound to have as little Logicke, as himselfe. For a contradiction must be Secundumidem, and eodem tempore. They were a Parlia∣ment when the King gave consent to their acts, and 'tis there∣fore he intends to keepe them, but having now run into so foule a rebellion 'tis at his pleasure what to speake in this case;
and he may now say, they are no Parliament; But he goes on. The King hath told us he will maintaine the Lawes and observe them himselfe. And yet be layes the bloud had in these warres up∣on the innocent bloud (as he calls it) of my Lord of Strafford▪ who was condemned by himselfe, and by the Law. That, he saies, he will maintaine. For that personall Law made against the life of the Lord of Strafford, the King did maintaine, and observe it, for within a few daies he signed a warrant for this death. So that this law is now at an end, and by the words of the same Law it must not be drawne to example; and yet is he still bound to maintaine that Law now expired? Or may not the King he sorry for what he then did amisse, but his repentance is a breach of law? I had thought that a Prince then maintaines and ob∣serves his Lawes when he sees them put in execution. But that he is so strictly tied that he may not speake against the sence of any one of his Lawes, or wish it had not beene enacted, is more, I confesse, then is beleived by me, or as I conceive by this Ora∣tour. Truly Sin, said he, when I did read the Letter, into which the King put that passage, I could scarce refraine teares of joy to find him so sensible of the crime he conceived he had done by communicating in that bloudy sinne; not doubting, but that God, who had given him this true Sence of his fault, had brought him to as true Repentance. And though I hold the Arch-Bishops Death (which the King speakes of in the same Letter, and your Annotatour takes so much notice of) in the Construction of all Law a most compleate perfect murther, and make no more doubt that God will revenge it, then I do that he is in Heaven; Yet I dare prescribe no set time unto divine Justice. I neither know when God will command a blessing upon the Repentance of the King, or a curse upon the foule murther of the Parliament. Nor indeed doth the King prescribe it, He onely writes,—I beleive it is no Presumption hereafter to hope that his hand of Iustice must be heavier upon them—He saies not it must hereafter be heavier, nor so much as That he hopes it will be so. Onely he beleives it no presumption to hope. A speech let fall with so much Christian warinesse, that I could heartily wish we Subjects had learned to speake with
the like caution, of our King, as he hath done to speake of God. And now Sir, said he, I must from my soule tell you how pas∣sionately I am greived to see sworne Subjects thus labouring to abuse their King; nay to see them thus abuse themselves, that they may the more abuse him; and to see all this done in Eng∣land: Beleive it, 'tis no presumption to thinke that the crime of Cham will at length meet with Cham's reward. But when men strive to outdoe Cham, to say their Father's drunke, when he is not, and then jeere him downe as if he were now drowned in wine, what Curse may they expect when his was made thus great, A Servant of Servants shall he be. And though this Prophesy was not straight way fulfilled, yet 'twas not therefore the lesse true, or fearefull. Indeed what the wise man observed may hold as well in these times of ours, because God proceeds not suddainly to judgement, Therefore the Hearts of the Sonnes of men are wholly set in them to doe Evill. And this will as well hold in ours and all times, that where men doe still sinne with a high proud hand, there will at length follow judgment. Take heed, Sir, said he, lest from your present prosperity you begin with that Cardinall, straightway to inferre the goodnesse of your Cause. No, The Benjamites thrived twice at that same time when they were most injurious, and yet ere long they fell, and were beholding to their care whom they wick∣edly opposed, that of a Tribe they were not brought to no∣thing. Our Actions must be judged not by successe, but by Lawes. And I shall then thinke your party will escape those Judgements which I feare, when there is either no such Text, Thou shalt not speake evill of the Ruler of thy People; Or that I thinke him, whom we have sworne to be our Onely Supreame Governour, to have no share among those Rulers. When I shall be brought to hold Repentance may be sinne in a King, And that murther is none, so it be done by a Parliament: When by the distinctions of your Divines I can perswade my selfe, that this Rebellion is no Crime, Or when they can make me beleive, that either those two Apostles did not understand Christ, or the Ancient Church those Apostles. Here my old freind pretended businesse and left me. And
truly, Sir, I must confesse to you that he left me in a great per∣plexity; for I know him a most honest man, and I find it to be true, that reason then gaines extreamely in the weight, when it hath once passed through such a furnace. I assure you he hath much troubled me, I would not say converted me, but I cannot divine how my Conscience will hold out, for this appeares to me so much reason that if you have not somewhat to satify me with, Beleive me, I am much afraid how long I shall con∣tinue a freind to our present Cause, though I shall never leave off to be, Sir, Your very faithfull Servant. FINIS.
