L1475 E445_35 R204798 99864259 161764
A LETTER FROM HIS MAIESTIES COURT IN THE Isle of Wight: Wherein is declared, The Kings Majesties late Resolution touching Colonell Hammond, and the manner how he should have beene conveyed from Carisbrook Castle to the Kentish ARMY. With his Majesties Propositions touching the same, and three thousand pounds proffered to three Souldiers for the performance thereof. Also, a great Fight neer Canterbury in Kent, divers slain, and one of the Kings Colonels, with 30. of his men taken ta∣ken prisoners. And another Fight neer Rochester. with the number slain and taken. Likewise, the Kentish-mens Propositions to the Lord Generall, with his Excellencies Answer, and the Armies ad∣vance towards Rochester. June 2d London, Printed for R. W. MDCXLVIII.
A LETTER FROM The Kings Majesties Court at Cariisbrock Castle, shewing the manner how his Majesty should have been con∣veyed from the said Island, to the Kentish ARMY. Honoured Sir, THis day our Governour (Colonell Hammond) re∣ceived information of a new stratagem, for the con∣veying of his Majesty from this Island, the manner thus; His Majesty having received intelligence of the pro∣ceedings and Engagement of the Kentish-men, began to think and study, how he might make his escape, and at the last, ha∣ving an opportunity, resolved with himself, to declare his mind to three souldiers, which he suppos'd he might put confidence in, by promising them a great reward and gratui∣ty, which accordingly He did, and told them, that if they would do him that acceptable favour, as to use their ende∣vours for the restoring of Him to His liberty, and setting of
him free from that Castle, they should each of them have 1000. l: whereupon they humbly thanked his Majesty, protesting that they would use their utmost endeavours for the obtaining of his Majesties liberty, and presently conside∣red how they should accomplish the same, as the last resolved to buy a certain quantity of Aqua-fortis, and to ap∣ply it to the Iron-Bars of one of his Majesties Chamber windows, and so to eat the Bar asunder, which they did, and when the work was almost acoomplish'd, two of them be∣gan to repent of their former action, resolving to proceed no further therein, but to discover the same to the Governour, which accordingly they did: Whereupon our Governour used his utmost endeavours for the preventing thereof, and ordered, that all care and diligence should be used for the future, that no such thing should be acted. If this design had taken effect, his Majesty should have been conveyed first to Southampton, and from thence, either for the North or Kent. Carisbrook Castle 29. May, 1648. The further proceedings of the Kentish Army, and their chusing of Col. Washington Generall. SIR, THE Kentish Army is retreated as far as Rochester, Maidstone, and other towns adjacent, they consist of about 14000. but are divided into two Bodies, most of them being armed; but they cannot concord and agree a∣bout their Commanders in chief, some say, that they desire Col. Washington may be their Generall; others give out, that they will have the Lord Culpepper. This day the Generall had a Randezvouz upon the Heath beyond this town, where appeared of horse and foot 8000.
The Kentish-men have sent Propositions to the General, tou∣ching a treaty, but the Generall returned answer, that hee knew not of any order of Parliament directing him to treat, and whereas he finds the Gentlemen of Kent, and others in Arms, and persisting therein, without, and against the autho∣rity of Parliament, and doing many Acts of Hostility, to the great dammage of their Neighbours, he cannot capitulate while they are so in arms, nor lose time in prosecution; but if they forthwith lay down, and go home, he doubts not but the Parliament will pardon the seduced, and punish the sedu∣cers for example to others. They Regiment, and are very numerous in horse, few men of quality to be seen, but as is apprehended, gathered in Armes; some skirmishes have been, and at severall times neer 100. prisoners taken. A small party of Col. Riches horse sallying out, met with a party of the Kentish foot, fought with them, and put them to a rout, taking 36 prisoners, with the losse of one man, having but 7 in number. But on Wednesday last a party of the Kentish-men came up unto a Guard of the Parliaments Forces, they fought well, divers of them were slain, others taken, among the rest two young Gentlemen who were brave in Gold and Silver Lace, with whom the Souldiers changed. The Generall hath a party of horse in the wild of Kent, who desire to relieve Dover Castle besieged by them, to whom are joyned some hundreds of the Kentish, who have made some spoyl among the other Kentish, and have taken Col. Culpepper, and many others. They say there is with the Kentish-men one of the Gorings, and that they increase hourly.
On Fryday last Vice-admiral Rainsborough came ashore at his own Castle at Deale, the occasion was, because some of the Kentish men had endea∣voured to get the possession of the Earl of War∣wicks Castle of Sandon, the castle of Warbrough, and this Castle, which are all three within a mile and a half one of the other. And when the Vice Admi∣rall had done his endeavour to secure them, he went in a small Pinace to his command again at Sea; and when he came to the ship which was under his immediate com∣mand, those which were in her forbad him to come a∣board, saying they would obey him no longer, but would have the King brought to London, &c and told him, if he came aboard, it was at his perill, but if he pleased, he might depart in the Vessel hee was in. Then they sent to Capt. Penrose, desiring him to come in to joyn with them; but he replyed he would not, and asked them, if they would become Enemies to their for∣mer cause and Engagements, and quite cast of all sub∣jection. To which they generally replyed no, they were for King and Parliam. then said he, it were fit that you should make choice of some honourable per∣son, that is true to both, for this is a place not fit for any other, &c. hee had no sooner spoken this but one of them named the Earl of Warwick, and all the rest cryed out presently, a Warwick, a War∣wick:
then they agreed to send a Letter to his Lordship, & another to the Speaker of the house setting forth their proceedings, and that if the E. of Warwick came to them, they would live and dy with him, in defance of the cause for King and Par∣liament, according to the first principles; and they made choice of capt. Pentose to bring these Let∣ters, & before his coming away, he told them, that it might be when he was gone, they would make choice of some other; and to give satisfaction to the contrary, they all took an oath, not to receed from this choice untill the E. of Warwick came to them, &c. On Fryday last the Kentish men took the Fort neer Dover Castle, whereof capt. Bethel, a very de∣serving Gentleman, had the command, they shot many pieces against the Castle, but finding no pro∣bability of doing any good against it, they gave it over, But we hear that the Generall hath sent a party of Horse to relieve Dover, and re-possesse themselves of the Fort, which is all at present, from Deptford 30. May, 1648. Your assured friend, D. M.
POSTSCRIPT. SIR, Since the writing of my last, we have received in∣telligence, that the party of horse that went to relieve Dover Castle, have had a great fight with the Kentish Horse neer Canterbury, and have taken divers prisoners, and killed many, with the losse of two or three men, and have totally routed the whole party. They also skirmished with another party of the Kentish Horse, commanded by a Colo∣nel formerly in the Kings Army, and after some short dis∣pute, took the said Colonell, and 30 of his men prisoners, The great Fort at Dover is re-taken, and now in possession of the Parliaments Forces. Deptford 31. May, 1648. Imprimatur Gilbert Mabbott. FINIS.
