m1688 99897840 170977
A MEMORIAL Given in to the Senate of the City of Hamburgh in French faithfully Translated into English To their Magnificences the Burgo-Masters, and to the Gentlemen-Counsellors of this City of Hamburgh. WE, the Under-Subscribers, Ministers of His Majsty, The King of Great-Britain, have upon the Arrival of Commissioners from an Indian-Company in SCOTLAND, Represented at two several Times, to your Magnificences and Lordships from the King Our Master, that his Majesty understanding that the said Commissioners Endeavoured to open to Themselves, a Commerce and Trade in these Parts, by making some Convention or Treaty with this City, had Com∣manded us most Expresly to Notify to your Magnificences and Lordships, that if you enter into such Conventions with privat Men His Subjects, who have neither Credential Letters, nor are any other wayes Authorized by His Majesty; That His Majesty would Regard such Proceedings as an Affront to His Royal Authori∣ty, and that He would not fail to Resent it. Your Magnificences and Lordships had the Goodness to Answer us thereto by your Deputy, that you would no way enter into Commerce with the afore-mentioned Commissioners, nor Encourage them in any sort. Notwithstanding whereof, We the Subscribers do see with Dis∣pleasure, that without any regard to the Remonstrances made by Us in the Name of His Majesty; The Inhabitants of this City forbear not to make Conven∣tions and Treaties with the said Comissioners, who dare even Erect a Publick-Office to receive Subscriptions as appears by rhe annexed Print. And it is not very Credi∣ble that Strangers could so openly Enterprize Matters of such Importance without being Supported by this Goverment: Wherefore, We make Our just Complaints thereof to Your Magnificences and Lordships; Beseeching you in the Name of the King Our Master to remedy in time that which is begun, and to do it so Effect∣ually as to prevent any Consequences it may have, capable to disturb the Freind∣ship and good Correspondence which We would Cultivate between England and the City of Hamburgh. We wait Your Magnificences and Lordships Aaswer in Writing to be transmitted to His Majesty Our Master. And We are. Your Magnificences and Lordships most humble Servants, The Knight RYCAUT Resident for His Majesty the King of Great-Britan in the City of Hamburgh. CRESSETT, His Britannick Majesties Envoy Extraordinary at the Courts of Lunenburgh, and his Plenipo∣tentiary at the Treaty of Pi∣nenberg. Done at Hamburgh the 7th of April 1697.
