m2297 E284_10 99860861 112987
Colonell Mittons Reply TO Lievtenant-Colonell Reinkings Relation OF The taking of Shrewesburie: Which was printed without License, though said (in the Title thereof) to be published by Authority THE laying of a design for the taking of the Town of Shrews bury, was in agitation severall wayes, both by the Commit¦tee, and my self, they sent unto Of westrey for me to Wem to consult about it; M. Huson (a Minister) was the onely man that first advised us to this way, wherein God gave us the towne: after ward one Captain Willier seconded him therein. The first attempt we indeavoured to make upon the town, was the 14 of February, but the darknesse of the night (and the ill mannaging of the march) by Lievtenant. Col. Reinking retarded the businesse so much, that we were faine to retreat for that time. Next day being Saturday, in the afternoon, the rest of the Gentlement of the Committee and my selfe fell in councell how to go on with the designe a∣gaine, and sent for Lievtenant Col. Reinking, M. Huson, Captain Willier, and others to advice with us. We did agree to go the next night; being the Sabbath, to surprize the Ca∣stle,
being much troubled, least any of the well-affected in the Town  suffer by reason of our former attempt. They that should have gone with me, were the foresaid Lievtenant-Colo∣nell, M. Huson, and Captain Willier, we had likewise sent unto Major Fen∣nicke, who was then Governour of Morton Corbet, to go along with us, with what strength he could affoord, to second us with the rest of the Forces from Wem, and my Horse; the place were we should have scalled the Ca∣stle-wall, required ladders five yards long, the ladders we had the night be∣fore were so heavy, that they could not be carried under foure men to one of them; whereupon I sent for the Joyner (that lives in Wem) to me, and gave him order to make ladders of that length, with two of his feasoned railes, which were so light, that one man might carrie one of them a mile with ease. But as we were ready to give order to march, word came from Shrewsbury, that they kept out Scouts towards Wem: therfore we thought fit to proceed no further at that time, and sent likewise to countermand Ma∣jor Fennicke, who was to meet us upon our march. I stayed with them (as I remember) at Wem, till Tuesday in the evening: Vpon the Monday before I went, we did agree to fall upon their Garrison at Atcham (having great hopes we should gaine it) and did intend to fortifie it strongly, it being a place upon the river of Severne, within two miles of Shrewsbury, which would much annoy the town: but P. Maurice being at Chester, wee conceived our strength was not sufficient to defend the place, till we had made it tenable, and did agree to send to Sir William Brereton to borrow some of his Auxiliaries, and so for that time I took my leave of the rest of the Gentlemen of the Committee, and went to my Garrison to Os∣westree, they promising me, and (Colonell Hunt in particular) desiring that if I had any designe, I would make them acquainted, and when they were to go upon any they would acquaint me. Vpon the Friday following they sent me a Letter to Oswestree (about foure in the after-noone I received it) mentioning their march upon a designe that night, wherein they desired me to have an eye upon Prince Maurice, lest he should send some partie to fall upon them, and wherein they wrote, that they would have a regard to my honour in the first place. Between 7 and 8 of the clock, Capt. Iohn Betton being with me I shewed him the Letter, so hee and I advising together, wee resolved speedily to be gone, not making any one acquainted which way we went: I sent to Liev∣tenant-Colonell Pope, to come along with us, who brought with him two
or three of his Troop, and I my selfe had only one man, but sent to all my Horse to follow, which they did with great speed: wee met them upon their march upon the old heath, a mile from the Suburbs, though Lievtenant-Colonell Reinking sets forth, that they were in the Suburbs before I came in unto them: and whereas he saith, that he had only two light marches, I cau∣sed them to put out thirtie and above, asking them if they would surprize the towne with light matches: Colonell Lloyd, when I shewed him the light matches, being also much displeased. Vpon my first coming in, I went (as Lieutenant-Colonell Reinking re∣ports) to the Gentlemen of the Committee, and saluted them, and asked them the reason why they had not sent me more timely notice of the designe, they answered (and Mr. Charlton in particular) that they did only intend to have a scrip at Shrewsbury, as they passed by: but their greatest hope was to possesse themselves of Atcham. I kept constantly with the Horse, sometimes with the Gentlemen of the Committee, sometimes with others: they that came with mee from Os∣westree and I, being not one from the other all night, according to our pro∣mise that wee made to one another: this meane while Lievtenant-Colonell Reinking went on with the Foot, as he sets forth, (leaving all the Horse be∣hind him upon the Heath) I being in the Van of them with Capt. More, the All-arme was given unto the towne: whereupon (as Mr. Huson told mee and others) that Leivtenant-Colonell Reinking would have gone back, had it not been for him: and thereupon he himselfe took a sledge, and went to the Palisadoes, by whose encouragement, and Capt. Williers, they went on a∣gaine, and made their way thorow them: The meane while I went on with: the Horse into the Suburbs, where we found the Lord Colvill, and where-we stayed neare a quarter of an houre before the Foot could break an iron chaine to let us passe to the gate. From thence I marched strait to the gate, where we stayed neare upon a quarter of an houre before it was opened, which being done much about the break of day, I entred with the Horse the first my selfe, one would have entred before mee, but I wished him to forbeare, which hee did till I entred: wee went direct to wards the maine guard, our Foot being beaten back by them, they verie earnestly cryed for the Horse, wee made all haste possible unto their releefe, (those that came with mee from Oswestree being still with mee) and Captaine More one of the Committee, when wee came into the Hay-street, wee thought to have entred upon them thorow a narrow passage betweene some Drapers shops, but were beaten thence, and
they killed one of our horses: whereupon Captaine Iohn Betton d us  along the Hay-street, and so by Chads Church, by which meanes wee sur∣rounded them: and then, and not till then, they fled. As foon as they were dispersed, I called for an old Gentleman (my Vn∣cle) that lodged the next house to that guard: while I was talking with hion qume of the Committee, and Lievtenant-Colonell Reinking went to the Castle shinking to have it delivered unto them, and did agree upon termes with them thereon: but when they came to surrender it, they asked. To whom they should deliver it? the Committee told them. to L. Col. Rein∣king they asked, whether I was not there: the Committee answered, I was in Towne; they replied, They would not deliver it till I came: where upon the Committee sent M. Charlos Langford, who came in great hast to me: I went presently with him, and had it delivered unto me: I my selfe went to the gate of the Castle, and with my own hands (as they passed out) wrote, the names and quality of all the Souldiers therein, and gave the list of them to Colonell Lloyd. So when they were all gone out, and sent with a guard to the stone bridge, (excepting the Irish, upon whom I put a difference in the lift that I gave Ge∣lonell Lloyd) I entred the Castle first, divers others of the Gentlemen of the Committee being there, and followed me. So it will here plainly appeare, that (upon my coming) the order he stan∣deth. upon, to be Commander in chiefe, was in valid, I being the ancientest Co∣lonell in that County, having a Commission for three Regiments, as also that I came in to them a mile before they came into the Suburbs, and that Lievte∣nant-Colonell Reinking had more then two lighted matches, and that I took the command of the horse upon me, and that I led up the horse to beat the maine guard, which were not beaten away, till the Horse surrounded them, and that the Castle was surrendred unto me. These things I never intended to have published, but that Lienant-Colonell Reinking put forth a pamphlet upon Saturday last (as I conceive) to my dishonour: I having formerly written to, and reported in the House of Commons, contrarie to what he caused to be printed. Tho. Mytton▪ Printed according to Order, by R. Austin.
