M2454 E462_22 R36602 99872452 162201
THE RESOLUTION Of Major-Generall MONRO CONCERNING Lieutenant-Generall CRVMWELL, and the English For∣ces; and his randezvouz at Hexam-Moor in Northumber∣land, with 8000 Horse and Foot, 20 Pieces of Ordnance, and divers other Engines of War. And his Decla∣ration at the Head of each Regiment, touching their Engagement. With his Protestation to live and die with them. Also, a Letter of the proceedings of the Prince of VVALES, concerning the raising of new Forces to come into England, And the results and proceedings of the States of the United Provinces for the relief of His Highnesse, and allowing Him 1000. Gilders, per diem. Likewise, the proceedings of the Kings party in the town of Yar∣mouth, their assisting of his Highnesse, and opposing the Par∣liaments forces, their planting of Ordnance, and arming the town. As also, the time of the beginning of the Treaty, the manner thereof, and the particulars wherein they first insist on, 6000. li. allowed to His Majesty, Horses, Coach, and other neces∣saries to be sent forthwith unto Him. Printed for satisfaction of all his Majesties loyall subjects.
THE RESOLVTION Of Generall MUNRO Concerning Lieutenant Generall Crumwel, and the English Iron-sider, their preparation for Battell, and the number of their Army, and their further proceedings touching the Parliament of England. SIR, GEnerall Munro with his Army is marched on this side Appleby, his forces daily increase consisting of about 8000. and it is reported that 5000. more are joyned with him from Scotland. Our Intelligence saith that he is resolved to fight Lie.
Gen. Crumwel, and the rest of the English Forces, resolving rather to die, then yeeld ground, unlesse up∣on advantage. Our forces desires to ingage, but could not passe by the way of Cumberland for want of provision, that County and Westmerland being exhausted, besides the wet weather and mountainous wayes makes cariages and Artillery unpassble had there been provision; in those respects we passed by Skipton upon Craven, & so by the East Coast, where we shall have better op∣portunity to meet our enemy, who we are informed is past at Steinmore in the Bishoprick of Durhm, where is plenty of provision and Anti-covenanters, who bid them welcome to as much benefit, as Colche∣ster got by entertaining the Royall party. Upon Satterday last Munroes Army randezvouzed at Brough neer Stainmore in the Bishoprick wh mu∣stered neer upon 8000. horse and foo, Engis, Scots and rish, well armed and resolute. At which Randevouz we hear, that Munro decla∣red himself at the head of each Regiment, intimating His resolution to live and die with them, add to fight it out to the last man. Then he called a generall councell of all his Officers where it was agreed, That the Scots and Irish should be commanded back to Perith, and the English into the Bi∣shoprick, and that within two dayes they march p to the Randezvouz a Hexam Moor in Northumberland, whih accordingly they did, where was a great appearace, r Philip Musgrave joyning with them with a strong par∣ty of horse: the train of Artillery likewise came up, as also 20 piece of Ordnance: and its generally reported
here that 5000. more are comming out of Scotland, which if true, they will make a very considerable Ar∣my. Divers English resorts from these parts to Mun∣ro, who are by their great Landlords incouraged, and promised to sit rent-free for the future. We march slowly, because we wait the coming of Col. Gen. Lambert with 4 Regiments whom we expect daily. Sir Wil. Hudalesion (a papist) hath raised a con∣siderable party for the King, and besieg Cokermouth the Lancashire sorces are gone to supprest im. Col. Fenicks horse and some Dragoons went  Barwick, relieved the Holy Island, storm'd Fen a∣stle neer te Isle, in which was a Scots Garrison, took divers prisoners, put the rest to the sword: they sum∣moned Hagerston Garison, but the Scots sallying out of Berwick forced them to retreat. Richmond 4 Septemb. 1648. Septemb. 5. The Commons ordered the 10000. l. in∣tended for defraying of the charge of the Treaty, viz. 500. l. to te Querries for horse charge, 500.l. foi those to be employed by the Commissioners, 6000. l. his Ma∣jesty is to have for the use of himself, and those about him 3000. l. the Commissioners are to have for their occasions, so the quarters and dyet wil be distinct, they will go as soon as money comes in the treaty 40 days: the method will be, 1. recalling Declarations, Religion, Militia, then Ireland, and so as they fall in order, in which they are to keep as close as possible to the Pro∣positions. Tuesday a day of Humiliation for a good end ther∣of, horses, coaches, and other things, are to be speedily sent down to his Majesty.
Newes from Yarmouth, concerning the proceedings of the Royalists, and their opposing of the Parlia∣mnts Forces. FRom Yarmouth it is advertized, that some of the Royalists have plaid fast and loose with the Parl. as appears by their accommodating the Prince with provisions of victuals, &c. & particularly a ship some days since laden with barrels of beef, wherein were di∣vers of his Highnesse retinue; which ship when some of the Gen. Dragoons had taken, was rescued by the townsmen, and after past to the Prince: their pretend∣ed permission of us to march through the town, was, for the manner rather as prisoners then souldiers of Parl. for they had set stakes and sayles, leaving onely room for two a breast, planted their Ordnance, com∣manded the town to armes that in case any thing had not liked them they might have fallen upon our men. We expect the General here, and then we hope it will be secured: for intelligence is brought that it it was intended, and it is like will yet be furnished by English Soldiers from Holland. Norwich 6. Sept. 1648. There is a generall report up and down the Ci∣ty of London, that some action hath already happe∣ned between parties, who on sudden engaged, dispu∣ting the place with great difficulty, out the English Iron-sides in policy retreating, drew the Jockies from a place of advantage, rallied, and charged them with great fury and courage, the Irish Jockies received
them, and stood many a desperate charge, but finding the dispute too hot retreated, our men pursues, who with great gallantry maintains the pursuit to their ve∣ry heels, doing execution: but being some what wea∣ry, returned, taking neer upon 30. prisoners, and killing almost as many, with little or no losse. A sudden En∣gagement is daily expected, Munro being resolved to fight. It is likewise reported, that some of the Lieu. Gen. horse have lately beaten up the Scots out quarters in Westmerland, and have taken divers prisoners, putting many of the Irish to the sword, the two Bodies ad∣vance, and are very neer an ingagement, both parties proceed forward, and a field is suddenly expected, po∣licy is the chief Engine which the two Generals make use of, who are exceeding vigilant, in relation to an in∣gagement. We hear that Sir Philip Musgrave. Sir Robert Strit∣land, and Sir VVilliam Backstone, with a party of horse consisting of about five hundred came into Clevelnd on Munday last, and began to levy the Countrey for the Trained Bands, but the Inhabitants rising, and the Dale men comming into their assistance, they durst not stay long, but presently retreated. And having plundered divers horses, and other Goods in and about the parts adjacent to Cleveland, the Inhabitants of the Middle Dale put themselves into a posture of defence▪ and hastned to a passage where the Cavalry were to march through, who lay in Am∣buscado for their comming, and upon their approach neer, gave them a volley, which somewhat startled sir Philip Musgrave and his forces: Whereupon they
made a stand, and Sir Philip sent a Trumpeter to know the meaning thereof, the Dale men returned an∣swer, That they were resolved to lose their ives, rather then to be plundered of their estates and goods, and ther∣fore desired restitution of what had been taken from them or thir neighbours. Letters from Holland say, That great preparations is made at th Hague for the entertainment of the Prince of Wales, and that divers Courtiers are gone from thence with Coaches, to attend his Royall person from the Brill. The common report is, He is to rig the ships again, and those prizes which he got in the Downs, he intends to sell, and with the money to levy some forces. Among the States it was disputed, whether he should be entertained by them in a publike way, or whether so much per diem, should be allowed unto him for some time. The result its said was that one thousand Gilders should be allowed un∣to him per diem. Hague Septemb. stylo novo. FINIS.
