N394 E419_4 99863082 115264
The Levellers levell'd. OR, The Independents Conspiracie to root out Monarchie. AN INTERLUDE: Written by Mercurius Pragmaticus. No King, the Levellers do crie, Let Charles impeached be; And for his conscience let him die, When (hey boyes) up go we. Wee'll have no Ruler, Lord, or Peere, O're us for to command: Wee'l levell all alike, we sweare, And kill those that withstand. Bring forth the King, chop off his Head, We ne're our wish shall gaine, Till we upon his trunk do tread, His Blood must wash our staine. Roome for these Traitors, now they come To act upon the Stage: Strike up lowd musick, Fife and Drum, For Tumults, War, and Strage. Nemo me impunè lacessit. Printed in the Yeere 1647.
THE PROLOGUE, Spoken by Mercurius Pragmaticus. I That have lasht base Traytors to the bone, Have whipt ambition, pride, and spared none; Plaid the Man-Midwifes part, and with my pen Have dig'd the eyes out of rebellions men: And with my keen-edg'd Muse (gone thorow stitch) Squeez'd out the bowells o'th Genevah Witch; Have prov'd the monstrous children of the State Ignobly born, and illegitimate, Now flie, and higher pitch; and on the Stage Present to view the Monsters of the Age, These sonnes of Belial, you must onely read; And yet this Play was acted once indeed: Whether I fall or rise, thus I conclude, I shall be fam'd above the multitude. PERSONS. The five Adjutators, or Levellers. Apostasie, Conspiracie, Treacherie, Democracie, Impietie, Englands Genius. Two Independent Ministers. Regicide, Patricide, Orlotto, or Lillie the Almanack-maker. Chorus. A Souldier. A Woman. A Servant.
To my Soveraigne Lord Charles (who maugre the fury of the Levellers, is yet) by the grace of God, of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland King, and (futra for their slanderous imputations) Defender of the true, ancient, catholike, and Apostolike Faith, &c. DRead Lord, even the apple of Gods eye, Jesses great sonne did tast adversity, Though that his Subjects rose not, yet his Sonne Stir'd up his people to rebellion: And this most damn'd insurretion 'gainst thee Is but a second Absalonisme: But here's the difference, their base desire Was to inthrone the Sonne, divest the Sire. But these hell-hounds, their utmost doe assay, To make both Father, and the Sonne away, Hiding the face of their most black designe Under a vizard Lustrious, and Divine; So like the fiend, when he appeares to sight Refulgent, like an Angell of the light, Do they disguise themselves, unto the rude, And many headed Beast, the Multitude, Who now have found their errour, and repent That ere they trusted to a Parliament. But now their hands are ti'd, their strengh is gone, And they are vassalized every one: The knot of the State Mountebankes they curse, And of their basenesse make their whole dscourse. The names do stinke of Hollis, Pym, and Strowd, And now Give us our King, they call aloud: But there's a Remora, the pack of traytors, A bed of snakes congeal'd, the Adjutators Reply, you must not yet enjoy that good The earth a second time must drinke their bloud: We will be Kings, which we shall never be Lest CHARLES be sent unto Eternitie:
Therefore upon the eleventh of November He breathes his last, an Independent member Shall cut his thread of life in twaine, (tis well) This good we owe to Peters and to Dell. But thou, our dearest Lord hast scap'd the net, The which those bloudy huntsmen for thee set: And forc'd for safety to withdraw a while, Into a nooke of thy divided Isle: Live there, and see thine enemies to fall By their owne Engine; and mean time we all Will pray to thy preserver, to possesse Thy Royall soule with peace, and happinesse. So prayes, your Majesties most humble and dutifull Subject, Mercurius Pragmaticus. The Levellers level'd: Or, The Jndpen∣dents Conspiracie to root out Monarchie. Act 1. Scene 1. Confused Musick: Enter Englands Genius. WOe is me, where shall I seek for safety? the murmur∣ing Drums, and brazen Trumpets deafe my eares, no∣thing is heard but shreikes of murdered men, Bellona rides in triumph ore dead men, her horses wash their feet in humane bloud, rebellious hands are every where imployed to root out Loyalty: harke, me thinkes I see them grapple hand to hand, and are now in the field, Where Lightning raiseth it selfe to the Skies, The earth shines round with Armour, sounds doe rise
By men forc'd under feet: wounded with noise The hills to heaven reverberate their voice. Into what nook or angle shall I fly to gain a little respite? Curst be the traytors that cry out, no Peace, let Sampsons tai∣led messengers beare hence these fatall Fire-brands to some other soile, or let them make their way to their owne houses, there consume, devast their houses, and their granaries; let all their sonnes run mad, and trace the streets like frantick Bacchanalls, and while they there seek for refuge, be cut of by the all devouring sword. Let them be slaves and labour at the mill, and let their wives and daughters beg, let them be ravisht first, then slain; Let basenesse be intaild upon their name, too firme for all recovery: these are the Devills that do grin at Heaven, and jeer all Lawes, both Morall and Divine. The red, and white Rose strove for Soveraignty, but these contest to set up Anarchy, confusion, and the worst of ills that Envy can imagine; thunder, great Jove, upon these traytors heads, that like curst Lucifer, and his rebell troops, dare bid defiance to thy face, While I into some hollow cave do run, And curse the hell-hounds that this warr begun. Drum within beating a March. Exit Genius. Enter Apostasie, Treachery, Conspiracie, Democracie & Impiety. Apo. Stand. Trech. Give the word there. Consp. Stand. Apo. Thus far we are victorious my Cohorts, crown we our heads now with triumphant Bayes, for England now is ours: Couragious Rupert, Hopton, Glemham and the rest, we have brought to the ground; we have not left a loyall Dog alive; all's ours, all's ours: those fooles that say I am apostated from my first principles, know not what honour meanes, or what 'tis to be great: Ile sell my King, my Countrey and my soule, To be one of those rule without controule. Trech. And would the Sophies of the State not tremble? were but our brests transparent, they might view their pictures stab'd with ponyards, and each killing a Member in his heart: Can they imagine those that have rebell'd against their Sove∣raigne for ambitious ends will yeeld them homage: no, they were the stone that pasht K. Charles to peeces, and with the
same wee'l grinde them unto powder. Me thinks I see them tottering on their seats, now that our hands are shrunk from their supportance: sink till you see hells bottome, while we rise high in honours compassed with pleasures. Who'd care to see the world burn round about him? Con. Which to effect, 'twere best we strengthned our designe by entring into solemne covenant: heres Ca∣talines Effigie; if you intend to prosecute your wishes through blood and vengeance, & to reach your glories maugre the furie of the world, sweare by this sacred Relique. Pulls forth a Picture. They lay their hands upon the pi∣cture. Omnes. Most religiously. Con. By the fam'd memorie of this brave spirit, that once made Rome to tremble at his nod, who took the horrid Sacrament in blood to levell her proud battlements, sweare not to lay down armes till King Charles be sent to the invisible land, till all Lawes are repealed and abrogated, meum and tuum on pain of death not metioned. Omnes. We sweare. Consp. So; now we may be open to each other, now Charles his Crowne shall be ours, and we will share it: to attain which 'twere best to stirre the people, those ravenous Kites will flock to any prey; we must make them our stilts on which we walk, and burn them in the end to warm us: we must propose them more immunities, tell them they hitherto have been abus'd base∣ly by Kings, but worse by their Trustees: a Declaration shall be fram'd forthwith, inciting them at once to joyn with us for ENGLANDS FREEDOME, & the SOULDIERS RIGHTS. Demo. The plot is laid as I would wish, this to effect, we will depose our Generall, he is not mad enough to be our Guide, we can create a new one with a word; John, Legislative John shall be our Captain. And 'cause he famous John of Ley∣don imitates, we henceforth will him John of London call: but this we must not yet divulge, but let the choake peare hang till it be ripr: he that doth fish for the rude multitude, must cast forth golden nets, some rare unwonted liberty, which we de∣clare to be our native Rights, and therefore are agreed and resolv'd to maintain them with our utmost possibilities, a∣gainst
all oppositions whatsoever, being compelled thereto, not only by the example of our Ancestors, whose bloud was often spent in vain, for the recovery of their freedoms, suffe∣ring themselves through fraudulent accomodations to be de∣luded of their victories, but also by our owne wofull experi∣ence; who having long expected, and deeply earned the e∣stablishment of those certain rules of government which wee propound, and yet are made to depend for their settle∣ment and freedom, upon him that intended our bondage, and brought a cruell warr upon us. Imp. You meane the King, whom we will now call to ac∣count, we cannot be secure while he doth live. Apost. Of that we will debate when we next meet in Counsell, in the mean time, give it out, that we intend to give the people freedom, to Levell the inclosures of Nobilty, Gen∣try and property, and make all even: now let the Genius that did wait upon grim Spartacus, desperate Cethegus, and fell Cu∣taline, prompt us to action, and till we have set up our Oligar∣chie, no peace to England. Omnes. No peace. Apost. Let Regicide and Patricide be sent for: from their two heads we will distill a juice stronger then Stibium, baneful∣ler then Hemlock. Trech. 'Tis then concluded that K. Charles must die, His bloud dissolves the English Monarchie. Con. Let's in to counsell; for I long to see The first Scene acted of this Tragedie. Exeunt Conspirators. Enter Pragmaticus Prag. Infernall Firebrands, whom the very teares Of groaning England, while she mourning weares, Cannot allay: Nor yet the bleeding veins Of desparate Ireland, which even now remaines A very Golgotha, cannot asswage, Whole Babes, the earnest of another age, Taste of your salvage courses, and doe ly The Lambe-like Martirs of their cruelty. Let Catesby, Piercy, and that bloudy knot
Be Sainted now, or else at least forgot, And let these vipers vindicate their crimes, In every Almanack for after-times. O damn'd Projectors, whether will ye run, Having usurp'd the Chariot of the Sun, You drive amaine till all about is hurld, And your base folly fires our English world. O England, dost thou yet want eyes to see How many Rogues are digging graves for thee? Doth not thy very heart consume with paine, When thou considerest thy Soveraigne Even with chaines unto the earth is held, His sufferings being unparalleld? Seest thou not his Religious constancy, His patience, care, and zealous piety, And canst thou still give credit to these Elves, Who suck thy bloud for to make fat themselves? These Hippocrites clothed with holy zeale Are thy obnoxious Fates, destroy thy weale, They are meere outsides, have an holy tone, Yet, are but Devills masked every one: Their insides full of murther, lust and pride, Sacriledge, treason, and all ills beside. For shame then sit not still untill you be Struck dead, and throwne to hells profunditie. Exit The end of the first Act. Act 1. Enter Regicide and Patricide. Regicide. ANd are they still so foolish to implore his poore assistance, who's their prisoner, their vassall, made so by the chance of warre, a cake of ice, whom with their breath they may dissolve to nothing.
Patri. Yes, Commissioners (forsooth) are now imployed to move him yet to signe the PROPOSITIONS: Now by the happy Issue that I wish to all our Plots, I grieve to see their vainnesse and supercillious folly; is't not in them for to degrade him? doth the bare empty name of King affright them? O I'm mad, starke mad with rages—it must be so, we will remove this block that so choakes up our passage. Regi. Sic est in satis, how Lord-like shall wee reigne when hee's re∣mov'd; I that have far'd so well causing him troubles shall fare much better, having caus'd his death; then I and thee will become the Arch∣flamins of this Age, the Metropollitans of our new Anarchy; nor wine nor women will we want, spending whole dayes and nights in luxury, (the world knowes PETERS ever lov'd a whore) therefore twill bee no novell newes to them: the pit pat Blacke-coats shall not date to speake save what we shall prescribe, them that lived corell, that once durst affront me. yea, bang me backe and side, for that I tasted of his wife and mutton his mutton and his wife shall amply taste of sorrow. Patri. As little Love will I shew unto LOVE my ancient antagonist, who thwarted mee even in the Temple before our Senators, bidding de∣fiance to my utmost Acts: O the brave times that we may injoy, Saturns golden Age was a meer hell to what we shall injoy! O the sweet dis∣courtes, on Capon and Cocke , the halcion dayes that wee are now in hope of make us to vaunt too lowd—but what's the newes a∣broad? how doth it fare with the mixt multitude, I meane the ARMY, how doe the Linsey Woolsey men at Westminster, that medly of decre∣pid age and youth agree in their desires. Regi. I'll for the Kingdome, but most well for us, the Army have al∣ready purg'd out all that are not of their Faction; the Adjutators of five Regiments, Apostacy, Conspiracy, Treachery and Impiety have broke the ce to our Designe, and op't a gap for Liberty to enter; sever'd themselves from their Coleagues, drawn up a manifesto to the Kingdom, divulg'd that they intend to purchase absolute freedom, and break in sun∣der the heavy yoake of Kings, and as perswaded of a happy Issue, that all the Vulgar will joyne as one man, they call it an AGREEMENT OF THE PEOPLE. Enter a Souldier. Regi. What speakes thy hast? Soul. I come from the high and mighty States of Putney, who by me doe desire the instant pressence bout matters of import. Patri. Returne our service, and that we will waite on um. Sol, to night. Regi, This night. Sol, I shall inform them so. (Exit Souldie.)
Patri. Now, what thinkst thou hath brought forth this hasty Sum∣mons? Regi. Something in Agitation on my life that doth concerne our pre∣sent Interrests; for my part I'm resolv'd. Patri. The like am I, to bring to passe what I intend or did. Regi. I like thy resolution, flag not my wings; Ple soare aloft, over the trunkes of Kings. Exeunt. Enter Pragmaticus. THus doe these Wolves consult, combine, To root out all that is Divine; The five States-men of Turnum-Green Now care not, though their Acts are seen; They vw for to kill CHARLES their Lord, And levell all men by the sword; And to themselves, they doe propose Another Leader should be chose; They will new mold both Church and State, Be to the People as their fate, And not looke Their strange confused Anarchee Erected; and on waxen wings: Soare 'bove all sublunary things, Th to effect, PETERS and DELL, Leacherous Jew, treacherous Infideli, Desired are to give their doome, And what shall of their King become; By Poison some, some by surprize Would have him fall each doth devise A way of death; yet while they stand Cosulting, he escaps their hand. O Treason of the worst Intent, Such as Ravillack never meant. Religion both sides do pretend, But either to a different end; They out of zeale would reare their owne, Those out of zeale would pull all downe; O blesse us from both, but yet compare Faux n the vault, these in the Chaire;
Though 'twas an unsuccessefull sin, Fixt those without, worse are within. (Exit Prag.) The end of the second Act. Actus Tertius. Enter ORIOTO, or LILLIE, with a Iacobs stafe, a Globe and Booke. Lil. IF we observe the middle time of this Eclipse or full Moone, shee defluxeth from the opposition of the Sunne, to the Conjunction of Saturne and immediately after to the opposition of Venus, and then to the opposition of Mercurie, who is the chiefe and domineering Plannet in the Eclipse:—here's no body—I laugh to thinke how queintly I deceive the credulous world, by making them believe strange things: they come to me is to some Oracle, to be resolv'd of doubts; and by my Soplustrie I so delude them, that they returne contented and admiring; and I that know not whether Ptolomy were man or horse, am counted Englands Arch-Astrologer; yet some esteem me but a jugling wizard, one made up of tautologies and barbarisme, and this all would confesse knew they my windings, how I deceived the rare and gallant Lady, Faire Arnabella Scroope, giving her to my friend John How of Lincolns-Inne: the story thus, The Gentleman ingratiates himselfe into the favour of this Lady, comes to me for advice, (and introth) craves some unlawfull helpes to gaine her; large promises hee made mee in case I brought his wish to passe, gave a round summe in hand, and since I knew my owne unablenesse (to compasse it by Art) I did resolve to act by pollicy, and to that end advised him to breake his minde unto some trustie friend, one whom he durst rely on, he to perswade the Lady Arnabella to come to me, to be resolv'd 'bout some horary question, and who should be her hus∣band (for at this time two gallant Lords were Suitors to her) this was ef∣fected, the young Lady comes to me as to some Prophet; I told her that she should not marry (for direfull plagues would follow) either of those young Lords, but another Gentleman, whom destinie and my skill poin∣ted at, of such a stature, haire and habited; and for her better satisfaction in the point, wisht her to go into Spring-Garden, and at the end of such a walke she should meet him ordained to be her husband, and if fhee married him, she should be the most fortunate woman in the world, if not the most happy under Heaven: Mr. How in the interim is very punctu∣all, and observed his directions to a haire, clad in the same habit which I
had bid him weare, meets the betrayed Lady, the appearance wherof so amazed and bewitched her, that even through feare of fighting 'gainst the starr, she yeelds to marry him, her fortune being no lesse then 2500 l. per annum, by this device I gain'd an hundred pieces but now a despe∣rate part I undertake, the Adjutators of five Regiments have sent to crave my skill, and doe desire I would by art resolve them, whether their Plots will thrive and take effect, as if I knew what fate attends on things; but I must please the fooles and speake them faire, tell them the motions of the Heavens foretell lucky events to all their undertakings, as in my Alminackes I use to say, when I cologue with them at West∣minster. Enter a Servant. Sir, sir here's a woman that has lost some goods, her maid is run away, and carried with her six silver spoones, a paire of holland sheets, with di∣vers napkins. Lil. Admit her, Would you good Woman, ought with me, Enter Woman, Wom. Yes Sir, somethings of mine are stolne, by whom your man inform'd you: I do desire Sir, that by art you'l tell where the wench is, that I may prosecute her, and here's a good Angell Sir to guard you. Lil. When were they lost? Wom. Yesternight Sir, about three a clock in the morning. Lil. Let me see the first Saturne, the second Mars, the third Mercu∣rie; Mercurie is a Thiefe; Woman, thy goods were stollen. Wom. O Lord Sir, yes indeed were they. Lil. What Countrey-woman was your Servant? Wom. Glamorganshire Sir, and a friend of mine that lately came from thence told me he met her on the way. Lil. Give me the Map of Brittaine, let mee see England, Scotland, Wales, Brecknockshire, Herefordshire, Glamorganshire,—I see her—I see her, she has a packe under her arme, my art tels mee Mistres shee's gone downe to her friends, there you may find her. Wom. I thanke you Sir, may Heaven increase your art. Exit Wom. Lil▪ Ha, ha, ha. Thus do I by my knavish art Get more, than he that acts an honest part. Exit. Enter Pragmaticus. THis is the slave hath wounded England more Then the Committees, sat at Goldsmihs hall; Then the Excise, ne're heard of before Then our State Sophies (and the Devill and all)
He still hath told (by guesse) the Rebels should In the end beate the Royall Party downe, And hath presumed to foretell (for Gold) That they should make a prize of Charles his Crowne. The Traytours, even ready for to sinke Like drowning men, tooke hold of his weake stay, And once againe recovered the brinke, And so escap't the Whirle-poole of decay. And now in triumph through the streets are borne, Trampling upon all those that Loyall are, And at poore Englands miseries do scorne, While King, and Peoples Lands they 'mongst them share. For them both Land and Seas are searcht, the Skies Cannot afford them foule enough (they make) All that is Englands Treasure, lawfull prize, Killing those that the least resistance make. For now with Lucifer, their raigne being short, They rage extreamely, and blaspheme gainst heaven: But now the Traytors want their chiefe support, Their props are all pul'd forth, their Rocke is riven. Exit. The end of the third Act. Actus Quartus. Enter the LEVELLERS, Apostacie, Conspiracie, Treacherie, Democracie, Impietie, JOHN OF LONDON, Regicide, Patricide, & cum nova partu. Apost. NOw to the point of the businesse; how doth our Printed Papers take? Con. As well as heart can thinke, the people swallow them amaine. Treach. But what meanes shall we use to draw the rest of the Army on our side? It will be hard for us alone to bring to passe our great design, without there be joint consent of all, we run a desperate hazzard. Rege. For that my Brother Patricide, and I have so well dealt, that the whole Army at next Rendevou, resolve for to declare for Anarchy, and live and dye with us.
Patri. For to depose their timerous Generall, who seemes to be a∣verse to such designes terming them wicked and to be abhorr'd Impiety. But here's our Noble John, whom wee'l elect to be our Captaine Generall to guide us through all difficult adventures and actions  to be atchieved. John▪ Wee'l cut our safety through their Coates of Steele, and write our Lawes (as Draco did) in bloud: I that have dar'd for to encounter death▪ when Leggs and Armes did quarrell in the Aire, shot off from mai  and hewed my passage through an host of Royallists, have been a  Traytour against my Prince, and stood as sole Antagonist  will lead you Gentlemen through all assaies, and make my way with fire and vinegar over the frozen Alpes of Highgate Hill, nor put my Armour off till I do strike my Sword on London-stone, and be proclaimed Lord of London. Demo. Thy resolution is magnanimous and worthy thy great selfe re∣nowned Hero, but yet let us joyne Policie with strength, and do our best to ring our Cohorts in, we are yet but an handfull if compar'd with those vast Legions that may joyne with us. Con. I shame to heare you run so rashly on without consideration, and sell the Foxes skin ere he is taken; know you not that King Charles doth live, he that sixe yeares maintained feirce War against us, and did His ut∣most to race out our names from under heaven, is He not now at Hamp∣ton-Court respected like a King, and yet in hope once more to graspe the Scepter? Trech. 'Tis true▪ and while he is we cannot be. Impi. He is the run unbiasses our Boules be the ground never so Levell, and while He breaths we are not sure of life. Con. Is there no one that dares put forth his hand, and gall His vitall thread? Regi. Yes, here stands one, that for his Nations good and for the pro∣mulgation of the Gospell dares hew downe that tall Cedar. John. Doo't Regicide, and be renowned for ever, Posterity shall so∣lemnize thy name in Songs unto the Timbrill, the Virgins of our Land shall decke thy head with Anadems of flowers, and thou fill up a Page in the Callender. Regi. Patricide and I will undertake to do it, yet will not act the blou∣dy deed our selves, our Ministeriall Coate prohibits that, but we will see it done. Con. What meanes shall we provide? Trech. I hold it best by poyson.
Ioh. He is too wary what he eateth, it must be by assault. Teh. Now I thinke on't, tomorrow he rides forth on hunting; about the time that he sts out Ile lay an ambush in some covert place, and with an hundred bold adven∣tros Blades, surprze his person, beare him thence to some place that's farre remote, there keep hm clogg'd with Irons, till we take order for his death. Regi. And yet meane time, if opportunity will aptly aid us wee'll save you so much laour. Ioh. Thanks to you all for your kinde choice of mee; now to your severall Regi∣ments, you knw tomorow is a busie day; and with the rest o' the Army you must meet , where I will be, but in a  manner, where if the rest joyne with us, Futra, for all our Foes; He make the House of Lords horse one another, while I doe lash their Buttocks, the Presbyters shall peepe through Pillories, and he that hath most money prove most miserable: Come on, and let's away, My soule doth long to see the dismall day. Exeunt Omaes. Enter PRAGMATICƲS. The cursed trap is laid, the oile is set That they intend to take the Lyon in; And thus one ill another doth beget, While they (make▪ knowne) that sin must thrive by sin; Thinke, what after may be tide And that sinne beares, a sharpe wp at her side. The Devill that at first, was wont to stirre The People up, to their owne woe and losse; To bring their Coine and Plate it, to raise warre, All Lawes both morrall and divine to crosse, Get into their Trustees, and forc'd them on To act a priviledg'd Rebellion. From them the Spirit went into the Traitors, That now had plotted for to kill their King, And told them it concerned Adjutators To LEVEL all, community to bring. And when he is cast out, where will he goe; There's none besides that can be tempted so. The end of the fourth Act. ACTVS QVINTVS. Enter JOHN Solus. JOHN. VVHat direfull Planet is't that thwarts my hopes? did I but know I'de seale Joves starry roofe, there seize upon't, and throw it down from thence, like Lucifer from Heaven. O my accursed Fate, this ominous day hath blasted all my hopes. Enter Aposiasie. Apost. Flye flye, all that we hop'd for quite is crost, even our owne are fallen from us, and proffer their submission. Enter Treachery. Treach. What make you here? Doe you not know Sir Thomas so hath wrought by mild and gentle Speechs, by his discreet and wise depotment, that not onely our owne protest against us, but doe acknowledge their revolt with teares Joh. Curse light upon, 'embase, unstable Grooms. Enter Conspiracy.
Con. This Rendevouze at Ware hath marr'd us all; the souldiers of our several Regi∣ments have pull'd their Protestations from their Hats, and doe excuse them to the Generall, as drawne away, by our pernicious Counsells. Enter Democra. Democ. The fate of Monarchy is not yet determin'd for a subversion, the King is fled away from Hmpton-Court, and our designes are frustrate. Iohn. What an harsh melody this Quire of Scritch-Owles make; Mischiefe findes many Messengers. Enter Impiety. Imp. With our owne Mines our Castles in the Aire are all blowne up. The Souldiers of our severall Regiments are once more all turned round, nothing is heard amongst them now, but protestations of obedience unto their noble Chiefe, Sir Thomas Fairfax. Enter Regicide & Patricide. Ioh. Here comes two Ravens more; what will they croak? Reg. The Heavens conspire against us; which way can wee looke, and not behold our ruine▪ Patri. Let Whirle-windes enter spngie hills, and beare them thick and threefold on our heads, untill we buried lye in deeper graves then those of old, that durst attempt the Heavens▪ I see the Almighties selfe with his Sword drawne, bearing his dreadfull Thunder in his hand, arm'd cap a pe with lightning, riding on the swift Windes, stands ready to defend CHARLES, and his CROWNE, against all Conspiracy a∣gainst him. Iohn. 'Tis vaine to strive against the Destinies, let each shift for himselfe. And let the world know this, that those which strive 'Gainst lawfull Kings, their Plots shll never thrive. Exeunt. Enter PRAGMATICUS. THus Traitors for a while may hope To bring their ends about, But in the ed embrace a ROPE, Or else are whooted out. Our dearest Lord, great CHARLES, doth live Us comfort yet to bring, And maugre those would him deprive, MUST Reigne, GREAT BRITAINS KING. Le Heaven showre upon his Head The blessings of the Day, And when his soule is thither fled, Grant that his Sonne may sway. Exit. FINIS.
