O1230 R181170 43078101 151619
AN OCCASIONAL DIALOGUE AT A COFFEE-HOƲSE, BETWEEN PHILANAX BRITANNICUS, AND CALOPHILUS ANGLUS, TWO LOYAL English Gentlemen, Sincere Lovers of JƲSTICE, TRƲTH, and their NATIONS HONOUR. Authore COFFO-PHILO. Printed in the Year, M.DC.LXVII.
An Occasional Dialogue at a COFFEE-HOUSE, between Philanax Britan∣nicus, and Calophilus Anglus, two Loyal English Gentlemen, Sincere Lovers of Truth, Justice, and their Nations Honour. Phil. MY old Friend Calophilus, I joy to see you, and to have this Opportunity of some Communi∣cation with you, concerning the present general Distem∣pers. Cal. My Noble friend, were we both employed in the Nations highest Concerns, and of greatest Abilities to discharge, with all resolute Integrity, our Trust, they are but weak Remedies that Humane Endeavours can apply to State-Maladies. The best Antidote I know to prevent the poyson of Common Injustice, and pro∣cure a blessing from Heaven, is, For those in Publick Authority, to improve, with all diligence, their power to redress particular Injuries, and relieve the oppressed from the Oppressor, and him that is too strong for him; which, in time, by Induction, will amount to a Catho∣lique cure, and therefore let us descend to more parti∣cular passages.
Phil. Dear Sir, the frequent Revolutions and Subversi∣ons of all Kingdoms and States in the Ʋniverse, upon de∣fection from the Rules of Justice, are sufficient demonstra∣tions of your Assertion, by that irrefragable argument of experience in all Ages; and since Generals do arise from ma∣ny Particulars, which are nearest to Sense, I commend your judgment; and the rather, that thereby you mind me of the promise you made, when we last met at the Coffee-house, that we should discourse the Affair of the Lord Gerard, and Carr, now on the Theatre; and I desire to un∣derstand what this Carr is, and what his Transactions have been; for, I only know him by the Lord Gerards Report. Cal. Sir, I thank you for your remembrance, and shall readily give what satisfaction I may, in relating the truth concerning Carr; and shall gladly receive from a per∣son of your Ingenuity, any further Information, in refe∣rence to the Transactions between the Lord Gerard and him; wherein, be assured, I shall affirm nothing on Carrs behalf, but what I am persuaded will be proved by Wit∣nesses: nor shall I utter any thing touching the Lord Gerard, but apparent Truths. Carr I have known near Twenty three years, when a Scholar at Westminster School, whence he was preferred to be Page to a per∣son of Honour, who intending to give him the educa∣tion of France, sent him thither; but Providence so disposed, that his Master dying, his Relict, the Lady, in∣grost the whole Estate, and, as yet, detains the Legacies given both to Carr, and others; whereupon, he ende∣vours for a Livelihood to learn a Trade; which pro∣ving not sutable to his Genius, he becomes a Sollicitor; and, at last, was sworn an Attorney of the Earl of South∣ampton's
Court of St. Giles; and was next employed by the Worshipful Company of Brewers, his good Ma∣sters: both which Employs, afforded him and his Fami∣ly a comfortable subsistence. And here I must mind you of one passage which Carr managed, much to the ho∣nour of the Brewers Company, and manifestation of his own Integrity: which was, That when General Monck declared in Scotland against the proceedings of Lambert, and the pretended Committee of Safety, the Brewers fin∣ding defect in the Laws of the Excise, there being in that juncture of time no Law for Collecting that duty, which that Loyal Company improves for the advantage of General Monck's design, calling a Common Hall, which consisted of near 226 Master-Brewers, whereof not Ten proved Disloyal; and there they resolved to pay no more Excise, until it were Established by Act of Parliament, then impossible. Whereupon, issues the severe Orders of Lambert's Army, for every Brewer to have Souldiers quartered upon him, so to compel them to pay the Excise; but they resolve to suffer all might be imposed by those Tyrants, rather than comply, or support them with money; the onely want whereof, proved the utter ruine of Lambert's Army; and caused their unexpected Retreat from New∣castle, and the adjacent quarters, They quartered close. where the Inhabitants were ready to cut their Throats in their Beds, for forcing Victuals and Fodder from them in such abundance, without any satis∣faction. But to return to the Brewers negotiation upon this design of Lamberts Army upon them; Sir Samuel Sterlyn of London, Sir William Green Baronet, of
Westminster, Emery Hill of Westminster, and John Breden Alderman of London, consulting with a few others of that Company, Pen'd and Printed a Paper, Intituled, Brick without Straw: And each Brewer, by frequent Arguments, prevailed with the Souldiers that quartered at their respective Houses, to stand for a Free Parliament. And then Mr. Carr, with the assistance of Sir Edmund Godfrey, Mr. Will. Carr went then Incognito, by the name of Morgan; yet had like to have been Trapan'd: and his bro∣ther Steph. Carr was constrain'd to abscond two Months. Sir William Green, Sir Samuel Sterlyn, Alderman Breden, and Emery Hill, did Print a Declaration for a Free Parlia∣ment, with 800 Inhabitants hands of Westminster to it; which Mr. Carr presented to the General up∣on the Road, as he came out of Scotland, though the then prevalent Powers did offer 100 l. to discover the Author of that Declaration. Phil. But Sir, I am yet to seek what this Carr is, and have heard, he was a Servant to Scott; by whose means, he procured the Clerks place of the Sewers for Westminster and Middlesex. Cal. To answer your desires, my Noble friend, I must tell you, I have heard of some of the Carrs of Ford-Castle in Northumberland (the best Family I know of that name in England) acknowledge him for their near Relation: And as to the story of his being Scotts man, to my knowledge it's a meer Fiction; for his acquain∣tance with Scott, was upon the score of his being Solli∣citor for the Brewers, and so necessitated to make ap∣plication to him, who was Chair-man of that Commit∣tee appointed to hear the Brewers grievances: But it's evident, that by Carrs sollicitation, Scott was prevailed
with to procure the release of some of the Kings faith∣ful Friends; by name, Sir Samuel Starlyn, Henry How∣ard of Barks, and Dame Mary Howard out of the Tow∣er: And many of the Loyal Party did employ Carr to get them discharged of Imprisonment; others, for Pas∣ses to go beyond Seas; which he performed with much care and uprightness, as the Earl of Ancrum, and others have certified. And it's remarkable, that Carr bestir'd himself with so much zeal for His Majesties happy Re∣stauration, that his Grace the Duke of Albemarte, that Father of his Countrey, Honour of his Nation, and Pattern of Loyalty, whom God hath signally blest in his greatest Undertakings, hath largely certified Carrs activity, and Loyal endevours in that Service; inso∣much, That he went with Sir Thomas Clarges to Breda, where first he became known to the Lord Gerard, as I am informed. Phil. My dear Friend, since you are pleased to wade so far in this Discourse, let me give you the trouble to satisfie me how Carr became Clerk of the Guard under the Lord Gerard; for I now perceive, he had better, and more safe Employments, than to rake after a Livelihood in a place of so much Temptation, Corruption and Hazard, under so harsh a Master; for (to speak ingeniously) we that have followed the Court, have had sad experience of his Lord∣ships passionate miscarriages; and do know, that no Ser∣vant did ever thrive under him, nor any Transaction pros∣per in his own management, witness the Welsh Affair; the ill success whereof, proved fatal to that Renowned Prince, His late Majesty of blessed Memory. To which I may add, That dangerous and prodigiously desperate Revolt at New∣ark, no less Enormity.
Cal. Pardon my interruption, for I think strange you say, that none of my Lords servants have enriched themselves, since their Employments are of so great a Trust; for I have heard say, That when William Lawes, a near servant of his Lordships, was kill'd at Chester, the Lord Gerard mist Ten thousand pounds in Jewels and Money! And that one Bedell, who left his Lord∣ships service, Cozened him of God knows not what, (and some say) nor his Lordship neither! Yet I find the same Bedell afterwards admitted into the Lord Ash∣ley Cooper's service, who gave him such Preferment, as became a generous Master to a faithful Servant; and it's reported, with like truth, That Carr went away from his Lordship with Twenty thousand pounds: And now I shall proceed, to give you an account of Carrs Seven years Apprentiship under the Lord Gerard, and the Guard. Sir, In that happy year of Englands Jubile 1660, Carr being at Breda, was presented to His Majesty, as one worthy of, and fit for Employ; at that time his Evil Star (as he usually calls it) directs him to the Lord Gerards knowledge, who, after two or three dayes time, desires Carr to present him with the Module of Cromwel's Guard, who had by him most of the Establishment of that Army; which he did, but the Rules did not alto∣gether please his Lordship: Yet Carr was presently em∣ployed at the Hague, to List a Life-guard to be Estab∣lished in England, at Ten shillings per diem each Guard∣man, as was then reported. And now Carr was prof∣fered a more proper Employment for him under the Lord Chancellor, whose counsel he hath often, since, wished he had followed; for his Lordship was pleased
to tell Carr, though then but a stranger, the Guards would never prove what the Lord Gerard said they would be, which many an undone younger Brother hath since found by woful experience: But the Lord Gerard told Carr he was a Fool to look for any other place, for that of the Guard should be a profitable Imploy; I presume his Lordship meant to himself, as by the sequel appears; for I have heard it will be proved, He exacts 2000 l. a year out of the Gentlemen over and above the just Pay belonging to his Lordship, which is converted into French Bees, Cloaths, and Kickshaws Alamode, and Carr bore all the blame, burden, and many curses to boot. Phil. I pray Sir, tell me how this Money was exacted unjustly? let me know the particulars. Cal. The Guard consisted for three quarters of a year of 800 Gentlemen, modestly counted, before there was any establishment, or put into Pay; at the establish∣ment, the 800 were reduced to 200, and here began Carr's misery; for those only were established, who could and did present, as Ben. Gostin, who gave a Jepan Trunk, and Cabinets, with other things, and lent the Lady Gerard 250 l. not yet paid, as I am credibly informed; And here it is necessary likewise that I give you a rellish of those that bought their places: John Parson the Brewers Son, for 100 l. was with great difficulty established; William Crowder for a Diamond Ring. Mr. Man for 50 l. Mr. Hill for 50 l. And Mr. Richard luellin for 200 l. was established a Titular Marshal by a Captain General of the Guards; And likewise there was Snape the Kings Farrier, who gave the sum of 80 l. to be a Titular Farrier to the Guard,
and poor Thomas Woodall, for all his Cabinet to the La∣dy, and his several Treats, was turned out, and his place sold for 250 l. to Nathaniel Hubbard; but every Gen∣tleman, whether Loyal or not, must pay 5 l. for his pre∣heminency and priviledge on a bit of Parchment, sub∣scribed Charles Gerard, with a large Coat of Arms to it, and a good peniworth too; for some paid 50 l. for the same Ticket, to serve for a Protection against a Ne exeat Regnum; as I. G. and Alderman Waynwright did, and more decayed Citizens, and others, still protected against the Law, though of Posthumus Priestmans grain. Phil. But, I pray you Sir, How can the Lord Gerard answer the keeping in of such young men, who never ser∣ved the King, but rather against Him? as John Lewin, who was Lockart's man at Dunkirk; and was turned away, for Cozening a Serving-man of Ten shillings, which was given for a Cheshire Cheese, presented to Lockart, as Sir Gilbert Gerard hath often told me, and many others. And Whitworth (a Pedlar that sold Tobacco up and down the Countrey) who bore Arms against his King in Sir George Booth's business; and whose father, was that fa∣mous Sequestrator, and seller of the Kings, and His Loyal Subjects Lands in Cheshire. Cal. Sir, I perceive you know these particular per∣sons, and passages; but the Reasons why they are con∣tinued, I shall leave to his Lordships discovery, who best knows those Mysteries: But, if you ask me, Why others, His Majesties Loyal Subjects, were turn'd out? It's said, by persons of Credit, That Richard Pastow, now Foot-Souldier in the Tower, was turn'd out, because he took a Papist Priest that had Ruined many Families. Major
Conquest, because no Boon-grace. Another, because he limped with the Wounds he received in His Majesties Service. And one, because he could, or would not wear a Perriwig. And another, because he could not sit a Horse, being a Justee. One, because a Damn'd English Clown. Another, for not having Shoppo Cord∣beck. And some, for being Superannueted; as Sir Horatio Cary, Colonel Pritty, and Mr. Gilmore, whom Sir Philip Howard received afterwards into his Troop, to his Honour, as young enough to perform Duty, being recommended to him by the charitable Gallantry of the Renowned General. Phil. But, Sir, Is it true what is hinted, That the Lord Gerard should reap Profits out of the Souldiers Belts, Hooses and Feathers? Cal. All I can say to that Sir, is, That I will deliver nothing concerning the Lord Gerard upon common Fame, which proves often true; nor will I suffer my Judgment to be swayed by Vox Populi, though reputed Vox Dei; but will present you with some particulars herein: As, first, Gladwin the Belt-maker of the New Exchange, gave his Lordship 50 l. out of the Belts: And Mr. Walters the Sadler, gave 100 l. out of the Hooses: And out of the Feathers which came from France for the Guard, his Lordship got largely; besides 20 l. for his man Dickett, who went over to buy them, and his Lordships French Gallantry for his Equip at the Coro∣nation. And here I must take the liberty to give you some particular Instances, in Answer to a former Questi∣on of yours, which was, How his Lordship could raise his Exactions personally upon the Gentlemen of the Guard? First, Mr. Francis Cornwell had 14 Months pay
drawn from him at twice. John Bryers once, four Months, and another time two Months pay. Colonel Pritty, and Major Cooper, each a Musters pay deducted from them. Mr. Edward Thornebrough, five Months pay, because he fought with Richard Hallins; and Hallins, four Months pay, for fighting with Thornebrough. Mr. Read, because he did not fight, nine Months pay. And Mr. William because he would not fight, had six Months pay substracted from him; and so fight, or not fight, this Plow must go: Nay, out of the very Horses feeding at the Guard, there must be a dark Lanthorn agreement for some petty gain, which William Barker can very well tell, and hath confest the hardship recei∣ved from—But this is not all, his Lordships Agents, me∣nial Servants, and Witnesses, made use of upon what hard terms, God and his Lordship best knows, must be gratified with some By-profits, and Pay, to the King and Subjects cost: viz. famous Thomas Colt, my Lords old servant and Gentleman of the Horse, must have 50 l. to put in Miles Michell; his Agent Mr. Dobson must be con∣stantly in Pay, but never at Duty: both the Hollinsheads, though living in Lancashire and Cheshire, Mr. Whitworth, Mr. Dickett, with other his Lordships servants, who have no Wages, but constant Guards-pay. All this is over and above the 2000 l. per Annum exacted, as before; and many a Boon Jour for my Lady. And here I must reflect with much reluctancy upon that great mischief and disgrace hath befallen the poor Gentlemen of the Guard, by stopping altogether, or delaying their Pay; for when at their friends costs equipt out for the Guard, Riding so long without Pay, some, to supply their pre∣sent pressing necessities, have been put to shameful shifts;
others, to Rob on the High-way, for which some of them have been hanged, as Mr. Atkinson, and Mr. Cot∣ter: Others, condemned, as W. S. H. B. and I. O. who got Pardons. Phil. My worthy friend, you strike me with astonish∣ment to think that this should be so, which must of neces∣sity come to pass, by the grand abuse and strange mis∣management of His Majesties Pay, which (to my own knowledge) is the most, and most ready Pay in the World; and is therefore the fitter for young Gentlemen of good Fa∣milies to give them a competent subsistence, and honourable Military education, and such chiefly ought to be admitted into the Guards. Cal. Now Sir you mind me of another great dispa∣ragement put upon the Guard, for quite contrary to what you say, persons of meanest Birth, and sordid Conversation, and Citizens that have Out-lived their Estates and Esteems, are entertained in the Guard for their Money, and there protected against the Laws of this Kingdom, and their Creditors just and due De∣mands; which sometimes tends to the Ruine of the Creditors; if not so, yet they are commonly exposed to a great deal of trouble and loss; I could instance in Alderman Waynwright, and several others. But I must break off this Discourse for a little while, my dear friend, because I have a mind to a Pipe of Tobacco, and a Dish of Coffee, and then we will discourse further. Phil. Well Sir, now since your Pipe is out, and you have taken your Dish, I would desire you to satisfie me in one thing, which I shall propose to you, Whether or no Carr was not Jack in many Offices under the Lord Gerard, beside Clerk of the Guard?
Cal. Yes Sir, Mr. Carr I well know, did often sollicit the Lord Gerards other Affairs to his cost, and lent, and procured Money for him, when none else would, or could: 200 l. he lent his Lordship when he came first for England, yet unpaid; and I am sure the Lady often borrowed Money of Mr. Carr, sometimes on her Jew∣els, which her Ladiship once pawned at Mr. Carrs house, and soon after desired to borrow them for a Dancing night; but the Jewels cut such a Caper, that Carr never saw them, nor his Money to this day, but was forced to take her Ladiships Bill for payment Alamode, and is yet out of his Money, which is No boone English fashion. And one passage more I know certainly, That Carr having a House in Covent-garden, which he Lett to Sir John Tal∣bott for 100 l. Fine, and certain Rent, whereof he received a piece of old Gold in earnest; but was, by the Lord Gerards imperious importunity, compelled to be unjust, and break his promise with Sir John Talbott, whose fa∣vour, and friendship, thereby he lost, and Money to boot: For when the Lord Gerard got interest in the house, he sold the Lease thereof for 500 l. profit, to Sir Thomas Draper. Phil. I am exceedingly perplexed, my most faithful Friend, to hear what you assert concerning the Lord Gerard, and make so clearly out; and was alwayes afraid, that a man of his Lordships temper, should be employed in such high Trusts, which by his Ambition and Covetousness, might be perverted to the Disservice of the Nation, and Disobliging the Subject, and especially the Loyal Military Gentlemen, by his indecorous Austerity; for the Rules of general Reason never lose their force when put in practice; Vis non corrigit sed irritat, non coercit, sed provocat
violentia: But Sir, though Recrimination is no defence, I hear Carr much blamed concerning the Military Ground taken from that Corporation. Cal. Concerning that, Carr doth publickly Aver, That the Lord Gerard onely purchasing a Lease from Haines, Wilcocke, and others, Terre-Tenants to that Company; which though now expired, under colour thereof, his Lordship hath pluckt down, and altered much of that Free-hold, destroyed the Library, and imbezeled the Goods belonging to the Company; and though Carr at that instant might be somewhat subser∣vient to his Lordships impetuous Commands, and there∣by (undeservedly) lost much of his Neighbors love; he both will, and can assist the Company in regaining their Estates: to which, he openly declares, he will contribute his utmost endeavours, which I conceive is all the satisfaction can be desired in that particular: And truly Sir, I am both ashamed, and grieved to hear what is reported concerning the Lord Gerard's manage∣ment of the business of Enfield Chase, for your further satisfaction, wherein I shall refer you to your honourable Friend the Earl of Salisbury, and to my good acquain∣tance, old Norris, Bats and Barter, turn'd out by his Lordship, though great Sufferers for their Loyalty; and the Neighbours about the Chase, take little felicity in his Lordships Vicinity; and Barnet, with the adjacent Towns, complain heavily, That his Lordships Steward is the worst Pay-master that ever came into a Countrey, which is Alamode, ex Domini moribus. And to give you a touch of other harsh dealings, Hargrues case was very hard, who, for that two French men quarrelled in his House, because they would not pay their Reckoning,
was Imprisoned, and for a long time in much trouble, and his House threatned to be burned, and the poor Man to be thrown out of his own Window; to which I shall add, the too well known Sufferings of Mr. John Wright, a Common-Council Man of London, and of that worthy Citizen Mr. John Cade, it would be over tedious to tell you all. I have credibly heard of his Lordships cruelties, by the particular persons unque∣stionable affirmation, as one Avery a Coach-maker, living at Charing-Cross, for asking money that was due to him, his Lordship gallantly broke his staff about his Head, and after that drew his Sword: likewise one Howard a Mercer at the Hen and Chickens, sending his Partner to demand the money that was owing them by the Lord Gerard, his Lordship did box and beat the poor Fellow up and down the Chamber in White-Hall, a place very ill becoming such Injuries. Next a Smith at St. Martins Lane end, for only affronting his Lord∣ships Foot-man, and a Meal-man his Neighbour, only for taking the Smiths part, were both of them clapt into the Messengers custody, and it cost them dearly to be released, and admitted to begg his Lordships pardon; And Col. Streeter, for barely requesting his Lordships compassion, and mediating for a Release for the two poor Citizens that were imprisoned about Grangers Bible, his Lordship swore that he would cut Streeters Throat, and burn Cade and Wright's Houses, And were it not for the Law, (swearing a great Oath) He would Burn the City; And Dr. Gardner tells a more fearful story, which he attended at the House of Commons door to relate, but was not called upon.
Phil. Sir, not to interrupt you, I got cold last Night, and would willingly drink a Dish of Lac't Coffee, or Chocolet, and so I would have you too, for methinks you speak some∣what hoarse; they say, that either of them are good for a cold: But to our present Discourse, Did you hear of Carrs Testimony in the House of Commons in Fitton's cause, or can you give me any account thereof? Cal. I have just cause to know, that what Mr. Carr delivered before that Honourable Assembly in that Af∣fair, was truth; and especially concerning the Witnes∣ses produced by his Lordship to support Grangers testi∣mony for him: And here I must a little stir the Dung∣hil, and discover somewhat of the whole pack of my Lords Witnesses, &c. Granger is so notoriously known, as to save me a labour; I therefore begin with Post. Priestman, almost as remarkable amongst the Attornies of the Common-pleas, but better by the Lord Camden, and Gentry about Stamford, whereof he betrayed at one time 100 to Cromwell, of which number, about 22 were put to death thereupon. Another was Holland Simpson, who carried a Halbert on the Scaffold that fa∣tal 30th of January, when that horrid Tragedy was acted, which I tremble to mention; to add to his other perfections, he was a notorious Newgate bird; and to save his Craick, became Thief-taker. Next to him, is Peter Gifford, a Renegado Benedictive Monk, too well acquainted at Newgate, Bridewell, and most of the Pri∣sons in London; who, to be quit of a Prison, became Priest, and Thief-taker. Then follows a pair of fa∣mous Gaolers, Hugh Rowe, and Bayley, Keepers of the Gate-house, both dead since they confessed their Perjury against that great Sufferer Mr. Fitton, with very much
reluctancy, before several Neighbours, and to Carr in particular; and have left behind them a black me∣morial of their Pranks: As Avery, Adams, and Cotton, the present Keepers of Newgate can, and do relate: And amongst the rest, Honourable Col. Ashton, for∣sooth, whose Wife was condemned for a Shop-lifter in 1664, and for company sake the Lord Gerard's near Kinsman was Executed for the same Crime, and his Lordships Brothers Son was then in Graves-end Goal, for venting false Coin, who was therefore sent to Bom∣bay with Sir Jervace Luvas; Next, one Wheeler, Granger's man, who had his red coat taken off, that being a foot Soldier, he might not appear in his proper colours; and had a new Sute bought him, that he might appear in his painted feather, a witness of more preva∣lency than desert; And then comes in another naked Gentleman, who had a Plush coat, which was borrow∣ed purposely for him to wear, upon the day of the Tryal betwixt the Lord Gerard, and Mr. Fitton, the better to face out his Testimony; And Sir, I have breifly now hinted unto you what a blessed crew, and upon what virtuous ties of friendship were mustered up, and combined together, to Swear out of doors the Justice of the Nation, and an Ancient, well de∣serving Family out of their Right, and undoubted Inheritance; And although this may seem somewhat Satyrical; Yet, (Noble Friend) know, that nothing but my great love to Justice, and the great power of Truth exhorts me to give this relation, for to my own knowledge Carr was imployed by, &c. to save Aston's Wife, and the other, &c. And also to get young Gerard out of Prison, in all which businesses he disbursed
moneys, and is yet unpaid, except it be with the false Coin of hateful ingratitude, for his Lordship is pleased to cast all the groundless aspersions that malice can rake up, upon Carr, to blacken his Reputation: But the World laughs to think that his Lordship never disco∣vered Carr, whether true or false, Loyal or a Rogue, whilst he carryed on his Lordips Interest: O this dumb and insensible god, Money! Phil. True Sir, I have heard it reported by persons of good repute, that Carr had great credit and respect, amongst many worthy and wealthy Citizens, and so was able to serve his Lordship. Cal. I Sir, but Carr almost lost that credit, by be∣ing looked upon as one that had a finger in the Pie, when Wright and Cade before named, suffered Impri∣sonment, and were so malitiously persecuted, only for being Witnesses to the Recantation of such an horrid Perjury as Granger's was; But Carr sufficiently purged himself of that supposed Crime, for all men now do know clearly it was Dobson, Preistman, and Whitworth that prosecuted that severely, and had the moneys wrested from the poor Citizens, to gain their Liberty: yet it cost Mr. Carr dearly, for the Citizens highly resenting the injury done to their good Neighbours, by Imprisonment, &c. it made them suddenly call in their Credits in all places where Carr owed money, in one Goldsmiths Shop 9000 l. and to Carr's very great de∣triment, it cost him at once 350 l. to borrow money at several places to pay off other Citizens.
Phil. But Sir, Why did not Carr, knowing the Lord Gerard, and being so sensible of his own trouble∣some life under him, quit himself sooner of that Imploy∣ment? Cal. Sir, It's certain Carr hath endeavoured it these three years, but the Lord Gerard had so fast wedged him in, by the Ingagement of Moneys for his Lord∣ship, and Relations; That he could not get off but to his utter Ruine: my Lord having often openly vowed, He would destroy Carr if he left his Imploy∣ment: and therefore his Lordship, and Lady kept themselves constantly indebted in great sums of money unto Carr, as I have formerly related. Phil. But how at last came Carr to desert the Lord Gerard at Portsmouth? Cal. I have been faithfully informed it was upon this occasion, That Carr presenting his Lordship with an Accompt of what his Lordship was undeniably in∣debted unto him, whereof his Lordshiy took such no∣tice that great sums thereby became due and payable to Carr: to whom he thereupon declared, that unless Carr would allow his Lordship above 2000 l. more than had been really exacted out of the Pay of the Troop, he would neither account with Carr, nor pay him a penny; and then in a minacing manner, tells Carr he was a General, and that he could Hang, and Draw, without being questioned: insomuch, that Carr being so well acquainted with his Lordships natural disposi∣tion, choller and carriage to others, was advised for some time to withdraw himself, yet sent the Accompt by his Brother Mr. Stephen Carr: Whereupon his Lordship presently sent Soldiers into Carr's House,
who rifled his Closets, took away all his Books, and Files of Acquittances, and Writings belonging to others, and stole from, and robbed Carr of Goods to the value of 200 l. (viz.) Tapistry Hangings, a Wrought Bed, Linnen, and the very Childrens cloaths: did frighten his Wife and Children, by entring his House at mid∣night, and kept a Guard there for Fifteen Weeks to∣gether, burning his coals and candles; and if his Wife would not give it to them, the Troopers swore they would burn the Chairs and Stools; and many nights drawing their Swords, attempted to force themselves into the Rooms, where Carr's Maid-Servants lodged; Things not heard of before in English ground in time of Peace, and which the learned in the Law conceive the greatest breach of Magna Charta, and other the good and wholsom Laws of this Land, for the better countenance whereof, his Lordships wisdom came often to visit and confer with his Soldiers in Naboth's Vine∣yard, threatning Carr's Wife, that if she did not deliver up every bit of Paper belonging to her Husband, He would burn her House, and clap her into Prison during life. Phil. O what a happiness have we in England, to live under such a Government, and Laws, to curb the surge of such Bashaws! But I pray you proceed. Cal. Then Sir, Carr writes a letter to the General, to desire his Pass, and Protection to come and charge the Lord Gerard, and acquit himself, as an honest, and faithful man in his Imployment; And His Grace accordingly desired his Lordships consent thereunto:
But his Lordship would (by no means) be induced, that Carr should be permitted to come and clear him∣self; but to prevent his coming over, sent Orders to his Lordships Correspondents in France, Holland and Flanders, to clap up Carr prisoner for 20000 l. but Carr escaped that Train, finding better men his friends there, than his Lordship, by whom were many old Remains in those Parts left unpaid: And when Carr, upon good advice, came over to vindicate his Reputation, his Lord∣ship hearing of his being amongst his friends in London, consults with his old Achitophels to practise on Carr, as he had done formerly on others; and his Lordship was persuaded by his learned Council in the Law to decline such courses, as (by the following Discourse) you shall understand he did take. First, his Lordship Indicts Carr for Felony, in running from his Colours. Then for three Forgeries, and for Cheats. Mr. Carr abides the Tryals, and the Indictments proved so ridi∣culous, they were hissed out of Court. When that would not take, his Lordship employs his Blood∣hound, I mean the titular Marshal Lewellin, and other Emissaries, to search for Carr; whom, when they found, they haled out of a civil Merchants house in Bishops∣gate-street, took his Brother prisoner, and Ransack't the Chambers, supposing they had been the second time dis∣obliging Wales. Phil. These are very strange passages, and I am glad we are not at the publick Table, in regard we can be the more free one to another; Is not Lewin that you nam'd, the bro∣ken Exchange man, that Cozened all his Creditors, was Im∣prison'd in Flanders for a Quoyner, and should have been boyled in Oyl?
Cal. Yes Sir, by this Pipe that I have in my hand, the very same pitiful Wretch, who to please his two Ma∣sters that set him on work, the Lord Gerard and — Sacrilegiously entred the Abby at Westminster, with a pack of such Fellows as himself, and there seized upon Carr, tore his Band, Cloak, and stole his Perriwig, and by that means prevented Carrs delivering his Petition to the Parliament that day. Nay, Sir, the Lord Gerard made the Troopers of the Guard, so many Catch-poles, to arrest Carr, honourable Services indeed for the Guard to be employ'd. And here be pleased, to observe with me the justice of the Officers of the Abby Church, who suffered Carr to be pluck't from the very Horns of the Altar; and to be Robbed, and Wounded to boot; and because the Lord Gerard was concern'd, never as much as inquired after the Offenders: But if a poor Woman carry as much as a burden of Meal through the Church, or wear Pattins there, they shall be punished and mul∣cted. I must make a Digression, This Coffee and To∣bacco makes me a dry, I care not if the Boy bring a Bot∣tle of Syder. Phil. Agreed, with all my heart Sir; and, I wish Carr were here to participate of it; for, I am inform'd, he is well belov'd amongst Merchants and Citizens, and Men of good Credit and Repute; and is almost every day at Change, keeping up his Credit highly, notwithstanding his late Af∣flictions. Now your thirst is quench't, I pray tell me what became of him, after he was seized upon by Lewellin, that Miscreant, who offered such violence in the Church, for I fear they had a Design to murder him? And, truly Sir; Who knows what the Devil might have tempted them to? By the Law, they ought to have their right hands cut off, for as∣saulting in the Church.
Cal. I am pretty well refresht with this Syder, and therefore shall answer your request, as to what became of Carr afterward. His Lordship having Carr in limbo, discovers a degenerous, and ignoble cruelty (that Soul∣destroying Malady) to a vanquish'd (as he thought) Adversary, and Carr and his Brother are hurried to the Generals Guard, as if Malefactors; but neither His Ma∣jesty nor the General did meddle in the Affair; the Lord Gerard first sends Carrs Brother, without Law, or Warrant, Prisoner to the Marshals house; then sends Carr (after he was kept on the Guard until 8 at night) to the Lord Chief Justice Keeling's chamber, with Bea∣dles, and Major Bings, with a Life-guard, for fear Carr should be rescued (a dread his Lordship might easily rid himself of) foreboding, with great joy, that Carr should be immediately sent to Newgate, the Metropoli∣tan Gaol: But, that Righteous Judge above, who di∣rects the Judges on earth, order'd it otherwise: For the truly Loyal Lord Chief Justice, observing prudently, the great and groundless Envy and Malice of that pro∣secution, took poor Carrs own engagement for that Night, and discharged the Major, and his Watchmen, then at leisure to go and tell his swollen and angry Lordship, That Carr was as free a man as himself; which you may be certain was ill-pleasing News to my Lord. Whereat his Lordship being throughly alarm'd, posts, with his nimble Agents, Dobson, Posthumus Priestman, and Whitworth, to the Lord Chief Justices chamber, to prevent (if they could possible) Carrs being Bailed, but to no purpose, for, it pleased God, that he was too many for them; his Lordships Grandeur and Huffing, could not any ways prevail against the Nations Justice.
