P1148 E593_10 99865989 118248
A VVORD FOR THE COMMON VVEALE TENDING Towards the Begetting and Continuing, a right Vnderstanding and good Opinion betweene the PARLIAMENT and the PEOPLE. AND Towards the laying a firme foundation of constant Peace and good will towards each other. By Isaac Penington, Esquire. O how pleasant and profitable might a new kind of Warre be (after this bitter old-fashioned one) between Parliament and People, if each would contest by stratagems of love tendernesse, sweetnesse, and righteousnesse, to conquer the hearts of each other, wherein both their strengths lie, more then in any outward visible force or power, that either can lay hold on. LONDON, Printed by Charles Sumptner Anno Dom. 1650.
To the PRESENT PARLIAMENT MIserable must the state of this Creation needs be, while calamities are daily growing on every part of it, and the remedies desired and sought for, to redresse them, are so far from true and sound curing, that they also come to be rec∣koned among the number of calamities. This Nation was very sick; a Parliament much desired to cure it, many hopes and expectations fastened upon their endea∣vours, but now most men are grown sick both of the Phisitian and the cure. How farre there is just occasion hereof given concerns you neerly to consider, who are not to mind your own wills or ends, but the desires and welfares of those who have entrusted you: How farre there is unjust offence taken, behoves them throughly to scan who are severe Judges of your actions, lest they them∣selves prove guilty of that towards you which they charge you with, and obstruct you in the prosecution of that, which if once effected, might be both for their owne and others good.
It is no delight to me to open my mouth against any much lesse against those who should deserve, and have honour. I could please my selfe rather in apologizing for; then in accusing, though generally I find the state of man to be such, that much may be said against him little for him. But I may not use many words; There are only two conside∣rations I would at present propose to your view, the one where∣of is of somewhat a large nature the other referres to your late e∣rected Government. That which referres to your Government is this. Yee have made a change in the forme of Government, putting a new image and superscription upon it, which is like to be of great concernment one way or other, but which way it will be, is yet somewhat doubtfull; and it may not be unworthy of you, to bethink your selves, what security ye can give the people (who cannot but desire it) that this new mold of Government shall not be found as burdensome and oppressive to them as the foregoe∣ing was complained to be. If ye can demonstrate that it is more capable of bounds, and that yee also are more carefull to provide due bounds for it, this may yeeld some satisfaction to that reason which makes the en∣quiry: But if ye lay the stresse upon the goodnesse of the Per∣sons ye employ, this may neither prove so satisfactory at present, nor so safe for the future, as some perhaps expect it should and will. The other relates to afear which hath laine long upon my spi∣rit concerning some things which to my observation seemed like∣ly to eat out the benefit of this present Parliament, and to swallow up its credit with the people. The things I have been jealous of in this respect are chiefly these three. Multitude of affairs, Prolixity in your motions, and want of an orderly Government of your owne body, which may oc∣casion both the former: want of a right rule to square and order
your selves in your proceedings may easily draw many things upon you which might be better managed by other hands, and may likewise retard your dispatch in what yee set about. Yee have fallen into that calamity which Iethro forewarned Moses of, namely of tiring out both your selves and the People: ye complaine of your work, and they still complaine of their bur∣dens: your work still growes upon you and their burdens still lie upon them: the cost, the attendance the seeking, the waiting for releife will eat out the sweetnesse of it, if it should come at last. How can the People be pleased, while things are thus? How can ye be pleased with your selves while yee act thus? How can it but peirce your Eares and hearts to heare Persons groane and complaine under those afflictions, which your consciences cannot but tell you, yee ought to ease them of? Give me leave to speak plainly, I cannot but think that if yee had been in a right way, your work had beene done long before now; but in the way ye have been in, and (as farre as I can see) yet are in, there appeares no likely-hood of a desired end. How long will it be ere yee can come to particular businesses? how long must yee needs be in dispatching them? And how fast will both they, and more publique businesse grow upon you? I leave these things to your consideration, longing to see the time that the people may have just cause to be satisfied with your transactions, and that they may be satisfied with that cause. This is the present (though faint) desire of him who would rejoyce to serve you or his Countrey in such a way, as he might be free from any snare or temptation to serve himselfe. ISAAC PENNINGTON.
To the People of this rent and tattered NATION. Deare Country-men, IF my well-wishes towards you might take effect, yee should soon be happy: if I might but have my will, there should neither will nor power be left any where to hurt you. I de∣light not to see cause of complaining, or to heare complaints, whether justly or unjustly uttered: joy, peace, rest, content within in euery spirit, and good will towards all abroad, would make the prospect of affaires somewhat more pleasant to me, then as yet it is. We are now entangled in miserie: after all our running from it we are become involved in it. We can neither endure our sicknesse nor our cure. We are so divided into parties, that the whole is only liable to ruine, but cannot be saved. one sort cannot be pleased unless an other be crushed. Our de∣sires hopes, endeavours ends, are various and contrary, and so are our welfares; so that which way so ever you turne the scale a considerable part sinkes, groanes, and complaines of oppression & hardship which it suffers by the ease and exalta∣tion of other parts [What is there no common good wherein I and others may meet? can I not be happy unless I sit on a throne and others lie as slaves underneath me? must my rea∣son be euery ones rule, or I become their enemy? surely me∣thinks both that variety and contrariety that is amongst us, might be better ordered: true wisdome could so dispose of it, as it should no longer thus harshly jarre, but make up a sweet harmony. But this is the great unrighteousnesse in man, he thinks himselfe can never be dealt gently enough with but he would have force used towards others; he may be led by reason, but
others that dissent from his reason, are obstinate, and necessi∣ty requires the use of compulsion towards such: and oh how just is it, that every man, in his turne and season, should meet with that force, with that oppression, which he in his desire reason, and judgement, hath measured out to others? Thou complainest of unrighteousnesse abroad, but how little dost thou think of that root of unrighteousnesse that is in thy self which if it had the same dunging & watering in thee, as it hath in others would soon be as fertile if not more, yea doth already beare too much fruit in thee? Tell me truly, Art not thou unrighteous in judging o∣thers for unrighteousnesse? art not thou unwilling to give them their due allowances, to heare what might be spoken in their just defence? dost thou not deale thus with the present powers? wouldst thou be content to be dealt so with, if thou wert in their stead? Art not thou too forward to accuse, to prosecute, to condemn, but to backward to entertaine what may be spoken by way of justification or excuse? Thou per∣haps expectest to see the judgement of God overtake them for their unrighteousnesse, and dost thou think to escape judgement thy self, who judgest them so unrighteously? How canst thou expect God should make them just towards thee in their actings when thou art so unjust towards them in thy interpretation of their actings? Oh how vaine is man become, sowing the seeds of misery to himselfe and others, and yet complaining if hee misse of happinesse: every man desires happinesse, and thinks the way he walks in leads to it, and wonders if he meet not with it so soon as his expectations perswade him he shall, & is rea∣dy to blame others for the protraction or diversion of that good he expected: but little do's man think when he reaps misery, that it was wrapt up and lay hid in that seed which he himselfe did sow! what will be the issue of these things? Me thinks I see man undermining himselfe, and a power
bove him, wearying him out of his old sanctuary, under which he hath still been sheltring himselfe, which is, the honesty the integrity of his own heart, which when it is opened he will find to be some other geuss thing▪ then he took it for; and then he will become more shie of justifying himselfe, and condem∣ning others, then hitherto he hath been. A thorough sight of the strength and power of that within in himself, whereof it is but some appearances abroad in others that he is so feirce and vehement against, will quickly silence him, & make him ten∣der towards others for his own sake; and yet when he is brought to his low ebbe, he may be nearer that happinesse he longs for, then he is aware of: which that we may all meet with, after all these calamities and miseries, which we have felt, and still feare, is the desire of him, who would faine be∣come love to all, and enjoy love in all. ISAAC PENNINGTON.
A VVORD FOR THE COMMON VVEALE TENDING Towards the Begetting and Continuing, a right Vnderstanding and good Opinion betweene the PARLIAMENT and the PEOPLE. I Suppose it cannot be unknown to any, who have taken the least notice of the late transactions in this shattered Nation, what a sharp and bitter conflict there hath been in the bowells of it, for the recovery of those rights and liberties, which were bleeding to death, and had almost given up the Ghost. And it concerns every one; after all this cost and travaile, through so ma∣ny stormes and tempests, to contribute his utmost vigilance and industry, for bringing the ship with its burden into a safe Har∣bour, that every one may at length be fully possess'd of that, which he hath run through so many hazards and difficulties to attaine. This lies much upon all, though most upon those who have most power and advantages in their hands to effect it. That which will accomplish all, is a righteous administra∣tion of Government; whereby our rights and priviledges are both
preserved and increased, where need is; and whatsoever any man in reason can desire, this will supply him with. For the effecting of this, these three things are requisite. Good Lawes, proper hands duly to execute them, and an exact Rule or way, whereby those hands may be guided unto a due and speedy execution of those Lawes. The Lawes are the proper bounds of right and liberty, where∣by every man is determined what he shall enjoy for his owne particular, and what he shall be engaged to act for the publick welfare. These must be certaine and suited to the state of the Na∣tion, else there is a foundation of injustice, slavery, and misery laid at the bottome of all, which it will be very hard to build righteousnesse and liberty upon. And these Lawes should be cleare and easy to be known, else any man may easily be prone to run into dangers unawares, or to misse of that remedy which is by the Law provided for him, in case of injury done him: for want of this, Lawes may easily become snares to them whom they should preserve from being insnared, and advantages to the crafty to perplex and crush the more simple and plaine-hearted, whom they should be a fence to, against the crafty. Execution is the life of the Law. It is not the Law barely that affrights or encourages, but the execution of it: and our de∣fect and complaint hath been more concerning the Non-execu∣tion of the Lawes we had, then of the Non-addition of the Lawes we wanted. Therefore so soon as we are fitted with lawes, it is in the next place to be throughly weighed what hands are most fit and pro∣per for the due and faithfull execution of these lawes, without which, the framing of the best lawes that can be imagined, is to little purpose. Now that which will make the execution most certaine, is a cleere Rule prescribed to them who are to execute, whereby they may be rightly guided in the administration, and left, as little as may be, to determine or order things according to their
owne present apprehensions and judgements, lest at that back∣dore, arbitrary Government (which is the foundation of Ty∣ranny) on a sudden creep in. This would be carefully look'd to at the beginning, while things are in constitution, and may more easily be molded, then afie: things are setled. For how can it be expected, but man who hath the same corruption in him with others to draw him aside, temptations above others unto it, and advantages of security be∣yond others (as authority, power and greatnesse do alwayes af∣ford) I say how can it be expected, but man in this state should step out of the way, unlesse he have firme and fixed bounds to keep him in his proper compasse. Surely the people are bound, in respect to their own safty, and the good of those they employ in so great a matter as government is, not only to provide good lawes for themselves to be governed by but also due bounds for them to keepe within, who are to act in the execution of the Lawes. And it may be worthy the consideration, whether the late King were sufficiently furnished in this respect and if he were left too much to his owne liberty, and thereby somewhat occasioned to miscarry, what may free us from this danger for the future. There is no such great matter in the change of Government, as many conceive (who peirce not into the true causes of things, but are ready to fly out upon that which stands most in their eye) every Government having its advantage as well as its disad∣vantage; but the goodnesse and safety of every government lyes in that well ordering and well bounding of it for speedy and due administration of the Lawes. And upon this ground it seemeth to me improper for Parlia∣ments to intermeddle with matters of Government, further then to settle it in fit hands, and within just bounds: because they are entrusted with an arbitrary power, which is absolutely necessary to the work whereunto they are called; they are to redresse things at present for which there is as yet no Law, and to provide future
remedies for things amisse, which the Law did not foresee. Now this is exceeding usefull to the People, and necessary for the People in such cases; but if this power shall be drawne out into acts of Government; so far as it is so drawne out, the people are governed arbitrarily by an Arbitrary power, which power the people did put into their hands, not to make use of to this end, but to enable them to prevent in any whatsoever. The power they are intrusted with, is an extraordinary power for extraordinary ends and purposes, to which safely and swiftly applyed, it will produce excellent effects; but if extended too far, and to cases for which it was not appointed nor is proper, it will prove as great a mischeife as it was hoped to be a remedy; for the greatest power being misapplyed, having nothing to check it▪ must needs be the greatest oppression. A Parliament may far more easily err in Government, then a King or ordinary Councel; for they have, or should have their rule to act by; but a Parliament act, by meere supremacy, by power paramount, and from their determinations, there is no orderly appeale: what they do but Vote is so, or shall be so, they ex∣pect the people are bound to stand to; therefore if they keep not within a cleare circumference, within the bounds of cleare rea∣son and justice, they do unadvoidably make the people slaves. Remedies of this nature should be very warily used, and very carefully applyed to the disease; for as the advantage is great in the right and skilfull application, so the danger is as great in the misapplication. Now since I have thus lighted upon so needfull a subject, wherewith my mind hath been long full; both for mine owne ease, and for publique benefit, I intend to vent my selfe a little further about it. The safety of the People lies in government, for whose wel∣fare it was erected. The safety of Government consists much in the limits set unto it, and the strict observation of those limits; which if it fall short
of, it is defective; and cannot attaine its end; if it exceed, it proves burdensome and Tyrannous. Take into consideration what Government you will; if it have not limits, or be not well bounded; those who are under it, must needs smart by it, and be entangled in those miseries which Government is appointed to prevent. Now this is it I have much bewailed in mine owne thoughts concerning Parliaments (whether justly or no; let the Reader well consider) that they are not well bounded, that the trust which is reposed in them, is not clearly known, either by the People, or perhaps by themselves: but they are left unto, and take unto themselves so much scope, as it is very easie for them to erre, almost impossible for them to act aright. Every man that is to do any work, must throughly know his work, his rule whereby he is to do it, and be carefull to eye the conformity of the one with the other; if he know not his work, how can he set about it at all? if he know not his rule, how can he set about it a right? how apt will he be to slip into by-actions at least? and this great mischeife accompanyes it too; he will be apt to think he does every thing a right, and so to justifie himselfe in the most apparant injustice and oppression, as the wit of man is very subtle to do; for though he have a rule, he can bend the rule and make it suit with his owne miscarriages, how much more when he thinks himselfe left at liberty? It is ill trusting unbounded Power any where; it is hard keeping Power upright, though never so well bounded, but unbounded, it is a very sharp toole, and will quickly eat out all, but its owne Soveraignty. Man is very brutish in this respect, not searching into the root and ground of things; but according to sence, flying out upon that which is most obious. If he find himselfe oppressed, remove but the hand that laid the burthen upon him, he presently thinks he is eased for ever; when alas poore foole, he finds by after ex∣perience, that the succeeding finger is heavier then the foregoing loyns. And how can this be otherwise? you must still set up a
greater power to remove a lesse, else it will not availe to do it; and the greater it is, the weightier strokes can it give, the weightier burdens can it impose; and the more unlimited it is the sooner is it tempted so to doe; and the more unsuspicious o∣thers are of it, or it is of it selfe, the more likely is it to do it. So that there is no trusting any man, or any sort of men; they are all of the same make, they have all the same principle to mislead them, the same by-ends and interests (the same at bottom, though they appeare not the same) to work upon them, one as well as a∣nother: and though man, under the sence of feare and danger, may act warily and somewhat righteously; yet let those ob∣stacles be a little removed, you shall see what command selfe hath over him; it hath the cheife command in his heart, and will quickly appeare at his fingers ends: He that knowes not this by himselfe, knowes little of himselfe; and he that knowes this by himselfe, and is not willing to be chained up (as a man would chaine up a Lyon, or a Wolfe from doing harme) nou∣risheth in himselfe a desire tp be a Tyrant: And people by calling persons to any office, putting them in any trust, inve∣sting them with any power in a dark confused way, without cleare and distinct limitations, do sow the seed-plors of Tiran∣ny, which by this meanes they too carelesly sow, and may too soon reap. And if the People of this Nation, have been too negligent of their owne security in this respect; let such as are able, and truly love them, not take advantage hereof, but help them out of the mire, by putting them into a way whereby they may do it now, or by doing it to their hand so cleerly, so justly, as they may not chuse but owne it. Yet further. There is great need of some fixed bounds and limits, to be a square or standard to measure the actions of the Parliament by, whereunto the People might have recourse in matters of contro∣versie, between them and the Parliament, or in case of jealousie
that they were nor dealt faithfully with. It is a great trust the people have committed to the Par∣liament, upon the faithfull discharge whereof their wellfare doth much depend, by whose care they may be set into and preserved in a free and flourishing condition, by whose neg∣ligence or devotion, they may easily be impoverished and enslaved. Now in equity, the people are not only allowed, but it be∣hoveth them in point of wisdome, and by that duty of selfe-preservation, which nature teacheth all, to look after the managing of this their trust, to expect an account of it from those who are entrusted by them, to have full satisfaction that it is managed with the best care, speed, and fidelity to their advantage. But how shall the People know this? how shall the People be thus satisfied? is it not fit they should be? If any controversie arise about it, that the people think or say they are not well dealt with, their trust is abused; Power not made use of to preserve them and their liberties, but to enslave them; that the Priviledges of Parliament swallow up their Rights and Liberties, which they were ordained to defend. How shall this be decided? how shall it be truly and clear∣ly known whether these things be so, or whether they be un∣just reproaches, unlesse there were some standing Priviledges of reason or rules of Law extant, whereto any person doubting might addresse himselfe for satisfaction, and whereto their actions should so cleerly answer; that it should not need any great depth of reason to discerne the justnesse, plainnesse, and integrity of them? And it might not be much out of the way to search and in∣quire, whether this hath not been the bottome root of all our disturbances, the want of some cleere and setled Principles for the Parliament to proceed by, or at least the not divulging and making common these Principles?
The Parliament were at first looked upon with a loving as∣pect generally by the people: within a while the Kings party falls of, conceiving his trust and interest intrenched upon by them, and still calling for the discovery of those priviledges and fundamentall Lawes; which were pleaded in the behalfe of the Parliament. Afterward the Parliament looses more and more, and growes too sudainly to a very low ebbe in the eyes of the people: and though occurrences help to raise it againe, yet not to its former lovelinesse; nor so, but that it sinks af∣terwards againe, and its very freinds are often divided amongst themselves. How can it be otherwise? how can men but fall out, when occasions of difference are continually arising, and every man is left to his owne (perhaps misbyassed) reason and judgement to determine, and has no cleare Rule before him, to guid his eye and thoughts by? This made the case between the late King and them, some∣what more difficult, then some have thought. He had a trust committed to him, so had they also: but the bounds of either were not fully cleared, and so they clashed (as powers are very apt to do) and in their clashing, their charge against one ano∣ther was one and the same. They charged him with viola∣ting the Lawes, with extending his prerogatives to the hurt of the people, with ruling according to will, &c. He likewise charged them with overturning the Lawes, with assuming pri∣viledges prejudiciall both to him and the People, with en∣tring into an Arbitrary government. So these two great Powers fall out, having no standard to determine these things by, whereby it might appeare which were truly guilty, but each justifie themselves and condemne the other, according to the ordinary course of man, who is very sensible of the injuries he receives but very insensible of those hee does: Nor had the people any standard neither, and so they fell in with either, as their minds lead them, to the ruining & destroying of one ano¦ther. Now the same case may hapen between the people & the
Parliament, as hath done between the Parliament and the late King. The people may vote it in their thoughts and minds, that the Parliament do not discharge their trust, that they meddle with that which the people hath not en∣trusted them with, neglect the doing of that which the people have entrvsted them to do, that they elevate their priviledges, not in circumstances, but in substantiall things, to the prejudice of the people. The Parliament on the contrary, may contend, that they have been faithfull, have run great hazards, through their love and faithfullnesse to the people, have denyed themselves more then ever any Parliament hath done, that the people owe them a better requitall, and ought to allow them power and priviledges answerable to the work they employ them about, which in equity would arise far higher then any they make use of. How may this be fairly endod? what shall be done in this case? is there no way of determining this, but by strength and power? shall the people make use of their power (taking their accusation for granted) and rush upon the, Parliament to seek its destruction? or shall the Parliament (being cleare in their owne eyes, and looked upon with an evill eye by the people) make use of an Army to stop the peoples mouths, that they may not dare to mutter any thing against them? were it not better, that some cleare Principles of Reason, whereby Parliaments were first foun∣ded, might be produced and brought to light, both to square their actions by, and to square mens judgements in the consideration of their actions. So that this might be usefull, both in respect of the Par∣liament and people; for want whereof, the Parliament may have been drawne to do many things, which other∣wise they would not have done, if they had cleerly seene, they had not been entrusted with them: and the people may have been ensnared to entertaine and reteine hard
thoughts of the Parliament about actions which were regular∣by undertaken and faithfully managed for the peace and safety of the people. Vpon these and such like considerations, I cannot but wish that some such thing might be speedily and effectually done, with equall respect both to the people on the one hand, whose safety and prosperity is mainly to be minded and to the Par∣liamen-on the other hand, who are so far to be honoured and furnished with power and priviledges, as they may best effect and not deviate from the good and prosperity of the people. In order whereunto I am constrained to propound and desire these three ensuing particulars. 1. That a true measure of the Parliaments trust from clear Principles of Reason or Law, or both, may be pub∣lished to open view; whereby every Parliament-man may see what he is to do, what not; and whereby any of the people may see what they are to expect, what not: and these not to be wrested in favour to any party, but accor∣ding to the state and nature of the thing it self. This might be a foundation of peace and security between them and the People, whereas now they lye under a double blame, both of not having don that they were entrusted to performe and of having set about that they were not entrusted with: the foundation of this controversy between them and the people is deeply laid, however it is suppressed at present from breaking forth. 2 That in the mean time till this can be done, there may be free liberty given to any sort of men (whose spirits are sensible of fundamentall dangers, are ready to improve their utmost abilities for publique good) to discover any substantiall matters amisse in the present proceedings, and that a select Committee may be appointed at certain times to heare and consider thereof, in such a way as the persons who shall offer their service herein, may not be tired out with seeking up and down after them, which is a thing much complained of.
And I cannot say lesse of it then that it is a very unkind and injurious dealing with the people, which I should be glad to see regularly amended, for I look upon that kind of amending only as lasting. And if the Parliament would please to think of rectifying things disorderly among themselves, by a righteous rule prescribed unto themselves (which is the way of rectifying things amisse in the great body of the Common-weale, and why should it not be also in the lesse) they might perhaps act farre more speedily and safely, then otherwise it is possible for them to do. 3. Thas there may be some way thought of, how the work of Parliaments may be dispatched with more speed, and thigns left in an ordinary way of government, that the people may not any longer be frighted with the long continuance of an extraordinary power. Surely Nature doth not only pre∣scribe ends, and suit means to them, but doth wisely order direct, and guid the means unto the end, which if there be a neglect in, the dictate of nature is not understood, or not hear∣kened unto. Nature will not appoint a Parliament to be a re∣medy against greevances, oppressions, &c. & prescribe them to act in such a way, as the work must necessarily grow faster upon them, then it can be dispatched by them. This is all I intend to expresse at present, only I should intreat those, who now sit at sterne, to be wonderous watchfull over themselves, and wary about the managing of affairs, for there is a very severe eye upon them. It is not for nothing that so great ones have been throwne downe before them, and they exalted so high, the step is not so vast between the people and them, as was betweene them and their Predecessors. All the power they have is from the people, and for the people: if they have blamed others for unfaithfullnesse (and have seene as they say the judge∣ment of God follow it) let them take heed of being un∣faithfull themselves, if they assume more power or privi∣ledge then is committed to them, and allowed them, if they
do any other worke then what they are entrusted with, they cannot excuse themselves of unfaithfulnesse: if they throwe downe one government because of arbitrarinesse (for that was the originall quarrell) and settle another in an arbitra∣rie way, this is not only unfaithfulnesse, but injustce. Oh when shall this poor oppressed enthralled people be made free! When shall the true foundations of freedome and righ∣teousnesse be laid! Oh consider what opportunities▪ and ad∣vantages yee uow have above any that ever went before you. Do your worke throughly, go to the bottome: let not the interest of any sort of men divert you from minding of the good and welfare of the people, whom yee are singly to eye, and not particular persons or interests. If I could speak as I would, I should speake more, not onely for the peoples sake, but also for yours, who stand on so ticle a point, either to be instruments of woe or welfare, and are very likely to meet with either large blessings, or a swift and sharp visi∣tation. Reader, Notwithstanding the care of the Author, yet the carles∣nesse of the Printer hath committed some Erratta's which thou art desired to correct thy selfe and candidly to inter∣pret. FINIS.
