S1229 E436_6 99864087 161607
THE DEMANDS AND PROPOSALS OF The Parliament of Scotland to be presented to the Parli∣ament of England, by the Lord Lee, for remo∣ving the King neer London, a personall treaty, and the disbanding the Lord Fairfax his army. Votes of the Parliament of Scotland that the Parliament of England have broken the Covenant and trea∣ties in seven particulars, and the answer given to the English Commissioners Die Mer. 19 April. 1648. THese papers were read and appointed to be Printed by the Originall Copies. Imprimatur Dilbert Mabbot. London Printed, by Bernard Alsop, and are to be sold at the Royall-exchange in Corne-hill. 1648.
THE DEMANDS AND PROPOSALS OF The Parliament of Scotland, to be presented to the Parlia∣ment of England, by the Lord Lee, for removing the King neer London, &c. SIR, THE Parliament of Scotland have beene upon an answer to the desires of the Clergy, which I believe you have seen long ere this, but al∣though they would haue first stated the que∣stion, yet carryed on the negative, and the answers resolved on, was not hele satisfacto∣ry to the Ministery. Some dayes there are great hopes of an agreement, and other days the distance is so farre, as scarce any man shal know how neer they are to have an Army: ma∣ny English men are at Edenburgh, and they doe dayly in∣crease.
Another great ship came to Leeth Rode on Fryday night last; what she is, is not yet known, but a flying Report of the Prince being in her, but no certainty. Some Irish Re∣bels are come into some of the Scots Islands, and the Marq. of Argyles Regiment are directed, with some others, to march towards them. This is all, I earnestly request a correspon∣dency weekly, and where I shal direct my Letter unto you, that I may take the occasion to subscribe my self. Your oblieged servant, R. S. Barwick 12 April, 1648. The Copy of a Letter from Edinburgh, touching severall Propo∣sitions to be sent to the Parliament of England. Noble Sir, YOurs I received, and by way of requitall take what hath occurred since my last. The difference be∣tween the State and the Clergy is as great as ever; they will by no means consent to the raising of an Army, till the King establish the Presbytery: yet notwithstanding I hear for certain, that an Army is raising, and men listing in divers parts of this Kingdome; 'tis supposed 'twill be spee∣dily effected; and because many of the Commanders of the standing Forces of this Kingdome do not concur with them in this design, those Forces are to be disbanded, and the Earl of Calender is to be General of their new Modell; insomuch, that the Cavees and English Fugitives grow very high, trea∣ting ruine and destruction to the Parliament and their Ad∣herents. Our Commissioners have not had audience, nor answer
to any one of the papers they have delivered to the Parlia∣ment, but are promised it this week. We hear that 'tis oed by this Parliament, that our parliament have broken the Covenant and Treaties with them in seven particulars. Its likewise reported, that the Lord Lee is to goe speedily to England with propositions from this Parliament; the one is, about setling Religion according to the Covenant, a second for removing the King to one of his Houses, and a personall treaty with him: the third for disbanding the Army, with others, which I hope to send the certainty of by the next, I have underneath, written you the names of the Committee of danger, with some that are added. Edinburgh 10. Apr. 1648. Your most affectionate friend to serve you. Duke Hambleton. Mar. Argile. Ld. Treasurer. Ld. Lannerick. E. Calender. E. Ladderdale. added E. Uxborough. E. Traquire. Burroughs Archibald Sidserfe. Sr. Peter Wedderborne. Patrick Lesly. Iohn Shrt. George Porterfeild. William Gloudoving. added George Bell. Iames Pady. Barons Innerpeffer. Lee. Hunbey. Wariston. Arneston. Collington. added Innis. Garthland for Edenborough. Dundee. Aberdeen. Sterling. Glasgow. Kirk-Gudbright. Lithgow. Munrosse.
SIR, SInce my writing by this Post, I received a Letter just now from Edinburgh, whereby I perceive it was con∣cluded yesterday, that an Army should be forthwith levyed though it be kept very close. There is a Lord called Lee, as I heare appointed Commissioner for England, with some Pro∣positions touching Religion, a personall Treaty with his Majesty, and disbanding of the Army: This is all that is materiall, I am, Sir, Your assured loving friend, R. G. Barwick 12 April, 1648. Since the writing hereof we hear that the Parliament of Scotland have given an answer to our Commissioners pa∣pers, but it is said to be very unsatisfactory, and that they re∣fer the substance of all to their own Commissioners which are comming into England to treat with the Parliament. Worthy Sir, FOr affairs in these parts, wee heare another Mac-Donald, commonly called Kolkittoh, and a Kins∣man of the former, is risen in Arms in the Marq. of Argyles Country, which hath caused sundry Forces that
lay in the Southern parts of Scotland, to march North∣ward to the suppression of him, Al the Officers in the standing Army of Scotland, save Lieut-Gen. Middle∣ton, have petitioned the Parliament not to ingage in a war against England, unlesse the Church do concur with them. Some Demands or Proposals from the Parlia∣ment of Scotland, to the Parliament of England will shortly be sent By which we may guesse, a good deale of time wil be spent, before our Brethren resolve one way or other, The Kirk and State here, are still at a distance, one day there is some likelyhood of an agreement betweene them, another while there is no hope at all: to say truth, af∣fairs in Scotland lie lose, things are done, and not done: the Scots expect, that the division and distempers in England will increase, and prepare the way for their coming into England: they love to go upon some grounds, and thereupon they build their hopes, being still at liberty to declare and joyne with whatsoever interest and party shall be found most advantagious, and suitable to their ends, If, in some short time, the Cloud in Wales blow o∣ver, and the Parliament make examples in punishing Poyer, and others, that are there in Rebellion, it wil be a great discouragement, and happily, may put a period to
the designs of the Malignant parties in both Kingdoms, the Scots have agreed to raise an Army, the Lord Lee is to be sent to the Parliament of England, with Pro∣posals and Demands: In the meane time, the English flock thither apace, and the common souldiers have 4. d. a day. All will be nought. Barwick 12. April, 1648. FINIS.
