t3032 43077719 151832
A TRVE RELATION OF THE QUEENES MAIESTIES Returne out of HOLLAND, AND, Of Gods mercifull preservation of Her from those great dangers wherein Her Royall Person was engaged both by Sea and Land. ALSO, Her MAJESTIES Letter sent to the STATES about the stay of Her Ammunition-Ship. VVritten by one in the same Storme and Ship with Her MAJESTIE. Printed at Yorke, and Reprinted at Oxford. 1643.
A TRVE RELATION OF THE QVEENES MAIESTIES returne out of HOLLAND, &c. THe States Generall of the United Pro∣vinces,Her Maje∣sties first set∣ting out of Holland with a Navy of foureteene Ships. (notwithstanding many Arts, and meanes used to perswade the con∣trary) having prepared for Her Maje∣sties Service nine Men of Warre, with five lesser Ships for the Baggage: Her Majestie on Thursday Ianuary the 19. 1642. in the afternoone, at Sciveling, two miles from the Hague, imbarked in a more threatning, then promising Weather. The wind then was so slacke that it made little further way that Night, then to carry the Ships out of those perillous Shoares; where, had a storme risen, they had beene in very great danger. The next day, when God had blessed us with Sea-roome enough, the windes began to rise very high, and about midnight, blew a fearfull and furious storme; which with the intermissions of some houres, (one day onely) Tuesday, excepted, for sixe daies together continued yet very vehement and terrible.
And by reason of the often variation of the winds, made a most raging Sea, and so very tempestuous that the Ship was many times let to drive, and hull it at Sea, not being able to make any Saile with safety, having beene in great danger to be underset, by the suddaine gusts and blasts, which duck't and drowned the sailes in the Seas. In this sad and unsafe condition, did we live out all those dayes, being tossed and driven to and fro on the Doggar Sands, threatning to be our graves; in which we had surely beene buried, if the care of Heaven had not more mercifully come in to our helpe. Her Majesty saw and suffer'd all this so long with a Prince∣ly Patience and Courage, and then Perceiving how little She did advance in Her way to Newcastle, tooke a Resolution (there being no English Port else neer where She might safe∣ly adventure Her Person) rather to return for Holland, then to tug on and work out Her Way with contrary Winds and Weathers, in such enraged Seas. It was presented and pres∣sed to Her Majesty, That if any storme should arise and meete Her in that shoare, the danger would be greater then in the o∣pen Seas where She was, Her Ship being tydie and good. TheSir Martin Van Tromp. Admirall most skilfull and carefull of his Royall Charge, and the Masters and Mariners answerably able and willing to do their best seruice. But Her Majesty kept still her resolution to returne. Where∣upon, the Thursday Sennight after She imbarked, we made our Course for Holland againe, and the next Day came on the Coast before Sciveling; God blessing Her with the freedome from a Tempest in that place of perill, where foure Ships had beene wrack't, of which we saw the bulke and ribs of an Eng∣lish one, which had perished in the late Tempests on the shoare, before our eyes. The Admirall upon his comming in, shot off a Peece of
Ordinance to give notice of his returne; which they of the Towne tooke presently and carried to the Hague, so that some houres before Her Majesty could get to shoare, the Queene of Bohemia, the Princesse Royall and other of the Princesses; the Prince Elector, the Prince and Princesse of Orange with divers Persons of Quality and Honour, were all ready in their Coaches at shoare, to attend Her landing; and did drive and ride into the Sea for joy and haste to see that happy sight of Her Majesties safety for whose great perills heavy feares had layn upon them, all the time of these Tempests. That Evening a Fisher-boat being found out at Sea, (for contrary Tyde and Winde would suffer none to come from Land) the Admirall commanded and called it in, and in it, Her Majesty with some Persons of cheife quality, not with∣out some dangerous weltrings of the Boat, by reason of the high Waves and Sands in that shallow shoare, came, at last, safe to Land; And having rested and refreshed Her Selfe some time at the Towne, went after to the Hague to Her Bed that Night. On Saturday (the next Day after) the rest who came in the three Ships with Her Majesty (for but three came) landed all in safety. What was become of the other eleven, was not then knowne; but after it was. That two missing or mistaking the Admiralls warning, went on to Newcastle, the propound∣ed Port; The others, with some leaks, and wounds, and los∣ses of Masts, and sailes, and tacklings, came in after us, or got safe to other Shoares. But the two Ships wherein the Horses were, one of them was runne on ground, all the Men and some Horses being saved, onely that, wherein the Coachmen were, is not yet heard of; and therefore feared, to be utterly lost. All they in Holland, who were in great anxiety and fear for
the Queene at Sea, (not having ever known a greater storme by Land) were very jocund and joyfull, to heare and see Her in safety. Some said, Her Majesty would never heaveadventured Her Selfe to Sea in such a Weather, but to shew, That a Queene feared not to be drowned. Others thought, that some Witch∣es were made use of, to raise those Winds. But all saw, That if any such villany came from Hell, it was curbd by Heaven, in the mercifull preservation of the Queene, and that, When God will help, the Devill cannot hurt us. Her Majesty was entertained at the Hague by the Prince of Orange all the time of her last stay, which was from Fryday January 27. to February the 13. And then 7 greater Ships being got ready for Her Maje∣sty, and five lesser for the Baggage, with one of Her owne, bought before, and now laden with Ammunition (thirteen in all:) On Munday afternoon, She went to Sciveling, and in that poore Fisher Towne lodged three Nights, upon an un∣expected occasion. For Her Ammunition ship in the River of the Maze was watched by two Parliament ships, (as they call them) the Providence and Greyhound;) who gave out, that they would take that Ship, or fire it, or sink it, or sink with it. Her Majesty knowing how much the Kings Service, and his good Subjects and Souldiers in the North were concerned in it, resolved not to goe without it, but to stay there till She had it. The Admirall thereupon having this Warrant from the States Generall, and the Prince of Orange, went with two Men of Warre to fetch it off, and was bringing it away; But was met, and bourded, and charged by the States of Holland (the Provincialls as they call them) to have that Ship search∣ed for Armes, and not to carry it further, but the Arms to be
taken out, or kept safe in some other place fitting for it. The Admirall upon this Arrest, stopt and cast Anchor; and came to acquaint the States Generall, and the Prince, with what was done, and to doe further, as it should be directed. Now began all Eyes to see that good Providence, which guided the Queene to returne to Holland, that Ship of Arms having beene absolutely lost by Her absence; which was so hardly redeemed and preserved by Her Royall Presence, and Courage. And by that it was. For the Queen, toucht with the sense of so visible an indignity, by the hands of Sir William Boswell,See Her Ma∣jesties Letter Printed af∣ter the Rela∣tion. resi¦dent in Holland for His Majesty, sent to the States Generall a round and quick Letter, of the deepe resentment, which She justly had of that great affront then done Her; and that the bands of Amity betwixt the King and them, must needs be dissolved, if that were done and endured. This begat a Meeting of all the States, the Prince of Orange being with them, whose spirit this affront had moved much. In it, the matter was argued with the States of Holland, who made the stay. The Arrest by many condemned, and concluded by all, that the ship of Armes should come away with the rest to the Queene; and the Admiralls Commission enlarged to fight with any, that should attempt to hinder it, or any with the Queen besides it. The States of Holland now saying, they tooke the ship of Arms till then for a private mans, and not the Kings, for which cause (or colour) they before had stayed it. The Admirall (thus arm'd) went to fetch it away; and af∣ter some expostulations by Letters with the two Parliament ships, and the Messenger their Ministers vaine perswasions to the contrary; bid them to lye still, till the ship was gone, or to keepe off out of Cannon-shot, or he would shoot at them.
The ship being got out to Sea, the Providence made three shots at it, none hitting it: upon this, the Admirall shot at them, who instead of answering him, shot off a Peece on the other side from him, and so went their way. So on February six∣teenth, being Thursday, that ship with the rest came to Scive∣ling to the Queene. THat Day, Her Majesty imbarked againe in the Princesse Royall of great Brittaine (Her first ship.The Queens second com∣ming out of Holland with a Navie of 13 Ships, Feb. 16. 1642.) And with a most blessed Weather, on a quiet Sea, by a soft and gentle Gale, was brought on Sunday after, within sight of Flamborough-head. The Heavens and Winds for so long a time (and many Dayes before) continuing in those Winter Dayes and Nor∣thern Seas, almost miraculously Faire, and Intempestuous. On Munday we got on as farre as Scarborough; But then the Wind blew from Newcastle, our onely intended Haven, just in our Teeth; and as God in great Mercy would have it, said to us (in the Language of His Providence) Goe no further. So we fell backe into a safe Harbour (Burlington-bay) and cast Anchor hard by the Shoare. As Her Majesty rid at Anchor there, some of the Gentry and Country People sent, and came, to present to the Queene some of their Country Pro∣visions, with their Joyes for Her Safety and happy Returne. Her Majesty graciously accepted them, doing them the Ho∣nour to let them kisse Her Hand. Here God put into Her Heart another blessed Resolution. It was to send to my Lord of Newcastle, to give him word of Her being there, and Her will (if he so direct) there to land. His Excellency having but the Weeke before, beaten the Forces out of Stamford Bridge, and made his way into the East-Ryding of Yorkeshire, was then very happily at Pockling∣ton with his Army, about twenty miles from Burlington. On
Tuesday came a messenger with tidings, That the Generall the horse, next day about noon, would waite on Her Majesty at shoare with a thousand horse: & my Lord Generall the next day after, with the rest of the Horse and Foot Army. This was done accordingly. For on Wednesday after Noone, the the Horse appeared on the shoare; whereupon, Her Majesty landed that Night at Burlington Key. All the Ordinance of the Ships speaking as much to those who were not near enough to see it. Next Day (as the Queene was at Dinner) came His Excellency, and Generall King, with the Army of Foot, and fifteene hundred more Horse. His Excellency told the Queene, Her landing so, was in a most happy place and time, for the Country and Army, and Her selfe and Her Retinue. So apparently it was. For besides the great moiling of Men and Beasts, this would save the Country a very vast expence of Monies for Carriages in those long and ill wayes from Newcastle to Yorke, this being but thirty miles, and good way, from it And the Army (al∣ready much wearied, in chases of the Enemy, from which they came but the Day before) would have beene overtoyled and weakned in so long Convoyes and Marches to and fro, for the Queens necessary conduct and Attendance; of which great trouble Her Majesty now gave them a present ease. And both Country and Army magnified the mercifull Pro∣vidence of God to both, who disposed so of his Winds, and the Queens thoughts, to bring them such an unexpected ease and happinesse, to the great joy and encouragement of them all. And Her Majesty & Retinue had their share in the hap∣pinesse, too. For by this meanes, the Queene came much sooner to Yorke now, then she could, had she landed at Her first coming at Newcastle: And much safer too, then if she had now arrived there, considering the Dangers both of the Ha∣ven,
and ships, which lay in wait for Her there, fitted with Men of desperate minds, to doe all possible Mischeife, and the many Accidents and Perills, which might have befallen Her in comming thence. Besides all this, great advantage would have beene necessa∣rily given, and as greedily taken from the Diversion and Di∣vision of the Army, to make the Enemy more bold and busie to worke his ends, by the absence, now frustrated by the keeping of it in one body and place. The Army being now by Burlington, the Queene after Din∣ner rid out in a Coach to see it; which received great encour∣agement from Her comming, and welcomed Her into the field, with many hearty Acclamations and expressions of their Joyes, such, as much moved many to see them; and in them the true old Genius and Spirit of the English Nation to their Princes, of late degenerated into the strange Tongue of rude Invectives and Outcryes. After fight of the Army, which Her Majesty rid through and through, even to the new raised and unarmed Companies; She returned to Her Lodging at Burlington Key. The names of the Captains and Masters of the Ships were, C. Hadock. Commander of the Fleet. C. Lee. C. North. C. Bedwart. C. Peacock. Master of the Pinnace.But had another manner of Salutation sent Her from the Sea next Morning, in a strange and (till that time) utterly un∣knowne and unparallelly barbarous Language. For foure Ships and a Pinnace, Voluntaries in the Parliaments Service, which came over Night into the Roade, betwixt five and six of the Clock next Morning made above an hundred shots at the houses in the Key; for two howers shooting crosse bar-shots, and many Bullets of twelve pound weight, and therea∣bouts, and the while. One of those Ships was directly planted against the House where the Queene lay; and that, and the o∣ther made many shots over it. Her Majesty hereupon was suddainly called up out of Her Bed to avoid the Danger, and
leaving the house, went and sat down under the Brow of an hill, which secured Her from the shot. The Lords and Ladies (who were all thereabouts lodged) made hast to goe with, and after the Queene; some of their houses having beene shot through before; and the Bullets, then flying about them in the Streets and Fields as they went. And as they sate under the hill, some slew over their heads, casting some rubbage and dust, though no Danger then upon them: so that of all the Queenes Company (God be thanked not one was kill'd, or hurt, or touched, though one of the com∣mon Souldiers was sore torne, and a Serjeant slaine out right, not farre from the Queens Lodging. These Ships, (upon advertisement brought them of the Queenes coming) were seene to hie away presently from Newcastle, where till then, they lay to doe such Service as they were directed to. And where, they are said, to have bragged, they would board, sinke, or sinke with the Queenes Ship, could they meete it. Gods Goodnesse gave them not the power of tryall by Sea, though the Devills malice in them made them attempt to do that Mischiefe by Land. And to doe it the better, in the Night they landed some of their Men on shoare, who were heard to enquire for the Queenes Lodg∣ing at three of the Clocke, which they shot at by six, a shrowd suspicion (with the rest) what was the Mark they aimed at. Whether by Commission, and by whose, these bold Men did this barbarous Outrage, the Justice of Heaven and Earth will doubtlesse concurre to examine and punish, that so great a Blot, and Burden of shame and Guilt may not lye on the Nation. Upon this deliverance from the shot, Her Majesty went that Day further out of their reach, from Burlington Key, to the Town. And the Ammunition ship (all this while in the
Key, hit, though little hurt with all shots) was unladed, and the Armes carried to the Towne, and there carefully kept, in the old Church of the Monastery, now decayed. The Parish for that Sunday, being desired for feare of danger, to goe to their Neighbour Churches at hand, or to come so many as could, to the Queenes Court; where by Her Majestie's leave (there being elsewhere no convenient Roome to be had,) Her Hou∣shold had Service and Sermon for that Day. At this the Country People wondered much, who be∣leived all with the Queene to be Papists; though of all the English in Her Majesties Houshold; not one Woman, and but foure men be all. So willing are some to deceive, and o∣thers to be deceived. On Sunday after (necessity pleading the Passe) Her Maje∣sty in the after-noone, Marched with the Army and Ammu∣nition from Burlington to Norburton (about foure Miles off.) Thence next Day to Malton. And (there the Foote being left) was next Day conducted by the Horse to Yorke: No Enemy all this while opposing, or appearing. That Ancient City received Her Majesty with many hearty welcoms, & shouts, and blessings accompanying Her all the way She went: Sir Edmund Cooper, Lord Major, (that true and tryed Lieutenant to his Leige) and Sir Thomas Widdrington, Recorder of the City, with Speeches to that purpose. So She was brought with much Joy and Honour on Tues∣day, March the seventh, to Her Lodging in Sir Arthur In∣grams House, where a Court of Guard attends Her Majesties safety, which the Guard and Blisse of Heaven make good to Her, as it hath hitherto beene most mercifully and visibly with Her and for Her, in Her Departure, Absence, and Re∣turne; which hath beene happy, healthy, and safe, almost to a Miracle.
The Circumstances of Her going out, were strange beyond all beliefe, both at home and abroad: but the issues have ap∣peared good and happy above all expectation. And Her staying as wonderfull. That Her Majesty and Her Retinue being about, or above two hundred Persons (for Eleven Moneths time) in a strange Lands, and unwonted Diet and Dwelling, should but bury one Consumptive Man in Holland, who brought his Death with him out of England; but keepe in, and come out with so good health, was an unlook't for, but not un enjoyed Blessing. And Her safety in Her com∣ming out, as singular. At Her Majesties first comming out to Sea, the Stormes were most fierce and terrible for many Dayes; But at the se∣cond, the Winds and Weather most faire and comfortable all the time. God Allmighty most mercifully preserved and blessed Her Majesty in both. And at last gave Her an Arri∣vall most happy both to Her Selfe, and to many Since that He delivered Her from the villanous attempts of the ships at Sea, which put Her precious Life to a manifest Perill and ha∣zard. A Signe from Heaven of Blessings to come upon the King and Queene, to which the Majesty of Heaven long pre∣serve them, and the Kingdome by them.
Her MAJESTIES Letter sent to the STATES, concerning the stay of Her AMMUNITION-SHIP. THe QUEENE OF GREAT BRITTAINE, out of a desire by all meanes to conserve the friendship betwixt the King, and the Lords the States; Having omitted to take notice of very many indignities, by which She hath been provoked here; doth find Her Selfe at this present offended in so high a degree, that She cannot any longer, with the Honour of the King (Her most Deare Husband) with-hold this Complaint, which She now makes unto the Lords the STATES, con∣cerning an Order made to search and make stay of a Vessell, which is Fraughted and charged with goods belonging to Her: for which notwithstanding the STATES have already accorded their free Passe-Port. The QUEENE makes no difficulty to avow the trans∣port of Ammunition, as being absolutely necessary for Her safety: and She hath chosen to furnish Her selfe by this way, rather then that of demanding a Licence: by reason of an Order formerly made by the STATES, to forbid the transport of Armes, or Ammuniti∣on, either for the KING, or Parliament Which Order, the KING hath great cause to beleeve, very partiall for the Parliament, by putting them in equall rank with Him: But the default of Observa∣tion of that Order, hath been yet more displeasing to Her; For, that since that time great quantities of Ammunition have beene trans∣ported for the service of the Rebels, and Ships also bought to be im∣ployed
against the KING. If the QUEENE hath not asked a pa∣cular Licence for all the things necessary for Her Service, it ha beene out of this consideration, that she might not cast the STATE upon the inconvenience, either of contradicting their owne Order,  of giving just offence to the KING. But since all the care Her Maje¦stie hath taken, and the precautions used to conserve a good intelli∣gence betweene the KING and the STATES (which is established by so many past Treaties) hath produced nothing but a continuation of affronts, and prejudices to the KINGS Service. Her Majesty is obliged to make this Declaration; That She receives this Order, given for the stay of that Ship, for a notable and high inju∣stice, and an indignity which She is obliged very neerly to resent. Wherefore Her Majesty doth expect, That the Lords the STATES, having better considered the matter, will give way to the departing of that Ship, together with whatsoever is charged upon it, for Her Service; without which, Her Majesty cannot resolve to de∣part Her Selfe. The QUEENE is obliged to represent to the Lords the STATES, that this injustice, and Affront, which She hath re∣ceived by the arrest of this Ship, cannot passe for lesse then a viola∣tion of the Friendship betwixt the KING and the STATES; the con∣sequences whereof will be very dangerous. Wherefore She doth hope, That they will not offer so just a cause of offence unto the KING, nor so great a displeasure unto Her Selfe. FINIS.
