W1574 E127_27 99871439 156211
THE TWO SPEECHES OF THE LORD WHARTON, Spoken in Guild-Hall, Octob. 27. 1642. In which are contained a full and true Relation of the Battell betweene the two Armies at Kinton. Corrected by the Authors owne hand. London Printed for Sa: Gellibrand, 1642.
The Lord Wharton his Speech. MY Lords, and you the Aldermen, and Commons of this City, in a businesse of this very great con∣sequence & concernment, it was very well known to my Lord Generall, that you could not but bee full of great expectations: whereupon my Lord according to his duty tooke care for to give information to the Parliament, to those that had sent him, of what had proceeded; in the very next place it was his particular respect to this City, to my Lord Maior, the Aldermen, the Common Councell, and all the Commons of this Citie, that they might likewise be ac∣quainted with the successe of that businesse, towards which they themselves had beene at so much expences, and had shewed so much love and kindnesse in all the proceedings of this businesse: for that purpose, because that Letters might be uncertaine, and might miscarry, there being great interception of them, (the Forces of the Armies being close together) my Lord thought fit to send Master Strode, a Member of the House of Commons, and my self, who should not willingly have undertaken to have beene messengers of ill tidings, and for the truth of our report, though we already heare that there are those that have so much malignity as to oppose it, yet the certainty of it will cleare it selfe, and therefore there shall neede no Apologies to be made, but that which shalbe said to you shalbe nothing but the truth, in a very cleare way of relation of what hath past. Gentlemen, I shall open to you as neare as I can, as it comes within my memory, those things of circumstance which are worthy the taking notice of, and one in the first place shall bee, the occasion why so many of the Forces were not then upon the place, which you will finde to be upon very good ground and reason, for the preservation of the Countries that were behind, and of this Citie, which is the particular thing in the care, and now under the diligence of my Lord General to preserve. There was left at Hereford, which lies upon the confines of Wales, a Regiment of Foot under the Command of my L. of Stamford,
and a Troop or two of Horse, that the power of Wales might not fall in upon Glocester-shire, and upon the of river of Severn, and so upon the West. There was likewise left at Worcester (which you all know how it is seated upon the river of Severn, and what advantage it hath to intercept all force that shall come from Shrewsbury downe into the West) a Regiment of my Lords Saint Johns, and Sir John Merricks. There was for the safetie of Coventry (for that was a Towne it was likely the King might have fallen upon) the Regiment of my Lord Rochford; but it seemes that his Excellency the Earle of Essex his Ar∣my did so quickly come up to the Kings, that the King thought it no way fit or advantagious for him to spend any time upon those places, for certainly they would have quickly beene relieved, so that the King slipt by Warwicke and Coventry, though they are Townes, as particularly under the eye and care of those which direct the Kings Counsell, as any other in the whole kingdome, excepting this. There was likewise upon the suddennesse of my Lords march, two Regiments of Foot, one under the command of a Gentleman you all know, Colonell Hampden, and the other under the command of Colonell Grantham, with some 10. or 12. Troops of Horse, and these were one dayes march behind for the guard of some powder, and ammunition, and artillery, which my Lord would not stay for, pur∣posely upon his diligence and desire that there should not be an houre lost in his march up to the other Army, and that hee might make all hast in comming up to the safeguard of this Town, & his desire there∣of was such, that he kept for 2. or 3. dayes together a dayes march before those Forces afore named with Col. Hampden, and so there be∣ing another Regiment lodged in Banbury, occasionally for their own safety, there was with my Lord when the Battell was fought upon the Lords day, 11. Regiments of Foot, and about the number of 35. or 37. or 40. Troops or Horse. That which makes me say this to you, is partly for your satisfactions that you may know the reasons of the ab∣sence of so many of the Forces, and partly that you may give the more glory to God for his blessing, and for his preservation of that remnant of the Army which was together; being as I have said about 11. Regiments of Foot, and a matter of 35. or 40. Troops of Horse. Upon the Saturday at night about nine or ten a clocke at night the Army came to Kenton, and the next morning about 7. a clock (though
all that night there was newes came that the King was going to Ban∣bury) we had certaine information hee was comming downe a hill, which is called Edge-hill, which hath some advantage by nature for breast-works, and such things as those are; that hill the Kings Army came downe, his Army comming downe, my Lord of Essex present∣ly drew out into the Field and drew his Army into a place of as good advantage as possible he could, though the other Army had the advan∣tage of the hill, which they were possessed of before, and at the be∣ginning of the day the wind it was against us, and was for the advan∣tage of the other Army. The preparation on both sices was for the making of them ready for fight, and the Kings comming downe the hill was so long, that there was nothing done till 3. or 4. in the after∣noone, saving the shooting of some Cannon. And Gentlemen I shall tell you the worst as well as the best, that you may know all, and that when you have known the worst, you may find it in your judgements, to give the more praise to God for his mercy, after there was so much probability of having the worst of it. After that we had shot 2. or 3. peeces of Ordnance, they began for to shoot some of theirs, and truly not long after, before there was any near execution, there was 3. or 4. of our Regiments fairely ran away. I shall name you the particulars, and afterwards name you such of those as at the present shall come within my memory that did the ex∣traordinary service, whereof you will finde those of this Citie to have beene very extraordinary instruments. There were that ran away, to be bold with my selfe first, my Regiment, my Lord Mandevils, Sir William Fairfaxes, Sir Henry Cholmleyes, these did fairely run away in despight of the Officers. Gentlemen, you see by this time I am like to tell you the truth of every thing; but yet I must say this, that though they did so, yet I hope there will be a convenient and good number of them got together againe, that may shew themselves in better condition, and better way of service then yet they have done, I hope so, and by the blessing of God it may be so, for they are but young Souldiers, and we have seene very good experience of some that have this last battle done very extraordinary and gallant service, who had the misfortune before to be under a cloud. Not long after there was a charge upon
the left wing of the Horse, and there I conceive there was a matter of 18. or 19. Troops, and truely I cannot say they did so well as they should though I hope that they will be brought together againe to doe very good service hereafter; but so it is they had the worst of it; by this you will see that at the beginning of the day we might thinke it would not prove so well as it pleased God it did afterwards in the close of the day, for 4. of our Regiments were departed and one halfe of the Horse were not in good order; but it pleased God then to begin to shew himselfe for after they had past the left wing of our Horse, I cannot attribute it to any thing but Gods owne providence, their Horse that had past through ours went to the Towne where all our baggage was; the baggage of the Officers and the private persons of the Army, not they of the Artillery or publique treasury, but the Colonels carts, and the Captaines Carts, and such provision as that; there they tooke a baite upon our pillage and fell a plundering, while the rest of the Army was a fighting, and indeed my Lord Gene∣rall had some more losse then ordinary by some cloathes and money he had there, but we thanke God for it, for thereby the rest of our Ar∣my had better opportunitie to doe that service they did. My Lord Generall himselfe upon this extremity did begin to shew himselfe to be more then an ordinary man, and indeed I thinke more then I have heard tell of any man, for he charged up at severall times, both with Horse and Foot, and perticularly at the head of one of the divisions of his own Regiments of Foot, which was raised here in Essex, and though so many ill passages happened before, yet with his Excellencies valour, conduct and encouragement, his own Troop of Horse fell with that division of his Regiment of Foot upon the Kings owne Regiment (which they had most hopes of) and was called the red Regiment, and after a sore and bitter fight (for to give them their due both sides fought very well, and particu∣larly my Lord Generalls Serjeant Major who did very gallantly) there was killed the Kings Standard-bearer Sir Edw. Varney, they took the Kings Standard which was raised up against the Parliament, and it was brought my L. Generall, and he delivered it to a servant which was not so carefull as he ought to have been, but lost that by careles∣nesse which was gotten by force. We tooke likewise the Kings Gene∣rall
prisoner, and carried him away; we tooke prisoner my Lord Gene∣rals son, my L. Willoughby, that person you have heard so much of, and been so well acquainted with here, Col Lunsford which should have had the tower, he was likewise taken prisoner and Sir Edward Strad∣ling, Col. Vavasour, and divers others of qualitie, My Lord Awbirney, & Munroy a Scotchman of great qualitie was slain. While these were upon this service. I must give the right to divers other of the Officers of the Horse which were upon the right wing, that they did extraor∣dinary service too, that was my L. of Bedford himselfe, who did ve∣ry gallantly, and Sir Wil. Belfore the late Lieutenant of the Tower, Sir Philip Stapleton, and all that Troop which formerly had been under some other kind of report, they did extraordinary service, charged ve∣ry bravely, after they had stood as I am informed seventeen shot of Cannon shot against them, by all which God be thanked not a man of them hurt: there was likewise very extraordinary service perfor∣med by my Lord Gray, and Sir Arthur Hazlerig, who indeed was a helpe to give a great turne to the day, by cutting off a Regiment of the Kings, which was called the blew Regiment, and there were many other Gentlemen of great worth, that did very extraordinary service too; I would not have you understand, that others did not doe, be∣cause I remember not their names, for I speake to you now but on the sudden, naming onely these that come to memory, and you will heare more of the rest upon other occasions. Upon the close of the day, wee know it for certaine, that the best Regiment of the Kings was cut off, and the next best Regiment, which was that under my L. of Lind∣sey: there was all the prisoners taken I told you of: there were those persons of qualitie slaine I told you of, and there was as we conceive (this I tell you upon information, as we conceive, and are informed by the Countrey-men that saw them bury the dead next day, and bring them up into heaps, there was I say, as is informed and conceived) about 3000. of theirs slain; and we cannot have any information, to give us reason to beleeve that there was above 300. of ours slain; And this was to be observed of Gods providence in this dayes worke, that though the battell began so improbably of our side, yet before the close of the night we had got the ground that they were upon, we had gotten the wind, and we doe not know, nor by information conceive,
that there was 20. men of ours kill'd by all the Kings Cannon: when it was night there could be no more fighting, we drew our Forces to∣gether, and so likewise did the King, they were then but at a reasona∣ble distance, it may be three times, or six times the distance of this room, or some such like distance, but in the night the Forces of the King withdrew up the Hill from whence they came; and my L. Ge∣nerall amongst others sent my self for to bring on those forces which I told you were a dayes march behinde with Colonell Hampden, which about one or two a clocke at night came up accordingly; and joyned with the rest of the Army, when the King had drawn his For∣ces up the hill, my Lord Generall about one or two a clocke drew us a matter of three quarters of a mile further from the hill, that he might be out of the power of the Cannon. Wee stood to our Armes all the night, in the morning wee drew our selves againe into the fields, but we heard no more newes of the other Army, more then wee saw some scattering men, and some Troopes of Horse on the top of the hill, which came to bury the dead, and take away some of their Cannon, and such things as those were, but they came no otherwise down the hill, neither that day, nor on Tuesday, though there were divers reports flew abroad and I beleeve came hither, that there was fighting on Munday and Tuesday, yet there was no fighting, for the King kept on the top of the hill, and when Master Strode and my selfe came away on Tuesday at 4. a clock, we can assure you there was no more action, then was on the Lords day. Gentlemen, I shall after I have declared this narration to you, say no more then this, that certainly my Lord Generall himselfe, hath de∣served as much in this service for his paines and care, and for the par∣ticular successe that was upon it, as truly I thinke ever any Gentleman did; and in the next place, that as God of his own immediate provi∣dence did thus declare himselfe for the owning of his own cause, so you will not forget to apply your selves to God, to give him the glo∣ry, and to intreat his blessing upon the future guidance of the great worke.
The Lord Wharton his second Speech. GEntlemen, I shal trouble you but with a word or two, the one is upon part of that narrative, which I began with all, wherein tru∣ly I take my self to be very much beholding to that Gentleman that; spoke after me, that he did not forget to informe you of the ex∣traordinary blessing, that God bestowed upon the courage of honest pious and religious men: for truely there was very few that did any extraordinary service, but such as had a mark of Religion upon them: That which I omitted to tell you, was this, that one great cause of the preservation, & of the successe of that day, was that the Troops under the Command of Prince Robert, while we were a fighting, not only pillaged the baggage (which was but a poore imployment;) but killed Country-men that came in with their teemes, and poore women, and children that were with them; this I thinke comes not amisse to tell you, because you may see what is the thing they aime at, which is pil∣lage, and baggage, and plundering, and the way which they would come by it is murdering, and destroying, and therefore it will come in very properly, to incourage you to that work, which these two noble Lords have so well opened unto you, which is, the standing upon your defence, and to that I shall onely adde this, that when you shall have done that in that measure, and in that proportion (which we doe not doubt but you will doe, because you have alwaies shewed your affections, and your wisedomes, to be so great in the carriage on of this businesse, I say, when you shall have so behaved your selves,) there is no doubt but Gods blessing will be upon it, and you will bee sure to have an extraordinary back, the Army wil be sure to be on the one side, when you with your strength will be on the other side, and when that Army shall lie between these two, without question it will come to a very short conclusion, when you may reap the fruit of your labours that you have beene at, to your benefit, and your posterities. FINIS.
