12521.5 S92789 52633268 174066
DE SECTORE & RADIO. The description and vse of the Sector in three bookes. The description and vse of the Crosse-Staffe in other three bookes. For such as are studious of Mathematicall practise. geometric illustration LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM IONES. and are to be sold by IOHN TAP at Saint Magnus corner. 1623.
THE DESCRIPTION AND VSE OF THE SECTOR, For such as are studious of Mathematicall practise. geometric illustration LONDON, Printed by WILLIAM IONES. 1623.
THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE SECTOR. CHAP. I. The Description, the making, and the generall vse of the Sector. A Sector in Geometrie, is a figure com∣prehended of two right lines contain∣ing an angle at the center, and of the circumference assumed by them. This Geometricall instrument hauing two legs containing all varietie of angles, & the distance of the feete, representing the subtenses of the circumference, is therefore called by the same name. It containeth 12 seuerall lines or scales, of which 7 are generall, the other 5 more particular. The first is the scale of Lines diuided into 100 equall parts, and numbred by 1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10. The second, the lines of Superficies diuided into 100
vnequall parts, and numbred by 1.1.2.3.4.5.6.7.8.9.10. The third, the lines of Solids, diuided into 1000 vne∣qual parts, & numbred by 1. 1. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. The fourth, the lines of Sines and Chords diuided into 90 degrees, and numbred with 10. 20. 30. vnto 90. These foure lines of Lines, of Superficies, of Solids, and of Sines, are all drawne from the center of the Sector al∣most to the end of the legs. They are drawne on both the legs, that euery line may haue his fellow. All of them are of one length, that they may answere one to the other: And euery one hath his parallels, that the eye may the better distinguish the diuisions. But of the parallels those onely which are inward most containe the true diuisions. There are three other generall lines, which because they are infinite are placed on the side of the Sector. The first a line of Tangents, numbred with 10.20.30.40.50.60. signifying so many degrees from the beginning of the line, of which 45 are equall to the whole line of Sines, the rest follow as the length of the Sector will beare. The second, a line of Secants, diuided by pricks into 60 degrees, whose beginning is the same, with that of the line of Tangents, to which it is ioyned. The third, is the Meridian line, or line of Rumbs, diui∣ded vnequally into degrees, of which the first 70 are al∣most equall to the whole line of Sines, the rest follow vn∣to 84 according to the length of the Sector. Of the particular lines inserted among the generall, because there was voyd space, the first are the lines of Qua∣drature placed betweene the lines of Sines, and noted with 10.9.8.7. S. 6.5.90. Q. The second, the lines of Segments placed betweene the lines of Sines and Superficies, diuided into 50 parts, and numbered with 5.6.7.8.9.10. The third, the lines of Inscribed bodies in the same Sphere, placed betweene the scales of Lines, and noted with D. S. I. C. O. T.
The fourth, the lines of Equated bodies, placed between the lines of Lines and Solids, and noted with D. I. C. S. O. T. The fift, are the lines of Mettalls, inserted with the lines of Equated bodies (there being roome sufficient) and noted with these Characters. ☉. ☿. ♄. ☽. ♀. ♂. ♃. There remaine the edges of the Sector, and on the one I haue set a line of Inches, which are the twelth parts of a foote English: on the other a lesser line of Tangents, to which the Gnomon is Radius. 2 Of the making of the Sector. LEt a Ruler be first made either of brasse or of wood, like vnto the former figure, which may open and shut vpon his center. The head of it may be about the twelth part of the whole length, that it may beare the moueable foote, and yet the most part of the diuisions may fall without it. Then let a moueable Gnomon be set at the end of the moueable foote, and there turne vpon an Axis, so as it may sometime stand at a right angle with the feete, and sometimes be inclosed within the feet. But this is well knowne to the workeman. For drawing of the lines. Vpon the center of the Sector, and semidiameter somewhat shorter then one of the feet, draw an occult arke of a circle, crossing the closure of the inward edges of the Sector about the letter T. In this arke, at one degree on either side from the edge, draw right lines from the Center, fitting them with Paral∣lels and diuide them into an hundred equall parts, with subdivisions into 2.5. or 10. as the line will beare, but let the numbers set to them, be onely 1.2.3.4. &c. vnto 10. as in the example. These lines so divided, I call the lines or scales of Lines; and they are the ground of all the rest. In this Arke at 5 degrees on either side, from the edge neere T, drawe other right lines from the Center, and fit them with Parallells. These shall serue for the lines of Solids.
Then on the other side of the Sector in like manner, vpon the Center & equall Semidiameter, drawe another like Arke of a circle: & heere againe at one neere degree on either side frō the edge neere the letter Q draw right lines from the Center, and fit them with parallells. These shall serue for the lines of Sines. At 5 Degrees on either side from the edge neere Q drawe other right lines from the center, and fit them with parallels: these shall serue for the lines of Superficies. These foure principall lines being drawne, and fitted with parallels, we may drawe other lines in the middle betweene the edges and the lines of Lines, which shall serue for the lines of inscribed bodies, and others betweene the edges and the Sines for the lines of quadrature. And so the rest as in the example. 3 To diuide the lines of Superficies. SEeing like Superficies doe hold in the proportion of their homologall sides duplicated, by the 29 Pro. 6 lib. Euclid. If you shall find meane proportionals between the whole side, and each hundred part of the like side, by the 13 Pro. 6 lib. Euclid. all of them cutting the same line, that line so cut shal conteine the divisions required. wherefore vpon the center A and Semidiamiter equall to the line of Lines, describe a Semicircle ACBD, with AB perpendi∣cular to the diameter CD. And let the Semidiameter AD he divided as the line of Lines into an hundred parts, & AE the one halfe of AC diuided also into an hundred parts, so shall the diuisions in AE be the centers from whence you shall describe the Semicircles C 10. C 20. C 30. &c. diuiding the lin AB into an hundred vnequall parts: and this line AB so diuided shall be the line of Superficies, and must be transferred into the Sector. But let the numbers set to them be onely 1.1.2.3. vnto 10, as in the example,
geometric illustration 4 To diuide the lines of Solids. SEing like Solids do hold in the proportion of their ho∣mologall sides triplicated, if you shall finde two meane proportionalls between the whole side & each thousand part of the like side: all of them cutting the same two right lines, the former of those lines so cut, shall containe the diuisions required. Wherefore vpon the center A & Semidiameter equall to the line of Lines. describe a circle and diuide it into 4 equall parts CEBD, drawing the crosse diameters CB, ED. Then diuide the semidiameter AC, first into 10 equall parts, and betweene the whole line AD & AF the tenth part of AC, seeke out two meane proportionall lines AI and AH. againe betweene AD and AG being two tenth parts of AC, seeke out two meane proportionals AL and AK, and so forward in the rest. So shall the line AB be diuided into 10 vnequall parts.
geometric illustration Secondly, diuide each tenth part of the line AC into 10 more, and betweene the whole line AD, and each of them, seeke out two meane proportionalls as before: So shall the line AB be diuided now into an hundred vn∣equall parts. Thirdly, If the length will beare it, subdiuide the line AC once againe, each part into ten more: and betweene the whole line AD and each subdiuision, seeke two
meane proportionalls as before. So should the line AB be now diuided into 1000 parts. But the ruler being short, it shall suffice, if those 10 which are nearest the center be expressed, the rest be vnderstood to be so diui∣ded, though actually they be diuided into no more then 5 or 2. and this line AB so diuided shall be the line of Solids, and must be transferred into the Sector: But let the numbers set to them be onely 1.1.1.2.3. &c. vnto 10. as in the example. 5 To diuide the lines of Sines and Tangents on the side of the Sector. VPon the center A, and semidiameter equall to the line of Lines, describe a semicircle ABCD, with AB, perpendicular to the diameter CD. Then diuide the quadrants CB, BD, each of them into 90. and subdiuide each degree into 2 parts: For so,if streight lines be drawne parallell to the diameter CD, through these 90, and their subdiuisions they shall diuide the perpendicular AB vnequally into 90. geometric illustration
And this line AB so diuided shall be the line of Sines; and must be transferred into the Sector. The numbers set to them are to be 10.20.30. &c. vnto 90 as in the exam∣ple. If now in the poynt D, vnto the diameter CD, we shall raise a perpendicular DE, and to it drawe streight lines from the center A, through each degree of the qua∣drant DB. This perpendicular so diuided by them shall be the line of Tangents, & must be transferred vnto the side of the Sector. The numbers set to them, are to be 10.20.30. &c. as in the example. If betweene A and D, another streight line GF, be drawne parallell to DE, it will be diuided by those lines from the center in like sort as DE is diuided, and it may serue for a lesser line of Tangents, to be set on the edge of the Sector. These lines of Sines and Tangents, may yet otherwise be transferred into the Sector out of the line of Lines, (or ra∣ther out of a diagonall Scale equall to the line of Lines) by tables of Sines and Tangents. In like manner may the lines of Superficies, be transferred by tables of square rootes; and the line of Solids, by tables of cubique rootes: which I leaue to others to extract at leasure. 6 To shew the ground of the Sector. LEt AB, AC, represent the leggs of the Sector: then seuering these two AB, AC, are equall, and their sections AD, AE, also equall, they shall be cut proporti∣onally: and if we draw the lines BC, DE, they will be parallell by the second Pro. 6 lib. of Euclid, and so the Triangles ABC, ADE, shalbe equiangle; by reason of the common angle at A, and the equall angles at the base, and therefore shall haue the sides proportionall a∣bout those equall angles, by the 4 Pro. 6 lib. of Euclid.
geometric illustration The side AD, shalbe to the side AB, as the basis DE, vnto the parallell basis BC, and by conuersion AB, shall be vnto AD, as BC, vnto DE: and by permutation AD, shall be vnto DE, as AB, to BC. &c. So that if AD, be the fourth part of the side AB, then DE, shall also be the fourth part of his parallell basis BC, The like reason holdeth in all other sections. 7 To shew the generall vse of the Sector. THere may some cōclusions be wrought by the Sector, euen then when it is shut, by reason that the lines are all of one length: but generally the vse hereof consists in the solution of the Golden rule, where three lines being giuen of a known denominaton, a fourth proportionall is to be found. And this solution is diuerse in regard both of the lines, and of the entrance into the worke. The solution in regard of the lines is sometimes simple, as when the worke is begun and ended vpon the same lines. Sometimes it is compound, as when it is begun on one kind of lines, and ended on another. It may be begun vpon the lines of Lines; & finished vpon the lines of Super∣ficies. It may begin on the Sines, and end on the Tangents.
The solution in regard of the entrance into the worke, may be either with a parallell or else laterall on the side of the Sector, I cal it parallell entrance, or entring with a paral∣lell, when the two lines of the first denomination are ap∣plied in the parallells, and the third line, and that which is sought for, are on the side of the Sector. I call it laterall en∣trance, or entring on the side of the Sector, when the two lines of the first denomination are one the side of the Se∣ctor, and the third line and that which is to be found out, doe stand in the parallells. geometric illustration
As for example, let there be giuen three lines A, B, C, to which I am to find a fourth proportionall. let A, measured in the line of lines, be 40, B 50, and C 60, and suppose the question be this. If 40 Monthes giue 50 pounds, what shal 60? Here are lines of two denominatiōs, one of months, another of pounds, and the first with which I am to enter must be that of 40 monthes. If then I would enter with a parallell, first I take A, the line of 40, and put it ouer as a parallell in 50, reckoned in the line of lines, on either side of the Sector from the center, so as it may be the Base of an Isoscheles triangle BAC, whose sides AB, AC are equal to B, the line of the second denomination. Then the Sector being thus opened, I take C the line of 60, betweene the feete of the compasses, and carrying them parallell to BC, I finde them to crosse the lines AB, AC, on the side of the Sector in D and E, numbred with 75, wherefore I conclude the line AD, or AE, is the fourth proportionall and the correspondent number 75 which was required. But if I would enter on the side of the Sector, then would I dispose the lines of the first denomination A and C, in the line of Lines, on both sides of the Sector, in AB, AC, & in AD, AE, so as they should all meete in the center A, and then taking B the line of the second denominati∣on put it ouer as a parallell in BC, that it may be the Basis of the Isocheles triangle BAC, whose sides AB, AC, are equall to A, the first line of the first denomination, for so the Sector being thus opened, the other parallell from D to E, shall be the fourth proportionall which was required, and if it be measured with the other lines, it shal be 75, as before. In both this manner of operations, the two first lines do serue to opē the Sector to his due angle, the difference betweene them is especially this, that in parallell entrance, the two lines of the first denomination, are placed in the parallells B, C, D, E, & in latterall entrance they are placed on both sides of the Sector, in AB, AD and in AC, AE.
geometric illustration Now in simple solution which is begun and ended, vpon the same kinde of lines, it is all one which of the two latter lines be put in the secōd or third places. As in our exāple we may say, as 40 are to 50, so 60 vnto 75, or else as 40 are to 60, so 50 vnto 75. And hence it cōmeth that we may enter both with a parrallell, & on the sides two manner of wayes at either entrance, and so the most part of questions
may be wrought 4 seuerall wayes, though in the propo∣sitions following, I mention onely that which is most conuenient. Thus much for the generall vse of the Sector, which being considered and well vnderstood, there is no∣thing hard in that which followeth. CHAP. II. The vse of the Scale of Lines. 1. To set downe a Line, resembling any giuen parts or fraction of parts. numbered line segment THe lines of Lines are diuided actually into 100 parts, but we haue put onely 10 numbers to them. These we would haue to signifie either themselues alone, or ten times themselues, or an hundred times themselues, or a thousand times themselues, as the matter shall require. As if the numbers giuen be no more then 10, then we may thinke the lines onely diuided into 10 parts accor∣ding to the numbers set to them. If they be more then 10, and not more then 100, then either line shall con∣taine 100 parts, and the numbers set by them shall be in value 10.20.30. &c. as they are diuided actually. If yet they be more then 100, then euery part must be thought to be diuided into 10, and either line shall be 1000 parts, and the numbers set to them shall be in value 100.200.300, and so forward still increasing themselues by 10. This being presupposed, we may number the parts and fraction of parts giuen in the line of lives; and taking out the distance with a paire of compasses, set it by, for the line so taken shall resemble the number giuen. In this manner may we set downe a line resembling 75, if either we take 75 out of the hundred parts, into which one of the line of lines is actually diuided, and note it in A, or 7 ½. of the first 10 parts, and note it in B, or one∣ly ¾. of one of those hundred parts, and note it in C. Or
if this be either to great or to small, we may run a Scale at pleasure, by opening the compasse to some small di∣stance, and running it ten times ouer, then opening the compasse to these ten, run them ouer nine times more, & set figures to them as in this example, and out of this we may take what parts we will as before. To this end I haue diuided the line of inches on the edge of the Sector, so as one inch containeth 8 parts, ano∣ther 9, another 10, &c. according as they are figured, and as they are distant from the other end of the Sector, that so we might haue the better estimate. 2 To encrease a line in a giuen proportion. 3 To diminish a line in a giuen proportion. TAke the line giuen with a paire of compasses, and open the Sector, so as the feete of the compasses may stand in the points of the number giuen, then keeping the Sector at this angle, the parallell distance of the points of the number required, shall giue the line required. line segment Let A, be a line giuen to be increased in the proporti∣on of 3 to 5. First I take the line A, with the compasses, and open the Sector till I may put it ouer in the poynts of 3 and 3, so the parallell betweene the poynts of 5 & 5, doth giue me the line B, which was required. In like manner, if B, be a line giuen to be diminished in the proportiō of 5 to 3, I take the line B & to it open the Sector in the poynts of 5, so the parallell betweene the points of 3, doth giue me the line A, which was required. If this manner of worke doth not suffice, we may mul∣tiplie or diuide the numbers giuen by 1, or 2, or 3, &c. And so worke by their numbers equimultiplices, as for 3
and 5, wee may open the Sector in 6 and 10, or else in 9 and 15, or else in 12 and 20, or in 15 and 25, or in 18. and 30. &c. 4 To diuide a line into parts giuen. TAke the line giuen, and open the Sector according to the length of the said line in the points of the parts, wherevnto the line should be diuided, then keeping the Sector at this angle, the parallell distance betweene the points of 1 and 1 shall diuide the line giuen into the parts required. line segment Let AB, be the line giuen to be diuided into fiue parts, first I take this line AB, and to it open the Sector in the points of 5 and 5, so the parallell betweene the points of 1 and 1, doth giue me the line AC, which doth diuide it into the parts required. line segment Or let the like line AB, be to be diuided into twenty three parts. First I take out the line and put it vpon the Sector in the points of 23, then may I by the former pro∣position diminish it in AC, CD, in the proportion of 23, to 10, and after that diuide the line AC into 10, &c. As before. 5 To finde a proportion betweene two or more right lines giuen. TAke the greater line giuen, and according to it open
the Sector in the points of 100 and 100, then take the lesser lines seuerally, & carry them parallell to the greater, till they stay in like points, so the number of points wherein they stay, shall shew their proportion vnto 100. line segment Let the lines giuen be AB, CD, first I take the line CD, & to it open the Sector in the points of 100, and 100, then keeping the Sector at this angle, I enter the lesser line AB, parallell to the former, and find it to crosse the lines of Lines in the poynts of 60. Wherefore the proportion of AB to CD, is as 60 to 100. Or if the line CD, be greater then can be put ouer in the poynts of 100, then I admit the lesser line AB, to be 100, & cutting off CE equal to AB, I find the proportion of CE, vnto ED, to be as 100, almost to 67; wherefore this way ye proportiō of AB vnto CD, is as 100 vnto almost 167. This proposition may also not vnfitly be wrought by any other number, that admits seuerall diuisions, and namely, by the numbers of 60. And so the lesser line will be found to be 36, which is as before in lesser numbers, as 3 vnto 5. It may also be wrought without opening the Sector. For if the lines between which we seek a proporti∣on, be applyed to the lines of Lines, (or any other Scale of equall parts) there will be such proportiō found between them, as betweene the lines to which they are equall. 6 Two lines being giuen to finde a third incontinuall proportion. FIrst place both the lines giuen, on both sides of the Sector from the Center, and marke the termes of their extension, then take out the second line againe, and to it open the Sector, in the terme of the first line, so keeping
the Sector at this angle, the parallell distance betweene the termes of the second line, shall be the third proportionall. geometric illustration Let the two lines giuen be AB, AC, which I take out and place on both sides of the Sector, so as they all meete in the center A, let the termes of the first line be B and B, the termes of the second C and C. Then doe I take out AC the second line againe, and to it open the Sector in the termes BB. So the parallell betweene C and C doth giue me the third line in continuall proportion. For as AB is vnto AC, so BB, equall to AC, is vnto CC.
7 Three lines being giuen to finde the fourth in discontinuall proportion. HEre the first line and the third are to be placed on both sides of the Sector from the center, then take out the se∣cond line, and to it open the Sector in the termes of the first line. For so keeping the Sector at this angle, the parallell dis∣tance between the termes of the third line, shalbe the fourth proportionall. Let the three lines giuen be A, B, C. geometric illustration First I take out A and C, and place them on both sides of the Sector, in AB, AC, and AD, AE, laying the beginning of both lines at the center A, then do I take out B the second line, according to it I open the Sector in B and C, the termes of the first line: so the parallell betweene D and E, doth giue me the fourth proportionall which was required. As in Arithmetique, it sufficeth if the first and third num∣ber giuen be of one denomination, the second & the fourth which is required be of another. For one and the same de∣nomination is not required necessarily in them all. So in Geometrie, it sufficeth if the sides AB, AD, resembling the
first and third lines giuen be measured in one Scale, and the parallells BC, DE be measured in another. Wherefore knowing the proportion of A the first line, and C the third line, by the fift prop. before. Which is here as 8 to 12, & descē∣ding in lesser numbers is as 4 to 6, or as 2 to 3, or ascending in greater numbers, as 16 vnto 24, or 18 to 27, or 20 to 30, or 30 to 45, or 40 to 60 &c. If the Sector be opened in the points of 8 and 8, to the quantity of B, the second line giuen, then a parallell betweene 12 and 12, shall giue DE, the fourth line required. So likewise if it be opened in 4 and 4, then a parallell betweene 6 and 6, or if in 16 and 16, then a paral∣lell betweene 24 and 24 shall giue the same DE. And so in the rest. 8 To diuide a line in such sort as another line is before diuided. FIrst take out the line giuen, which is already diuided, and laying it on both sides of the Sector from the center, marke how farre it extendeth. Then take out the second line which is to be diuided, and to it open the Sector in the termes of the first line. This done, take out the parts of the first line, and place them also on the same side of the Sector from the cen∣ter. For the parallells taken in the termes of these parts, shalbe the correspondent parts in the line which is to be diuided. Let AB, be a line diuided in D and E, and BC, the line which I am to diuide in such sort, as AB is diuided. First I take out the line AB, and place it on the line of Lines in AB, AC, both from the center A, then take I out the second BC, and to it open the Sector in B and C, the termes of the first line. The Sector thus opened to his due angle, I take out AD and AE, the parts of the first line AB, and place them also on both the sides of the Sector in AD, AE, so the parallell DD, giueth me BF, and the parallell EE, giueth me BG, and now the line BC, is diuided in F & G, as is the other line AB, in D and E, which is that which
geometric illustration required. If the line AB, were longer then one of the sides of the Ruler, then should I finde what proportion it hath to his parts AD, AE, and that knowne I may worke as before in the former proposition. 9 Two numbers being giuen to finde a third in continuall proportion. FIrst reckon the two numbers giuen on both sides of the lines of Lines from the center, and marke the termes to which either of them extendeth, then take out a line resem∣bling the second number againe, and to it open the Sector in the termes of the first number, for so keeping the Sector at this angle, the parallell distance betweene the termes of the second laterall number, being measured in the same Scale, from whence his parallell was taken, shall giue the third number proportionall. Let the two numbers giuen be 18, 24, these being re∣sembled in lines, the worke will be in a manner all one, with that in the sixt Prop. and so the third proportionall number will be found to to be 32.
10. Three numbers being giuen to finde a fourth in discontinuall proportion. THe solution of this proposition, is in a manner all one with that before in the seuenth Prop. onely there may be some difficulty in placing of the numsers. To avoyd this, we must remember that three number being giuen, the question is annexed but to one, and this must allwayes be placed in the third place, that which agrees with this third number in denomination, shalbe the first number, and that which remaineth the second number. This being con∣sidered, reckon the first, and third numbers, which are of the first denomination on both sides of the lines of Lines from the center, and marke the termes to which either of them extendeth, then take out a line resembling the second num∣ber, and to it open the Sector in the termes of the first num∣ber, for so keeping the Sector at this angle, the parallell dis∣tance betweene the termes of the third laterall number, be∣ing measured in the same Scale from whence his parallell was taken, shall giue the fourth number proportionall. As if a question were proposed in this manner, 10 yards cost 8 l, how many yards may we buy for 12 l? heere the question is annexed to 12; and therefore it shall be the third number, and because 8 is of the same denomination, it shall be the first number, then 10 remaining, it must be the second number, so will they stand in this order, 8, 10, 12. These be∣ing resembled in lines, the worke will be in a manner the same, with that in the seuenth Prop. and the fourth pro∣portionall number will be found to be 15. For as 8 are to 10, so 12 vnto 15. And this holdeth in direct proportion, where, as the first number is to the second, so the third to the fourth. So that if the third number be greater then the first, the fourth will be greater then the second, or if the third number be lesse then the first, the fourth will be lesse then the second, but it reciprocall proportion, commonly called the Back rule,
where by how much the first number is greater then the third, so much the second will be lesse then the fourth, or by how much the first number is lesse then the third, so much the second will be greater then the fourth. The man∣ner of working must be contrary, that is; the Sector is to be opened in the termes of the third number, and the parallell resembling the number required, is to be found betweene the termes of the first number, the rest may be obserued as before, as for example. If twelue men would raise a frame in ten dayes, in how many dayes would eight men raise the same frame? Here, because the fewer men would require the longer time, though the numbers be 12, 10, 8, yet the fourth proportionall will be found to be 15. So if 60 yards, of three quarters of a yard in bredth, would hang round about a roome, and it were required to know how many yards of halfe a yard in bredth, would serue for the same roome. The fourth proportionall would be found to be 90. So if to make a foote superficiall, 12 inches in bredth doe require 12 inches in length, and the bredth being 16 inches, it were required to knowe the length. Here, because the more bredth, the lesse length, the fourth proportionall will be found to be 9. So if to make a Solid foote, a base of 144 inches, require 12 inches in height, and a base giuen being 216 inches, it were requi∣red to knowe how many inches it shall haue in height. The fourth proportionall would be found to be 8. This last proposition of finding a fourth proportionall number, may be wrought also by the lines of Superficies, and by the lines of Solids.
CHAP, III. The vse of the lines of Superficies. 1 To finde a proportion betweene two or more like Superficies. TAke one of the sides of the greater Superficies giuen, and according to it open the Sector in the points of 100 and 100, in the lines of Superficies, then take the like sides of the lesser Superficies seuerally, and carry them parallell to the for∣mer, till they stay in like points, so the number of points wherein they stay, shall shew their proportion vnto 100. line segment Let A and B, be the sides of like Superficies, as the sides of two squares, or the diameters of two circles, first I take the side A, and to it open the Sector in the points of 100, then keeping the Sector to this angle, I enter the lesser side B, pa∣rallell to the former, and finde it to crosse the lines of Super∣ficies in the points of 40, wherefore the proportion of the Superficies, whose side is A, to that whose side is B, is as 100 vnto 40, which is in lesser numbers, as 5 vnto 2. This proposition might haue beene wrought by 60, or any other number that admits seuerall diuisions. It may also be wrought without opening the Sector, for if the sides of the Superficies giuen, be applied to the lines of Superficies beginning alwayes at the center of the Sector, there will be such proportion found betweene them, as betweene the number of parts whereon they fall.
2 To augment a Superficies in a giuen Proportion. 3 To diminish a Superficies in a giuen Proportion. TAke the side of the Superficies, and to it open the Sector in the points of the numbers giuen; then keeping the Sector at that angle, the parallell distance between the points of the number required, shall giue the like side of the Super∣ficies required. line segments Let A be the side of a Square to be augmented in the proportion of 2 to 5. First I take the side A, and put it ouer in the lines of Superficies, in 2 and 2; so the parallel between 5 and 5, doth giue me the side B, on which if I should make a Square, it would haue such proportion to the square of A, as 5 vnto 2. In like maner if B were the semidiameter of a circle to be diminished in the proportion of 5 vnto 2, I would take out B, and put it ouer in the lines of Superficies, in 5 and 5; so the parallell betweene 2 and 2, would giue me A; on which Semidiameter if I should make a circle, it would be lesse then the circle made vpon the Semidiameter B, in such propor∣tion as 2 is lesse then 5. For varietie of worke the like caution may be here ob∣serued to that which we gaue in the third Prop. of Lines. 4 To adde one like Superficies to another. 5 To subtract one like Superficies from another. FIrst, the proportion betweene like sides of the Superficies giuen, is to be found by the first Prop. of Superficies, then adde or subtract the numbers of those proportions, and accordingly augment or diminish by the former Prop.
line segments As if A and B were the side of two Squares, and it were required to make a third Square equall to them both. First the proportion betweene the squares of A and B, would be found to be as 100 vnto 40, or in the lesser numbers as 5 to 2; then because 5 and 2 added do make 7, I augment the side A in the proportion of 5 to 7, and produce the side C, on which if I make a square, it will be equall to both the squares of A and B, which was required. In like maner A and B being the sides of two Squares, if it were required to subtract the square of B out of the square of A, and to make a square equall to the remainder, here the proportion being as 5 to 2, because 2 taken out of 5, the remainder is 3, I would diminish the side A in the pro∣portion of 5 to 3, and so I should produce the side D, on which if I make a square, it will be equall to the remainder when the square of B is taken out of the square of A, that is, the two squares made vpon B and D, shall be equall to the first square made vpon the side A. 4 To find a meane proportionall betweene two lines giuen. FIrst find what proportion is betweene the lines giuen, as they are lines, by the fifth Prop. of Lines, then open the Sector in the lines of Superficies, according to his number, to the quantitie of the one, and a parallell taken betweene the points of the number belonging to the other line shall be the meane proportionall. line segments
Let the lines giuen be A and C. The proportion between them as they are lines wil be found by the fifth Prop. of Lines to be as 4 to 9. Wherefore I take the line C, and put it ouer in the lines of Superficies betweene 9 and 9, and keeping the Sector at this angle, his parallell betweene 4 and 4 doth giue me B for the meane proportionall. Then for proofe of the operation I may take this line B, and put it ouer between 9 and 9: so his parallel between 4 and 4, shall giue me the first line A. Whereby it is plaine that these three lines do hold in continuall proportion; and therefore B is a meane proportio∣nall betweene A and C the extremes giuen. Vpon the finding out of this meane proportion depend many Corollaries, as To make a Square equall to a Superficies giuen. IF the Superficies giuen be a rectangle parallellogram, a meane proportionall betweene the two vnequal sides shall be the side of his equall square. If it shall be a triangle, a meane proportion betweene the perpendicular and halfe the base shal be the side of his equal square. If it shall be any other right-lined figure, it may be resolued into triangles, and so a side of a square found equall to euery triangle; and these being reduced into one equall square, it shall be equall to the whole right-lined figure giuen. To finde a proportion betwene Superficies, though they be vnlike one to the other. IF to euery Superficies we find the side of his equall square, the proportion betweene these squares, shall be the pro∣portion betweene the Superficies giuen.
geometric illustration Let the Superficies giuen, be the oblonge A, and the tri∣angle B. First between the vnequall sides of A, I find a meane proportionall, and note it in C: this is the side of a square equall vnto A. Then betweene the prependicular of B, and halfe his base, I finde a meane proportionall, and note it in B: this is the side of a Square equall to B: but the propor∣tion between the squares of C and B, will be found by the first Prop. of Superficies to be as 5 to 4: and therefore this is the proportion betwene those giuen Superficies. To make a Superficies like to one Superficies and equall to another. LEt the one Superficies giuen be the triangle A, and the o∣ther the Rhomboides B; and let it be required to make an∣other geometric illustration
Rhomboides like to B, and equall to the triangle A. First between the perpendicular and the base of B, I find a meane proportionall, and note it in B, as the side of his e∣quall square: then betweene the perpendicular of the tri∣angle A, and halfe his base, I find a meane proportionall, and note it in A, as the side of his equall square. Wherefore now as the side B is to the side A, so shall the sides of the Rhom∣boides giuen be to C and D, the sides of the Romboides re∣quired, & his pendicular also to E, the perpēdicular required. Hauing the sides and the perpendicular, I may frame the Rhomboides vp, and it will be equall to the triangle A. If the Superficies giuen had been any other right-lined figures, they might haue been resolued into triangles, and then brought into squares as before. Many such Corollaries might haue been annexed, but the meanes of finding a meane proportionall being knowne, they all follow of themselues. 7 To finde a meane proportionall betweene two numbers giuen. FIrst reckon the two numbers giuen on both sides of the Lines of Superficies, from the center, and mark the termes whereunto they extend; then take a line out of the Line of Lines, or any other scale of equall parts resembling one of those numbers giuen, and put it ouer in the termes of his like number in the lines of Superficies; for so keeping the Sector at this angle, the parallell taken from the termes of the other number and measured in the same scale from which the other parallell was taken, shall here shew the meane pro∣portionall which was required. Let the numbers giuen be 4 and 9. If I shall take the line A, in the Diagram of the sixt Prop. resembling 4 in a scale of equall parts, and to it open the Sector in the termes of 4 and 4, in the lines of Superficies, his parallell betweene 9 and 9 doth giue me B for the meane proportionall. And this measured in the scale of equall parts doth extend to 6,
which is the meane proportionall number between 4 and 9. For as 4 to 6, so 6 to 9. In like maner if I take the line C, resembling 9 in a scale of equall parts, and to it open the Sector in the termes of 9 and 9, in the lines of Superficies, his parallell between 4 and 4 doth giue me the same line B, which will proue to be 6, as before, if it be measured in the same scale whence D was taken. 8 To find the square roote of a number. 9 The roote being giuen to find the square num∣ber of that roote. IN the extraction of a square roote it is vsuall to set pricks vnder the first figure, the third, the fifth, the seuenth, and so forward, beginning from the right hand toward the left, and as many pricks as fall to be vnder the square number gi∣uen, so many figures shall be in the roote: so that if the num∣ber giuen be lesse then 100, the roote shall be only of one figure; if lesse then 10000, it shall be but two figures; if lesse then 1000000, it shall be three figures, &c. Thereupon the lines of Superficies are diuided first into an hundred parts, and if the number giuen be greater then 100, the first diuision (which before did signifie only one) must signifie 100, and the whole line shall be 10000 parts: if yet the number giuen be greater then 10000, the first diuision must now signifie 10000, and the whole line be esteemed at 1000000 parts: and if this be too little to expresse the num∣ber giuen, as oft as we haue recourse to the beginning, the whole line shall increase it selfe an hundred times. By this meanes if the last pricke to the left hand shall fall vnder the last figure, which will be as oft as there be odde fi∣gures, the number giuen shall fall out betweene the center of the Sector and the tenth diuision: but if the last prick shall fall vnder the last figure but one, which will be as oft as there be euen figures, then the number giuen shall fall out be∣tweene the tenth diuision and the end of the Sector.
This being considered, when a number is giuen and the square roote is required, take a paire of compasses and setting one foote in the center, extend the other to the terme of the number giuen in one of the lines of Superficies; for this di∣stance applied to one of the Lines of Lines, shall shew what the Square roote is, without opening the Sector. Thus 64 doth giue a roote of 8, and 860 a roote of almost 19, and 1296 a roote of 36, and 7056 a roote of 84, and 62500 a roote of 250, and 714000 a roote of about 845, and so in the rest. On the contrary, a number giuen may be squared, if first we extend the compasses to the number giuen in the lines of Lines, and then apply the distance to the Lines of Superficies, as may appeare by the former examples. 10 Three numbers being giuen to find the fourth in a duplicated proportion. IT is plaine by the 19 and 20 Prop. 6. Lib. of Euclid, that like Superficies do hold in a duplicated proportion of their ho∣mologall sides, whereupon a question being moued concer∣ning Superficies and their sides. It is vsuall in Arith∣meticke that the proportion be first duplicated before the question be resolued, which is not necessarie in the vse of the Sector, only the numbers which do signifie Superficies must be reckoned in the lines of Superficies, and they which signifie the sides of Superficies, in the lines of Lines, after this maner. If a question be made concerning a Superficies, the two numbers of the first denomination must be reckoned in the lines of Lines, and the Sector opened in the termes of the first number to the quantitie of a line out of the scale of Super∣ficies resembling the second number; so his parallels taken betweene the termes of the third number, being measured in the same scale of Superficies, shall giue the Superficiall number which was required. As if a Square, whose side is fortie perches in length, shall
containe ten acres in the Superficies, and it be required to know how many acres the Square should contain, whose side is sixtie perches. Here if I tooke 10 out of the line of Superficies, and put it ouer in 40 in the lines of Lines, his parallell between 60 and 60 measured in the line of Superficies, would be 22 ½; and such is the number of acres required. For Squares do hold in a duplicated proportion of their sides; wherefore when the proportion of their sides is as 4 to 6, and 4 multiplied into 4 become 16, and 6 multiplied into 6 become 36, the proportion of their squares shall be as 16 to 36; and such is the proportion of 10 to 22 ½. If a field measured with a statute perch of 16 ½ foote, shall containe 288 acres, and it be required to know how many acres it would containe if it were measured with a wood∣land perch of 18 foote. Here because the proportion is reciprocall, if I tooke 288 out of the line of Superficies, and put it ouer in 18, in the lines of Lines, his parallell betweene 16 ½ and 16 ½ measured in the line of Superficies, would be 242; and such is the number of acres required. For seeing the proportion of the sides is as 16 to 18, or in lesser numbers as 11 to 12, and that 11 multiplied into 11 become 121, and 12 into 12 become 144, the proportion of these Superficies shall be as a 121 to 144, and so haue 288 to 242, in reciprocall proportion. On the contrary, if a question be proposed concerning the side of a Superficies, the two numbers of the first deno∣mination must be reckoned in the lines of Superficies, and the Sector opened in the termes of the first number, to the quan∣titie of a line, out of the line of Lines, or some Scale of equall parts, resembling the second number; so his parallell taken between the termes of the third number being measured in the same scale with the second number, shal giue the fourth number required. As if a field contained 288 acres when it was measured with a statute perch of 16 ½, and being measured with ano∣ther
perch, was found to containe 242 acres, it were required to know what was the length of the perch with which it was so measured. Here because the proportion is reciprocall, if I tooke 16 ½ out of the line of Lines, and put it ouer in 242 in the lines of Superficies, his parallell betweene 288 and 288, being mea∣sured in the line of Lines, would be 18, and such is the length of the perch in foote whereby the field was last measured. For seeing the proportion of the acres is as 288 vnto 242, or in the least numbers as 144 to 121, and that the roote of 144 is 12, and the root of 121 is 11, the proportion of roots and consequently of the perches shall be as 12 to 11, and so are 16 ½ to 18, in reciprocall proportion. If 360 men were to be set in forme of a long square, whose sides shall haue the proportion of 5 to 8; and it were required to know the number of men to be placed in front and file: if the sides were onely 5 and 8, there should be but 40 men; but there are 360: therefore working as before, I find that As 40 to the square of 5, so 360 to the square of 15. As 40 to the square of 8, so 360 to the square of 24. and so 15 and 24 are the sides required. If 1000 men were lodged in a square ground, whose side were 60 paces, and it were required to know the side of the square wherein 5000 might be so lodged, here working as before, I should find that As 1000 are to the square of 60: so 5000 to the square of 134. And such very neare is the number of paces required▪
CHAP. IV. The vse of the lines of Solids. To finde a proportion betweene two or more like Solids. IN the Sphere, in regular, parallell, and other like bodies, whose sides next the equall angles are proportionall, the worke is in a manner the same, with that in the first Prop. of Superficies, but that it is wrought on other lines. Take one of the sides of the greater Solid, & according to it open the Sector in the points of 1000 and 1000, in the lines of Solids, then take the like sides of the lesser Solids seuer∣ally, and carry them parallell to the former, till they stay in like points, so the number of points wherein they stay, shall shew their proportion to 1000. line segments Let A and B, be the like sides of like Solids, either the di∣ameters, or semidiameters of two spheres, or the sides of two cubes, or other like. First I take the side A, and to it open the Sector in the points of 1000, then keeping the Sector at this angle, I enter the lesser side B, parallell to the former, and finde it to crosse the line of Solids in the points of 400, and such is the proportion betweene the Solids required, which in lesser number is as 5 to 2. This proposition might haue beene wrought by 60, or any other number that admits seuerall diuisions. It may also be wrought without opening the Sector, for if the sides of the Solids giuen, be applied to the lines of Solids, begining allwayes at the center of the Sector, there will be such proportion betweene them, as betweene the numbers of parts whereon they fall.
2 To augment a Solid in a giuen proportion. 3 To diminish a Solid in a giuen proportion. TAke the side of the Solid giuen, and to it open the Sector, in the points of the number giuen: then keep∣ing the Sector at that angle, the parallell distance betweene the points of the number required, shall giue the like side of the Solid required. If it be a paralleleopipedon, or some irregular Solid, the other like sides may be found out in the same manner, and with them the Solids required, may be made vp with the same angles. line segments Let A be the side of a cube, to be augmented in the pro∣portion of 2 to 3. First I take the side A, and put it ouer in the lines of Solids in 2 and 2, so the parallell betweene 3 and 3, doth giue me the side B, on which if I make a cube, it will haue such proportion to the cube of A, as 3 to 2. In like manner, if B were the diameter of a Sphere, to be diminished in the proportion of 3 to 2. I would take out B, and put it ouer in the lines of Solids, in 3 and 3, so the pa∣rallell betweene 2 and 2, would giue me A: to which dia∣meter if I should make a Sphere, it would be lesse then the Sphere, whose diameter is B, in such proportion as 2 is lesse then 3. Here also for variety of worke, may the like caution be obserued to that which we gaue in the third Prop. of Lines. 4 To adde one like Solid to another. 5 To subtract one like Solid from another. FIrst the proportion betweene the sides of the like Solids giuen, is to be found by the first Prop. of Solids: then adde
or subtract those proportions, and accordingly augment or diminish by the former Prop. line segments As if A and B were the sides of two cubes, and it were re∣quired to make a third cube equall to them both: first the proportion betweene the sides A and B, would be found to be as 100 to 40, or in lesser termes as 5 to 2. Then because 5 and 2 being added do make 7, I augment the side A in the proportion of 5 to 7, and produce the side C, on which if I make a cube, it will be equall to both the cubes of A and B, which was required. In like maner A and B being the fides of two cubes, if it were required to subtract the cube of B out of the cube of A, and to make a cube equal to the remainder. Here the pro∣portion being as 5 to 2, because 2 taken out of 5, the remain∣der is 3, I should diminish the side A in the proportion of 5 to 3, and so I should haue the side D, on which if I make a cube, it will be equall to the remainder when the cube of B is taken out of the cube of A, that is the two cubes made vp∣on B and D, shall be equall to the first cube made vpon the side A. 6 To find two meane proportionall lines betweene two extreme lines giuen. FIrst I find what proportion is betweene the two extreme lines giuen as they are lines, by the fifth Prop. of Lines, then open the Sector in the lines of Solids, to the quantitie of the former extreme, and a parallell betweene the points of the number belonging to the other extreme, shall be that meane proportionall which is next the former extreme. This done, open the Sector againe to this meane proportionall in the points of the former extreme, and the parallell distance
betweene the points of the latter extreme, shall be the other meane proportionall required. line segments Let the two extreme lines giuen be A and D, the propor∣tion betweene them, as they are lines, will be found to be as 27 to 8. Wherefore I take the line A, and put it ouer in the lines of Solids betweene 27 and 27, and keeping the Sector at this angle, his parallell betweene 8 and 8, doth giue me B, the meane proportionall next vnto A. Then put I ouer this line B, betweene the aforesaid 27 and 27, and his parallell be∣tweene 8 and 8 doth giue me the line C, the other meane proportionall which was required. Againe, for proofe of the operation I put ouer this line C in the aforesaid 27 and 27, and his parallell between 8 and 8 doth giue me the very line D: whereby it is plaine that these foure lines do hold in continuall proportion; and so B and C are found to be the meane proportionals betweene A and D the extremes giuen. 7 To find two meane proportionall numbers between two extreme numbers giuen. FIrst reckon the numbers giuen on both sides of the lines of Solids, beginning from the center, and marking the termes whereto they extend: then take a line out of the line of Lines, or any other scale of equall parts resembling the for∣mer of those numbers, and put it ouer in the lines of Solids, betweene the points of his like number, and a parallell be∣tweene the points belonging to the other extreme, measured in the scale from whence the other parallell was taken, shall giue that meane proportionall number which is next the former extreme. This done, open the Sector againe to this meane proportionall in the points of the former extreame,
and the parallell distance betweene the points of the latter extteame, measured in the same scale as before, shall there shew the other meane proportionall required. line segments Let the two extreame numbers giuen be 27 and 8; if I shall take the line A, resembling 27 in a scale of equall parts, and to it open the Sector in 27 and 27, in the line of Solids, his parallell betweene 8 and 8 doth giue me B for his next meane proportionall, and this measured in the former scale doth extend to 18. Then put I ouer this line B between the aforesaid 27 and 27, and his parallell between 8 and 8 doth giue me C for the other meane proportionall, and this mea∣sured in the former scale doth extend to 12. Againe, for proofe of my worke, I put ouer this line C betweene 27 and 27, as before, and his parallell betweene 8 and 8 doth giue me D, which measured in the former scale doth extend to 8, which was the latter extreame number giuen; whereby it is plaine that these foure numbers do hold in continuall pro∣portion: and therefore 18 and 12 are meane proportionals betweene 27 and 8, which was required. 8 To finde the cubique roote of a number. 9 The roote being giuen to finde the cube number of that roote. IN the extraction of a cubique root, it is vsuall to set prick vnder the first figure, the fourth, the seuenth, the tenth, and so forward, omitting two, and pricking the third from the righthand toward the left; and as many pricks as fall to be vnder the cubique number, so many figures shall be in the roote. So that if the number giuen be lesse then 1000, the roote shall be only of one figure; if lesse then 1000000, it shall be but of two figures; if aboue these, and lesse then 1000000000, it shall be but three figures; &c. whereupon
the lines of Solids are diuided, first into 1000 parts, and if the numbers giuen be greater thē 1000, the first diuision (whcih before did signifie onely one) must signifie 1000, and the whole line shall be 1000000: if yet the number giuen be greater then 1000000, the first diuision must now signifie 1000000, and the whole line be esteemed at 1000000000 parts, and if these be to little to expresse the numbers giuen, as oft as wee haue recourse to the begining, the whole line shall encrease it selfe a thousand times. By these meanes, if the last pricke, to the left hand, shall fall vnder the last figure, the number giuen shall be reckoned at the beginning of the lines of Solids, from 1 to 10, and the first figure of the roote shall be alwayes either 1, or 2. If the last pricke shall fall vnder the last figure but one, then the number giuen shall be reckoned in the middle of the line of Solids, betweene 10 and 100, and the first figure of the roote shall be alwayes either 2, or 3, or 4. But if the last pricke shall fall vnder the last figure but two, then the number gi∣uen, shall be reckoned at the end of the line of Solids, be∣tweene 100, and 1000. This being considered when a number is giuen, and the cubique roote required: Set one foote of the compasses in the center of the Sector, extend the other in the line of Solids, to the points of the number giuen: for this distance applied to one of the line of Lines, shall shew what the cubique roote is, without opening the Sector. So the nearest roote of 8490000, is about 204. The nearest roote of 84900000, is about 439. The nearest roote of 849000000, is about 947. On the contrary, a number may be cubed, if first we ex∣tend the compasses to the number giuen, in the line of Lines, and then apply the distance to the lines of Solids; as may appeare by the former examples.
10 Three numbers being giuen to finde a fourth in a triplicated proportion. AS like Superficies do hold in a duplicated proportion, so like solids in a triplicated proportion of their homo∣logall sides: and therefore the same worke is to be obserued here on the lines of Solids, as before in the lines of Superfi∣cies; as may appeare by these two examples. If a cube whose side is 4 inches, shall be 7 pound weight, and it be required to know the weight of a cube whose side is 7 inches; here the proportion would be, As 4 are to a cube of 7: so 7 to a cube of 37 ½. And if I tooke 7 out of the lines of Solids, and put it ouer in 4 and 4, in the lines of Lines, his parallell between 7 and 7 measured in the lines of Solids, would be 37 ½; and such is the weight required. If a bullet of 27 pound weight haue a diameter of 6 in∣ches, and it be required to know the diameter of the like bullet, whose weight is 125 pounds; here the proportion would be, As the cubique root of 27 is vnto 6: so the cubique root of 125 is vnto 10. And if I tooke 6 out of the line of Lines, and put it ouer in 27 and 27 of the lines of Solids, his parallell betweene 125 and 125 measured in the line of Lines, would be 10; and such is the length of the diameter required. The end of the first booke.
THE SECOND BOOKE OF THE SECTOR, Containing the vse of the Circular Lines. CHAP. I. Of the nature of Sines, Chords, Tangents and Secants, fit to be knowne before hand in reference to right-line Triangles. IN the Canon of Triangles, a circle is commonly di∣uided into 360 degrees, each degree into 60 minutes, each minute into 60 seconds. geometric illustration A semicircle therefore is an arke of 180 gr.
A quadrant is an arke of 90 gr. The measure of an angle is the arke of a circle, described out of the angular point, intercepted betweene the sides suf∣ficiently produced. So the measure of a right angle is alwayes an arke of 90 gr. and in this example the measure of the angle BAD is the arke BC of 40 gr; the measure of the angle BAG, is the arke BF of 50 gr. The complement of an arke or of an angle doth commō∣ly signifie that arke which the giuen arke doth want of 90 gr: and so the arke BF is the cōplement of the arke BC; & the angle BAF, whose measure is BF, is the complement of the angle BAC; and on the contrary. The complement of an arke or angle in regard of a semi∣circle, is that arke which the giuen arke wanteth to make vp 180 gr: and so the angle EAH is the complement of the angle EAF, as the arke EH is the complement of the arke FE, in which the arke CE is the excesse aboue the qua∣drant. The proportions which these arkes (being the measures of angles) haue to the sides of a triangle, cannot be certaine, vnlesse that which is crooked be brought to a straight line; and that may be done by the application of Chords, Right Sines, versed Sines, Tangents and Secants, to the semidiameter of a circle. A Chorde is a right line subtending an arke: so BE is the chorde of the arke BCE, and BF a chorde of the arke BF. A right Sine is halfe the chorde of the double arke, viz. the right line which falleth perpendicularly from the one ex∣treme of the giuen arke, vpon the diameter drawne to the other extreme of the said arke. So if the giuen arke be BC, or the giuen angle be BAC, let the diameter be drawne through the center A vnto C; and a perpendicular BD be let downe from the extreme B, vpon AC; this perpendicular BD shall be the right sine both of the arke BC, and also of the angle BAC: and it is
also the halfe of the chord BE, subtending the arke BCE, which is double to the giuen arke BC. In like maner, the semidiameter FA, is the right sine of the arke FC, and of the right angle FAC; for it falleth perpendicularly vpon AC, and it is the halfe of the chord FH. This whole Sine of 90 gr. is hereafter called Radius; but the other Sines take their denomination from the degrees and minutes of their arks. Sinus versus, the versed sine is a segment of the diameter, in∣tercepted betweene the right sine of the same arke, and the circumference of the circle. So DC is the versed sine of the arke CB, and GF the versed sine of the arke BF, and GH the versed sine of the arke BH. A Tangent is a right line perpendicular to the diameter, drawne by the one extreme of the giuen arke, and termina∣ted by the secant drawne from the center through the o∣ther extreme of the said arke. A Secant is a right line drawne from the center, through one extreme of the giuen arke, till it meete with the tangent raised from the diameter at the other extreme of the said arke. So if the giuen arke be CE, or the giuen angle be CAE, let the diameter be drawne through the center A to C, and in C to AC, be raised a perpendicular CI. Then let ano∣ther line be drawne from the center A through E, till it meet with the perpendicular CI in I; the line CI is a Tan∣gent, and AI is the Secant both of the arke CE, and of the angle CAE.
CHAP. II. Of the generall vse of Sines and Tangents. 1 The Radius being knowne to find the right sine of any arke or angle. IF the Radius of the circle giuen be equall to the laterall Radius, that is, to the whole line of Sines on the Sector, there needs no farther worke, but to take the other sines also out of the side of the Sector. But if it be either greater or lesser, then let it be made a parallell Radius, by applying it ouer in the lines of Sines, betweene 90 and 90; so the parallell taken from the like laterall sines, shall be the sine required. As if the giuen Radius be AC, and it were required to find the sine of 50 Gr. & his complement agreeable to that radius. geometric illustration Let AB, AB represent the lines of sines on the Sector, and let BB, the distance betweene 90 and 90, be equall to the
giuen radius AC. Here the lines A 40, A 50, A 90, may be called the laterall sines of 40, 50, & 90; in regard of their place on the sides of the Sector. The lines betweene 40 and 40, be∣tweene 50 and 50, betweene 90 and 90, may be called the parallell sines of 40, 50, and 90; in regard they are parallell one to the other. The whole sine of 90 Gr. here standing for the semidiameter of the circle, may be called the Radius. And therefore if AC be put ouer in the line of Sines in 90 and 90, and so made a parallell radius, his parallell sine betweene 50 and 50, shall be BD, the sine of 50 required. And because 50 taken out of 90, the complement is 40; his parallell sine be∣tweene 40 and 40, shall be BG, the sine of the complement which was required. 2 The right sine of any arke being giuen to finde the Radius. TVrne the sine giuen into a parallell sine, and his paral∣lell Radius shall be the Radius required. As if BD were the giuen sine of 50 Gr. and it were requi∣red to finde the Radius: let BD be made a parallell sine of 50 Gr. by applying it ouer in the lines of Sines, betweene 50 and 50; so his parallell Radius betweene 90 and 90 shall be AC, the Radius required. 3 The Radius of a circle, or the right Sine of any arke being giuen, and a streight line resembling a Sine, to find the quantitie of that vnknowne Sine. LEt the Radius or right sine giuen be turned into his pa∣rallell; then take the right line giuen, and carrie it paral∣lell to the former, till it stay in like Sines: so the number of degrees and minutes where it stayeth, shall giue the quantitie of the Sine required. As if BD were the giuen sine of 50 Gr. and BG the streight line giuen: first I make BD a parallell sine of 50 Gr; then keeping the Sector at this angle, I carie the line BG
parallell, and find it to stay in no other but 40 and 40; and therefore 40 gr. is his quantitie required. 4 The Radius or any right Sine being giuen, to finde the versed sine of any arke. IF the arke, whose versed sine is required, be lesse then the quadrant, take the sine of the complement out of the ra∣dius, and the remainder shall be the sinus versus, the versed sine of that arke. As if AB being the laterall Radius, it were required to find to find the versed line of 40 gr; here the sine of the com∣plement is A 50, and therefore B 50 is the versed sine requi∣red. Or if I reckon from B, at the end of the Sector, toward the center, the distance from 90 to 80, is the versed sine of 10 gr; from 90 to 70, the versed sine of 20 gr; from 90 to 60, is the versed sine of 30 gr; and so in the rest. If AD be the giuen sine of 50 gr. and it be required to find the versed sine of 50 gr; here because AD is vnequall to the laterall sine of 50 gr, I make it a parallell. And first I find the radius AC; then the sine of the complement A 40, which being taken out of AC, leaueth C 40 for the versed sine of 50 gr. which was required. But if the arke, whose versed sine is required, be greater then the quadrant, his versed sine also is greater then the Radius, by the right sine of his excesse aboue 90 gr. As if AC being the Radius giuen, it were required to find the versed sine of 130 gr: here the excesse aboue 90 gr. is 40 gr; and therefore the versed sine required is equall to the Ra∣dius AC and A 40, both being set together. 5 The Diameter or Radius being giuen to finde the Chords of euery arke. The sines may be fitted many wayes to serue for chords. 1 A sine being the halfe of the chord of the double arke, if the sine be doubled, it giueth the chord of the double ark,
a Sine of 10 gr. doubled giueth a Chord of 20 gr; and a Sine of 15 gr. being doubled giueth a Chord of 30 gr; and so in the rest. As here BD, the sine of BC, an arke of 40 gr. being doubled giueth BE the chord of BCE, which is an arke of 80 gr. Wherefore if the Radius of the circle giuen be equall to the laterall Radius, let the Sector be opened neare vnto his length, so that both the lines of Sines may make but one di∣rect line: so the distance on the sines betweene 10 and 10, shall be a chord of 20; the distance betweene 20 and 20, shall be a chord of 40; and the distance betweene 30 and 30, shall be a chord of 60; and so in the rest. 2 Because a sine is the halfe of the chord of the double arke, the proportion holdeth. geometric illustration As the diameter FH vnto the radius AH, so the chord BE vnto the sine DE, or the chord GL vnto the sine AL: and then if the radius AH, be put for the diameter, which is a chord of 180 gr, the sine DE or AL shall serue for a chord of 80 gr, and the semiradius which is the sine of 30 gr, shall serue for a chord of 60 gr, and go for the semidiameter of a circle, and so in the rest. So that by these meanes we shall not need to double the lines of Sines as before, but onely to double the numbers. And to this purpose I haue subdiuided
each degree of the sines into two, that so they might shew how far the halfe degrees do reach in the sines, and yet stand for whole degrees when they are vsed as chords. Wherefore if the Radius of the circle giuen be equall to the lateral semiradius (the sine of 30 Gr. and chord of 60 Gr.) there needs no farther work then to take the sine of 10 Gr. for a chord of 20 Gr. and a sine of 15 Gr. for a chord of 30 Gr. &c. But if the Radius of the circle giuen be either greater or lesser then the laterall semiradius, take the diameter of it, and make it a parallell chord of 180 Gr. by applying it ouer the lines of Sines between 90 and 90: or take the Radius or Semi∣diameter which is equall to the chord of 60 Gr. and make it a parallell Radius of 60 Gr. by applying it ouer in the sines of 30 and 30, and keepe the Sector at this angle. The parallels taken from the laterall chords shall be the chords requi∣red. As if the diameter of a circle giuen were the line AB, and it were required to find the chord of 80 gr: first, I make AB a parallell chord of 180 Gr. or the halfe of it a parallell chord of 60 Gr; so his parallell LG doth giue me FG the chord of 80 Gr. which was required. 3 Seeing that as the sine of the complement of the halfe arke is vnto the Radius, so the sine of the same whole arke is vnto the chord of it: if we seeke but for one single chord, we may finde it without either doubling the sines, or dou∣bling the number. For applying ouer the Radius giuen in the sine of the complement of halfe the arke required, his pa∣rallell sine shall be the chord required. As if the semidiameter of the circle giuen were AC, and it were required to find the chord of 40 Gr: the halfe of 40 Gr. is 20 Gr. the complement of 20 Gr. is 70 Gr. Wherefore I make AC a parallell sine of 70 Gr. and his parallell sine GL doth giue me FG the chord of 40 Gr. agreeable to the semi∣diameter AC.
geometric illustration 6 The chord of any arke being giuen to find the diameter and Radius. TVrne the chord giuen vnto a parallell chord, and his pa∣rallell semiradius shall be the semidiameter, and the pa∣rallell radius shall be the diameter. As if FG be the chord of 80 gr. I put this ouer in G and L, the sine of 40, and chord of 80 gr. and the parallell chord of 180 gr. giueth me AB the diameter required. Or if I turne the chord giuen into a parallell sine of the same quantitie, his parallell sine of the complement of halfe the arke, doth giue me the semidiameter. As if FG be the giuen chord of 40 gr. I put it ouer in G and L, the sines of 40 gr; then because the halfe of 40 gr. is 20 gr. and the complement of 20 gr. is 70 gr. I take out the parallell sine of 70 gr. and it giueth me AC for the semidia∣meter, agreeable to that chord of 40 gr.
7 To open the Sector to the quantitie of any angle giuen. 8 The Sector being opened, to find the quantitie of the angle. IT is one thing to open the edges of the Sector to an angle, and another thing to open the lines on the Sector to the same angle. For the lines of lines on the one side, & the lines of sines on the other side, do make an angle of 2 gr. when the Sector is close shut, and the edges doe make no angle at all. So likewise the lines of Superficies and the lines of Solids doe make an angle of 10 gr, which are to be allowed to the edges. The lines of lines may be opened to a right angle, if the whole line of 100 parts be applied ouer in 80 and 60. The lines of sines may be opened to a right angle, if the large secant of 45 gr. be applied ouer in the sines of 90 gr. or if the sine of 90 gr. be applied ouer in the sines of 45 gr. or if the sine of 45 gr. be applied ouer in the sines of 30 gr. If it be required to open those lines to any other angle, take out the chord thereof, and apply it ouer in the semira∣dius, and those lines shall be opened to that angle. As if it were required to open the Sector in the lines of sines to an angle of 40 gr, take out the chord of 40 gr, and to it open the Sector in the chord of 60 gr; so shall the lines of sines be opened to the angle required. Or if the same chord of 40 Gr. be applied ouer betweene 50 and 50, in the lines of lines, they shall also be opened to the same angle. If it be applied ouer in 25 of the lines of Superficies, or 125 in the lines of Solids, they also shall be opened to the same angle: because the chord of 60 Gr. or sine of 30 Gr. and 50 in the lines of lines, and 25 in the lines of Superficies, and 125 in the Solids, are all of the same length with the semiradius. Or if the Semiradius be applied ouer betweene he sine of 30 Gr. and the sine of the complement of the angle requi∣red, it will open the lines of Sines to that angle.
As if the semiradius be applied ouer in the sines of 30 Gr. and the sine of 50 Gr. it shall open the lines of Sines to an an∣gle of 40 Gr. On the contrary, if the Sector be opened to an angle, and it be required to know the quantitie thereof, open the com∣passes to the semiradius, and setting one foote in the sine of 30 Gr. turne the other toward the other line of sines, and it shall fall there in the complement of the angle; if it fall on 50 Gr. the angle is 40 Gr; if on 60 Gr. the angle is 30 Gr. &c. Or take ouer the parallell chord of 60 Gr. and measure it in the laterall chord, and it shall there shew the quantitie of the angle. As if the Sector being opened to an angle, I should take ouer the parallell of 30 Gr. of the sines, and 60 Gr. of the chords, and measure it in the laterall chords, find it to be 40 Gr; the angle comprehended betweene the lines of Sines is 40 Gr. but the angle betweene the edges of the Se∣ctor is 2 Gr. lesse, and therefore but 38 Gr. 9 To finde the quantitie of any angle giuen. IF out of the angular point, to the quantitie of the Semi∣radius, be described an occult arke that may cut both sides of the angle, the chord of this arke measured in the laterall chord, shall giue the quantitie of the angle. Let the angle giuen be BAC: first I take the Semiradius with the compasses, and setting one foote in A, I cut the sides of the angle in B and C; then I take the chord BC, and measure it in the laterall chord, and I find it to be 11 Gr. and 15 M. and such is the quantitie of the angle giuen. geometric illustration Or if the arke be described out of the angular point at a∣ny other distance, let the semidiameter be turned into a pa∣rallell
chord of 60 Gr. then take the chord of this arke, and carrie it parallell till it crosse in like chords: so the place where it stayeth shall giue the quantitie of the angle. As in the former example, if I make the semidiameter AB a parallell chord of 60 Gr. and then keeping the Sector at that angle, carrie the chord BC parallell, till it stay in like chords; I shall finde it to stay in no other but 11 Gr. 15 M and such is the angle BAC. 10 Vpon a right line and a point giuen in it, to make an angle equall to any angle giuen. FIrst out of the point giuen describe an arke, cutting the same line: then by the 5. Prop afore, find the chord of the angle giuen agreeable to the semidiameter, and inscribe it into this arke: so a right line drawne through the point gi∣uen, and the end of this chord, shall be the side that makes vp the angle. Let the right line giuen be AB, and the point giuen in it be A, and let the angle giuen be 11 gr. 15 m. Here I open the compasses to any semidiameter AB, (but as oft as I may conueniently to the laterall semiradius) and setting one foot in A, I describe an occult arke BC; then I seeke out the chord of 11 gr. 15 m. and taking it with the compasses, I set one foote in B, the other crosseth the arke in C, by which I draw the line AC, and it makes vp the angle required. 11 To diuide the circumference of a circle into any parts required. IF 360 the measure of the whole circumference be diuided by the number of parts required, the quotient giueth the chord, which being found will diuide the circumference. So a chord of 120 gr. will diuide the circumference into 3 equall parts; a chord of 90 gr. into 4 parts; a chord of 72 gr, into 5 parts; a chord of 60 gr. into 6 parts; a chord of 51 gr. 26. into 7 parts; a chord of 45 gr. into 8 parts; a chord of 40 gr.
into 9 parts; a chord of 36 gr. into 10 parts; a chord of 32 gr. 44 m. into 11 parts; a chord of 30 gr. into 12 parts. In like maner if it be required to diuide the circumference of the circle, whose semidiameter is AB, into 32: first I take the semidiameter AB, and make it a parallell chord of 60 gr; then because 360 gr. being diuided by 32, the quotient will be 11 gr. 15 m. I find the parallell chord of 11 gr. 15 m. and this will diuide the circumference into 32. But here the parts being many, it were better to diuide it first into fewer, and after to come ouer it againe. As first to diuide the circumference into 4, and then each 4 parts into 8, or otherwise, as the parts may be diuided. 12 To diuide a right line by extreme and meane proportion. THe line to be diuided by extreme and meane propor∣tion, hath the same proportion to his greater segment, as in figures inscribed in the same circle, the side of an hexa∣gon a figure of six angles, hath to a side of a decagon a figure of ten angles: but the side of a hexagon is a chord of 60 gr. and the side of a decagon is a chord of 36 gr. Let AB be the line to be diuided: if I make AB a paral∣lell chord of 60 gr. and to this semidiameter find AC a chord of 36 gr. this AC shall be the greater segment, diuiding the whole line in C, by extreme and meane proportion. So that, As AB the whole line is vnto AC the greater segment: so AC the greater segment vnto CB the lesser segment. Or let AC be the greater segment giuen: if I make this a parallell chord of 36 gr. the correspondent semidiameter shall be the whole line AC, and the difference CB the lesser segment. line segment Or let CB be the lesser segment giuen: if I make this a parallell chord of 36 gr. the correspondent semidiameter
shall be greater segment AC, which added to CB, giueth the whole line AB. To auoid doubling of lines or numbers, you may put ouer the whole line in the Sines of 72 gr. and the parallell sine of 36 gr. shall be the greater segment. Or if you put ouer the whole line in the sines of 54 gr. the parallell sine of 30 gr. shall be the greater segment, and the parallell sine of 18 gr. shall be the lesser segment. CHAP. III. Of the proiection of the Sphere in Plano. 1 THe Sphere may be proiected in Plano in streight lines, as in the Analemma, if the semidiameter of the circle giuen be diuided in such sort as the line of Sines on the Se∣ctor. As if the Radius of the circle giuen were AE, the circle thereon described may represent the plane of the generall meridian, which diuided into foure equal parts in E, P, AE, S, and crossed at right angles with EAE and PS, the diameter EAE shall represent the equator, and PS the circle of the houre of 6. And it is also the axis of the world, wherein P stands for the North pole, and S for the South pole. Then may each quarter of the meridian be diuided into 90 gr. from the equator towards the poles. In which if we number 23 gr. 30 m. the greatest declination of the Sun from E to 69 North∣wards, from AE to ♑ Southward, the line drawne from 69 to ♑ shal be the ecliptique, and the lines drawne parallell to the equator through ♋ and ♑ shall be the tropiques. Hauing these common sections with the plane of the me∣ridian, if we shall diuide each diameter of the Ecliptique into 90 gr. in such sort as the Sines are diuided on the Sector. The first 30 gr. from A toward 69, shall stand for the sine of ♈. The 30 gr. next following for ♉. The rest for ♊. ♋. ♌. &c. in their order. So that by these meanes we haue the place of the Sun for all times of the yeare.
geometric illustration If againe we diuide AP, AS, in the like sort, and set to the numbers 10. 20. 30. &c. vnto 90 gr. the lines drawne through each of these degrees parallell to the equator, shall shew the declination of the Sunne, and represent the parallels of latitude. If farther we diuide AE, AAE, and his parallels in the like sort, and then carefully draw a line through each 15 gr. so as it makes no angles; the lines so drawne shall be ellipticall and represent the houre-circles. The meridian PES the
houre of 12 at noone; that next vnto it drawne through 75 gr. from the center the houres of 11 and 1, that which is drawne through 60 gr. from the center the houres of 10 and 2. &c. Then hauing respect vnto the latitude, we may number it from E Northward vnto Z, and there place the zenith: by which and the center the line drawne ZAN shall represent the verticall circle, passing through the zenith and nadir East and West, and the line MAH crossing it at right angles shall represent the horizon. These two being diuided in the same sort as the ecliptique and the equator, the line drawne through each degree of the semidiameter AZ, parallell to the horizon, shall be the cir∣cles of altitude, and the diuisions in the horizon and his pa∣rallels shall giue the azimuth. Lastly, if through 18 gr. in AN, be drawne a right line IK parallell to the horizon, it shall shew the time when the day breaketh, and the end of the twilight. For example of this proiection, let the place of the Sunne be the last degree of ♉, the parallell passing through this place is LD, and therefore the meridian altitude ML, and the de∣pression below the horizon at midnight HD: the semidiur∣nall arke LC, the seminocturnall arke CD, the declination AB, the ascentionall difference BC, the amplitude of ascen∣on AC. The difference betweene the end of twilight and the day breake is very small; for it seemes the parallell of the Sunne doth hardly crosse the line of twilight. If the altitude of the Sunne be giuen, let a line be drawne for it parallell to the horizon; so it shall crosse the parallell of the Sunne, and there shew both the azimuth and the houre of the day. As if the place of the Sunne being giuen as be∣fore, the altitude in the morning were found to be 20 gr. the line FG drawne parallell to the horizon through 20 gr. in AZ, would crosse the parallell of the Sunne in ☉. Where∣fore F ☉ sheweth the azimuth, & L ☉ the quantitie of houres from the meridian. It seemes to be about halfe an houre past 6 in the morning, and yet more then halfe a point
short of the East. The distance of two places may be also shewed by this pro∣iection, their latitudes being knowne, and their difference of longitude. For suppose a place in the East of Arabia, hauing 20 gr. of North latitude, whose difference of longitude from London is found by an eclipse to be 5 ho. ½. Let Z be the zenith of London, the parallell of latitude for that other place must be LD, in which the difference of longitude is L ☉. Where∣fore ☉ representing the site of that place, I draw through ☉ a parallell to the horizon MH, crossing the verticall AZ neare about 70 gr. from the zenith, which multiplied by 20, sheweth the distance of London, and that place to be 1400 leagues. Or multiplied by 60, to be 4200 miles. 2 The Sphere may be proiected in plano by circular lines, as in the generall astrolabe of Gemma Frisius, by the help of the tangent on the side of the Sector. For let the circle giuen represent the plane of the generall meridian as before; let it be diuided into foure parts, and crossed at right angles with EAE the equator, and PS the circle of the houre of 6, wherein P stands for the North pole, and S for the South pole. Let each quarter of the meridian be diuided into 90 gr. and so the whole into 360, beginning from P, and setting to the numbers of 10, 20, 30. &c. 90 at AE, 180 at S, 270 at E, 360 at P. The semidiameters AP, AAE, AS, AE, may be diuided according to the tangents of halfe their arkes, that is a tangent of 45 gr. which is alwayes equall to the Radius, shall giue the semidiameter of 90 gr; a tangent of 40 gr. shall giue 80 gr. in the semidiameter: a tangent of 35 gr. shall giue 70. &c. So that the semidiameters may be di∣uided in such sort as the tangent on the side of the Sector, the difference being onely in their numbers. Hauing diuided the circumference and the semidiame¦ters, we may easily draw the meridians and the parallels by the helpe of the Sector.
geometric illustration The meridians are to be drawne through both the poles P and S, and the degrees before graduated in the equator. The distance of the center of each meridian from A the cen∣ter of the plane, is equall to the tangent of the same meri∣dian, reckoned from the generall meridian PAESE, and the semidiameter equall to the secant of the same degree. As for example, if I should draw the meridian PBS, which is the tenth from PAES, the tangent of 10 gr. giueth me AC, and the secant of 10 gr. giueth me SC, whereof C is the
center of the meridian PBS, and CS his semidiameter: so AF a tangent of 20 gr. sheweth F to be the center of PDS, the twentith meridian from PAES, and AG a tangent of 23 gr. 30 M. sheweth G to be the center of P 69 S. &c. The parallels are to be drawne through the degrees, in AP, AS, and their correspondent degrees in the generall meridian. The distance of the center of each parallell from A the center of the plane, is equall to the secant of the same pa∣rallell from the pole, and the semidiameter equall to the tan∣gent of the same degree. As if I should draw the parallell of 80 gr. which is the tenth from the pole S, first I open the compasses vnto AC the tangent of 10 gr. and this giueth me the semidiameter of this parallel, whose center is a little from S, in such distance as the secant SC is longer then the radius SA. The meridians and parallels being drawne, if we number 23 gr. 30 m. from E to ♋ Northward, from AE to ♑ South∣ward, the line drawne from ♋ to ♑ shall be the ecliptique: which being diuided in such sort as the semidiameter AP, the first 30 gr. from A to ♋ shall stand for the sine of ♈; the 30 gr. next following for ♉; the rest for ♊. ♋. ♌. &c. in their order. If farther we haue respect vnto the latitude, we may num∣ber it from E Northward vnto Z, and there place the zenith, by which and the center, the line drawne ZAN shall repre∣sent the verticall circle, and the line MAH crossing it at right angles, shall represent the horizon; and these diuided in the same sort as AP, the circles drawne through each degree of the semidiameter AZ, parallell to the horizon, shall be the circles of altitude: and the circles drawne through the horizon and his poles, shall giue the azimuths. For example of this proiection, let the place of the Sunne be in the beginning of ♒, the parallell passing through this place is ♒ ☉ L; and therefore the meridian altitude ML, and the depression below the horizon at midnight H♒, the semi∣diurnall arke L ☉, the seminocturnall arke O ♒, the decli∣nation AR, the ascensionall difference R ☉, the ampli∣tude
of ascension A ☉. Or if A be put to represent the pole of the world, then shall PAESE stand for the equator, and P ♋ S ♑ for the ecliptique, and the rest which before stood for meridians, may now serue for particular horizons, according to their seuerall eleuations. Then suppose the place of the Sunne gi∣uen to be 24 gr. of ♉, his longitude shall be PI, his right as∣cension PH, his declination HI. And if the place giuen be 19 gr. of ♌, his longitude shal be PK, his right ascension PN, his declination NK. Againe, the declination brought to the horizon of the place, shall there shew the ascentionall diffe∣rence, amplitude of ascension, and the like conclusions of the globe. But I intend not here to shew the vse of the A∣strolabe, but the vse of the Sector in proiection. And after this maner may a nocturnall be proiected to shew the houre of the night, whereof I will set downe a type for the vse of Sea-men. geometric illustration
It consists as you see of two parts, the one is a plane, diui∣ded equally according to the 24 houres of the day, and each houre into quarters or minutes, as the plane will beare: the line from the center to XII, stands for the meridian, and XII stands for the houre of 12 at midnight. The other part is a rundle for such starres as are neare the North pole, toge∣ther with the twelue moneths, and the dayes of each moneth fitted to the right ascension of the starres. Those that haue occasion to see the South pole, may do the like for the Sou∣therne constellations, and put them in a rundle on the back of this plane, and so it may serue for all the world. The vse of this nocturnall is easie and ready. For looke vp to the pole, and see what starres are neare the meridian, then place the rundle to the like situation, so the day of the mo∣neth will shew the houre of the night. 3 The Sphere may be proiected in plano by circular lines, as in the particular Astrolabe of Ioh. Stophlerin, by help of the tangent, as before. For let the circle giuen represent the tropique of ♑, let it be diuided into foure parts, and crossed at right angles with AC the equinoctiall colure, and MB the solstitiall colure, and generall meridian, the center P representing the pole of the world. Let each quarter be diuided into 90 gr. and so the whole into 360, beginning from A towards B. The me∣ridian PM, or PB, may be diuided according to the tangent of halfe his arke. So as the arke from the North pole to the tropique of ♑, being 90 gr. and 23 gr. 30 m. that is 113 gr. 80 m. and the halfe arke 56 gr. 45 m. the meridian shall be di∣uided into 90 gr. and 23 gr. 30 m. in such sort as the tangent of 56 gr. 45 m. on the side of the Sector is diuided into de∣grees and halfe degrees; of which PAE the arke of the equa∣tor 90 gr. from the pole, shall be giuē by the tangent of 45 gr. And P 69 the arke of the Summer tropique 66 gr. 30 m. from the pole, shall be giuen by the tangent of 33 gr. 15 m. And the circles drawne vpon the center P through AE and ♋, shall be the equator, and the Summer tropique. Hauing the equator and both the tropiques, the eclip∣tique
♈ ♋ ♎ ♑ shall be drawne from the one tropique to the other, through the intersection of the equator and the equinoctiall colure. And it may be diuided first into the twelue Signes after this maner: PE the arke of the pole of the ecliptique 23 gr. 30 m. from the pole of the world, shall be giuen by the tangent of 11 gr. 45 m. The center of the circle of longitude passing through this pole E ♈ and ♎, shal be found at D (somewhat below B) by the tangent of 66 gr. 30 m. Then through D draw an occult line parallell to AC, and diuide it on each side from D, in such sort as the tangent is diuided on the side of the Sector, allowing 45 gr. to be e∣quall to DE. So the thirtith degree from D toward the right hand, shall be the center of the circle of longitude pas∣sing through E ♉ and ♏. The sixtith degree, the center of ♊ E ♐. The thirtith degree from D toward the left hand, the center of ♓ E ♍. The sixtith, the center of ♒ E ♌. And the other intermediate degrees shal be the centers to diuide each Signe into 30 gr. If farther we haue respect vnto the latitude, we may (the meridian being before diuided) number it from P Northward vnto H, and there place the North intersection of the meri∣dian and horizon: then the complement of the latitude be∣ing numbred from P Southward vnto Z, shall there giue the zenith; and 90 gr. from Z Southward vnto F, shall there giue the South intersection of the meridian and horizon. The middle betweene F and H shall be G the center of the hori∣zon ♈ H ♎ F, passing through the beginning of ♈ and ♎, vnlesse there be some former error. All parallels to the horizon may be found in like sort by their intersections with the meridian, and the middle be∣tweene those intersections is alwayes the center. The azimuths may be drawne as the circles of longitude were before. For the center of the first verticall ♈ Z ♎ will be found at I (somewhat neare vnto B) by the tangent of the latitude. And if through I we draw an occult line parallell to AC, and diuide it on each side from I, in such sort as the tan∣gent is diuided on the side of the Sector, allowing 45 gr. to be
geometric illustration equall to IZ; these diuisions shall be the centers, and the distance from these diuisions vnto Z, shall be the semidiame∣ters whereon to describe the rest of the azimuths. For example of this proiection, let ☉ the place of the Sun giuen be 10 gr. of ♉: a right line drawne from P through this place vnto the equator, shall there shew his right ascension ♈ K, and his declination K ☉. Then may we on the center P and semidiameter ☉ P, draw an occult parallell of declinatiō, crossing the horizon in L and M, the meridian in G and N.
So the right lines PL and PM produced, shall shew the time of the Sunnes rising and setting, ♈ Q the difference of as∣cension, ♎ R the difference of descension, ♈ L the amplitude of his rising, and ♎ M the amplitude of his setting. LGM sheweth the length of the day, LNM the length of the night. ZG sheweth his distance from the zenith at noone, HN his depression below the horizon at midnight. And then hauing the altitude of the Sunne at any time of the day, the intersection of the parallell of altitude with the parallell of declination, sheweth the azimuth, and a right line drawne from P through this intersectiō, giueth the houre of the day. 4 The Sphere may be proiected in plano by circular lines, after the maner of the old concaue hemisphere, by the help of the tangent on the side of the Sector. For let the circle giuen represent the plane of the hori∣zon, let it be diuided into foure parts, and crossed at right angles with SN the meridian, and EV the verticall; so as S may stand for the South, N for the North, E the East, V the West part of the horizon, and the center Z representeth the zenith. Let each quarter of the horizon be diuided into 90 gr. and so the whole into 360 gr. beginning from N, and set∣ting to the numbers of 10. 20. 30. &c. 90 at E, 180 at S, 270 at V, 360 at N. The semidiameters ZN, ZS, may be diuided according to the tangent of halfe their arkes: So as the arke from the ze∣nith to the horizon being 90 gr. and the halfe arke 45 gr. the semidiameters are to be diuided in such sort as the tan∣gent of 45 gr. as was shewed before in the second proiection. And if from Z we draw circles through each of these diuisi∣ons, they shall be parallels of altitude. Then hauing respect vnto the latitude, we may (the me∣ridian being before diuided) number it from Z to AE, and there place the intersection of the meridian and equator. The complement of the latitude from Z vnto P, shall there giue the pole of the world, and 90 further from P shall there giue the other intersection of the meridian and equator.
geometric illustration The middle betweene these intersections shall be A, the cen∣ter of the equator, passing through E and V, vnlesse there be some former error. The intersections of the tropiques de∣pend on the equator. From AE 23 gr. 30 m. farther shal be ♑, the intersection of the meridian & the Southerne tropique. From AE 23 gr. 30 m. nearer shall be ♋, the intersection of the meridian and the Northerne tropique. The intersections of the other intermediat parallels, shall be giuen in like sort, by their degrees of distance from the equator, and the middle
betweene those intersections is alwayes the center. The houre circles may be here drawne as the azimuths in the third proiection. For the center of EPV, the houre of 6 will be found at B (somewhat neare vnto N) by the tangent of the latitude. And if through B we draw an occult line pa∣rallell vnto EV, and diuide it on each side from B, in such sort as the tangent is diuided on the side of the Sector, allow∣ing 45 gr. to be equall to BP, and 15 gr. for euery houre: those diuisions shall be the centers, and the distance from these diuisions vnto P, shall be the semidiameters, whereon to describe the rest of the houre circles. The ecliptique may be drawne as the equator. For the center of that halfe which hath Southerne declination, shall be giuen by the tangent of the altitude, which the Sun hath in his entrance into ♑. And the center of the other halfe, by the tangent of his altitude, at his entrance into ♋. And it may be diuided, as in the former proiection, or else by tables cal∣culated to that purpose. To these circles thus drawne, if we shall adde the moneths of the yeare, and the dayes of each moneth, as we may well doe, at the horizon, on either side betweene the tropiques; this proiection shall be fitted for the most vsefull conclusions of the globe. For the day of the moneth being giuen, the parallell that shooteth on it, doth shew what declination the Sunne hath at that time of the yeare. And where this parallell crosseth the ecliptique, there is the place of the Sunne. Or the place of the Sunne being first giuen, the parallell which crosseth it shall at the horizon shew the day of the moneth. Either of these then being giuen, or onely the parallell of declination, we may follw it first vnto the horizon, there the distance of  of the parallell from E or V, sheweth the ampli∣  same among the houre circles sheweth the time  e riseth or setteth. Then hauing the altitude  any time of the day, the intersection of the  on with the parallell of altitude, sheweth  ay; and a right line drawne from Z
through this intersection to the horizon, giueth the azi∣muth. Thus in either of these proiections, that which is other∣wise most troublesome, is easily done by the help of the tan∣gent line: and what I haue said of this line, the same may be wrought by scale and numbers out of the table of Tangents. CHAP. IV. Of the resolution of right-line Triangles. IN all Triangles there being six parts, viz. three angles and three sides, any three of them being giuen, the rest may be found by the Sector. As in a Rectangle triangle, 1 To finde the base, both sides being giuen. Let the Sector be opened in the lines of Lines to a right angle, (as before was shewed Cap. 2. Prop. 7.) then take out the sides of the triangle, and lay them, one on one line, the other on the other line, so as they meete in the center, and marke how farre they extend. For the line taken from the termes of their extension, shall be the base required, viz. the side opposite to the right angle. Or adde the squares of the two sides (as in Prop. 4. Superf.) and the side of the compound square shall be the base. 2 To find the base by hauing the angles, and one of the sides giuen. Take the side giuen, and turne it into the parallell sine of his opposite angle; so the parallell Radius shall be the base. 3 To find a side by hauing the base, and the other side giuen. Let the Sector be opened in the lines of lines to a right
angle, and the side giuen laid on one of those lines from the center; then take the base with a paire of compasses, and setting one foote in the terme of the giuen side, turne the other to the other line of the Sector, and it shall there shew the side required. Or take the square of the side out of the square of the base (as in Prop. 4. Superf.) and the side of the remaining square shall be the side required. 4 To find a side hauing the base and the angles giuen. Take the base giuen, and make it a parallell Radius, so the parallell sines of the angles, shall be the opposite sides re∣quired. 5 To find a side by hauing the other side and the angles giuen. Take the side giuen, and turne it into his parallell sine of his opposite angle; so the parallell sine of the complement shall be the side required. 6 To find the angles by hauing the base and one of the sides giuen. First takeout the base giuen, and laying it on both sides of the Sector, so as they may meete in the center, and marke how farre it extendeth. Then take out the laterall Radius, and to it open the Sector in the termes of the base. This done, take out the side giuen, and place it also on the same lines of the Sector from the center. For the parallell taken in the termes of this side, shall be the sine of his opposite angle. Or take the base giuen, and make it a parallell Radius; then take the side giuen, and carrie it parallell to the base, till it stay in like sines: so they shall giue the quantitie of
the opposite angle. 7 To finde the angles by hauing both the sides giuen. Take out the greater side, and lay it on both sides of the Sector, so as they meete in the center, and marke how farre it extendeth. Then take the other side, and to it open the Se∣ctor in the termes of the greater side; so the parallell Radius shall be the tangent of the lesser angle. The third angle is al∣wayes knowne by the complement. 8 The Radius being giuen, to find the tangent, and secant of any arke. 9 The tangent of any arke being giuen, to find the tangent thereof, and the Radius. 10 The secant of any arke being giuen, to find the tangent thereof, and the Radius. The tangent, and the secant, together with the Radius of euery arke, do make a right angle triangle; whose sides are the Radius and tangent, and the base alwayes the secant; and the angles alwayes knowne by reason of the giuen arkes. Wherefore the solution is the same with those before. In any right-lined triangle whatsoeuer, 11 To find a side by knowing the other two sides, and the angle contained by them. Let the Sector be opened in the lines of lines to the angle giuen, then take out the sides of the triangle, & laying them the one on the one line, the other on the other, so as they meete in the center, marke how far they extend. For the line taken betweene the termes of their extension, shall be the third side required.
12 To find a side by hauing the other two sides, and one of the adiacent angles, so it be knowne which of the other angles is acute or oblique. Let the Sector be opened in the lines of lines to the angle giuen, and the adiacent side layd on one of those lines from the center; then take the other side with a paire of compas∣ses, and setting one foote in the terme of the former giuen side, turne the other to the other line of the Sector which here representeth the side required, and it shall crosse it in two places; but with which of them is the terme of the side requi∣red, must be iudged by the angle. As if in the triangle following, the side AC being giuen, and the side CD and the angle CAD 18 gr. 40 m. it were re∣quired to find the side AD. First I open the Sector in the lines of lines to an angle of 18 gr. 40 m. and laying the adiacent side from the center A, it extendeth to 800 in C. Then I take the other side CD with the compasses, and setting one foote in C, and turning the o∣ther to the other line of the Sector, I find that it doth crosse it both in B and D; so that it is vncertaine whither the side required be AB or AD, onely it may be iudged by the an∣gle. For if the inward angle where they crosse be obtuse, the side required is the lesser; if it be acute, it is the greater. 13 To find a side by hauing the angles and one of the other sides giuen. Take the side giuen, and turne it into the parallell sine of his opposite angle; so the parallell sines of the other angle shall be the opposite sides required.
14 To find the proportion of the sides by hauing the three angles. Take the laterall sines of the angles, and measure them in the line of lines. For the numbers belonging to those lines do giue the proportion of the sides. 15 To finde an angle by knowing the three sides. Let the two containing sides be layd, on the lines of the Sector from the center, one on one line, and the other on the other; and let the third side, which is opposite to the angle required, be fitted ouer in their termes: so shall the Sector be opened in those lines to the quantitie of the angle required. The quantitie of this angle is found as in Cap. 2. Prop. 8. 16 To finde an angle by hauing two sides and one adiacent angle. First take out the side opposite to the angle giuen, and laying it on both sides of the Sector, so as they meete in the center, marke how farre it extendeth; then take out the late∣rall sine of the angle, and to it open the Sector in the termes of the first side: this done, take out the other side giuen, and place it also on the same lines of the Sector from the center, for the parallels taken in the termes of this side, shall be the sine of the angle opposite to the second side. Or take out the side opposite to the angle giuen, and make it a parallell sine of that angle; then take the other side giuen and carrie it parallell to the former, till it stay in like sines, so they shall giue the quantitie of the angle opposite to the second side.
17 To finde an angle by hauing two sides, and the angle contained by them. First find the third side by the 11. Prop. and then the an∣gles may be found by the 15. or 16. Prop. For practise in each of these cases, we may vse the exam∣ples following, wherein CEA, CEB, CED are rectangle in E; the rest consist of oblique angles. CAB 18 gr. 40 m. ABC 126 52 ACB 34 28 ACD 108 12 ADC 53 8 BCD 73 44 geometric illustration For obseruation of angles, the Sector may haue sights set on the moueable foote; so that by looking through them, the edges of the Sector may be applied to the sides of the angle.
For measuring of the sides of lesser tri∣angles, any scale may suffice, either of feete, or inches, or lesser parts. But for greater tri∣angles, especially for plotting of grounds, I hold it fit to vse a chaine of foure perches in length, diuided into an hundred links. For so the length being multiplied into the bredth, the fiue last figures giue the content in roods and perches by this Table; the other figures toward the left hand, doe shew the number of acres directly. Links R P 100000 4 0 90000 3 24 80000 3 8 70000 2 32 60000 2 16 50000 2 0 40000 1 24 30000 1 8 20000   32 10000   16 9375   15 8750   14 8125   13 7500   12 6875   11 6250   10 5625   9 5000   8 4375   7 3750   6 3125   5 2500   4 1875   3 1250   2 625   1 As if in the former triāgle ACD, the length AD be 9 chaines and 50 links, the bredth CE be 2 chaines and 56 links; these mul∣tiplied giue the content for the long square 2.43200, the halfe whereof for the triangle is 1.21600, that is 1 acre, 21600 parts of 100000, of which last fiue figures, 20000 giue 32 perches, and the remainder 1600 giue better then two perches more.
CHAP. V. Of the resolution of sphericall triangles. FOr our practise in sphericall triangles, let A be the equi∣noctiall point, AB an arke of the ecliptique represen∣ting the longitude of the Sunne in the beginning of ♉, BC an arke of the declination from the Sunne to the equa∣tor, and AC an arke of the equator representing the right ascension. geometric illustration Let BD be an arke of the horizon representing the am∣plitude of the Sunnes rising from the East, and BE an arke of the horizon for his setting from the West: so DC shall be the difference of ascension, and CE the difference of descen∣sion; AD the oblique ascension, and AE the oblique de∣scension of the same place of the Sunne in our latitude at Oxford of 51 gr. 45 m. whose complement 38 gr. 15 m. is the angle at E and D. The triangles ACB, DCB, ECB, are rectangle in C: the other ADB, AEB, consist euery way of oblique angles.
geometric illustration Or to fit an example nearer to the latitude of London. Let ZPS represent the zenith pole and Sun, ZP being 38 gr. 30 m. the complement of the latitude, PS 70 gr. the comple∣ment of the declination, and ZS 40 gr. the complement of the Suns altitude. The angle at Z shall shew the azimuth, and the angle at P, the houre of the day from the meridian. Then if from Z to PS we let downe a perpendicular ZR, we shall reduce the oblique triangle into two rectangle triangles ZRP, ZRS. Or if from S to ZP we set downe a perpen∣dicular SM, we shall reduce the same ZPS into two other triangles, SMZ, SMP, rectangle at M: whatsoeuer is said of any of these triangles, the same holdeth for all other tri∣angles in the like cases. For the resolution of each of these, there be seueral wayes. I onely chuse those which are fittest for the Sector, wherein if that be remembred which before is shewed in the generall vse of the Sector concerning laterall and parallell entrance, it may suffice onely to set downe the proportion of the three parts giuen to the fourth required, and so I shew first by the sines alone.
In a rectangle triangle 1 To finde a side by knowing the base, and the angle opposite to the required side. As the Radius is to the sine of the base: So the sine of the opposite angle to the sine of the side required. As in the rectangle ACB, hauing the base AB, the place of the Sunne 30 gr. from the equinoctiall point, and the an∣gle BAC of 23 gr. 30 m. the greatest declination, if it were required to find the side BC the declination of the Sunne. Take either the laterall sine of 23 gr. 30 m. and make it a parallell Radius; so the parallell sine of 30 gr. taken and mea∣sured in the side of the Sector, shall giue the side required 11 gr. 30 m. Or take the sine of 30 gr. and make it a parallell Radius; so the parallell sine of 23 gr. 30 m. taken and measured in the laterall sines, shall be 11 gr. 30 m. as before. So in the triangle ZPS hauing ZP 38 gr. 30 m. and the angle P 31 gr. 34 m. giuen, we shall find the perpendicular ZR to be 19 gr. 1 m; or hauing PS 70 gr. and the said angle P 31 gr. 34 m. giuen, we may finde the perpendicular SM to be 29 gr. 28 m. 2 To finde a side by knowing the base and the other side. As the sine of the complement of the side giuen is to the Radius: So the sine of the complement of the base to the sine of the complement of the side required. So in the rectangle ACB, hauing AB 30 gr. and BC 11 gr. 30 m. giuen, the side AC will be found 27 gr. 54 m. Or in the rectangle ZRP hauing ZP 38 gr. 30 m. and ZR 29 gr. 1 m. giuen, the side RP will be found 34 gr. 7 m.
3 To find a side by knowing the two oblique angles. As the sine of either angle to the sine of the complement of the other angle: So is the Radius to the sine of the complement of the side opposite to the second angle. So in the rectangle ACB, hauing CAB for the first angle 23 gr. 30 m. and ABC for the second 69 gr. 21 m. the side AC will be found 27 gr. 54 m. Or making ABC the first angle, and CAB the second, the side BC will be found 11 gr. 30 m. 4 To finde the base by knowing both the sides. As the Radius to the sine of the complement of the one side: So the sine of the complement of the other side, to the sine of the complement of the base required. So in the rectangle ACB hauing AC 27 gr. 54 m. and BC 11 gr. 30 m. the base AB will be found 30 gr. 5 To finde the base by knowing the one side, and the angle opposite to that side. As the sine of the angle giuen, to the sine of the side giuen: So is the Radius to the sine of the base required. So in the rectangle BCD, knowing the latitude and the declination, we may find the amplitude; as hauing BC the side of the declination 11 gr. 30 m. and BDC the angle of the complement of the latitude 38 gr. 15 m. the base BD which is the amplitude, will be found to be 18 gr. 47 m.
6 To find an angle by the other oblique angle, and the side opposite to the inquired angle. As the Radius to the sine of the complement of the side: So the sine of the angle giuen, to the sine of the complement of the angle required. So in the rectangle ACB, hauing the angle BAC 23 gr. 30 m. and the side AC 27 gr. 54 m. the angle ABC will be found 69 gr. 21 m. 7 To finde an angle by the other oblique angle, and the side opposite to the angle giuen. As the sine of the complement of the side to the side of the complement of the angle giuen: So is the Radius to the sine of the angle required. So in the rectangle ACB, hauing BAC 23 gr. 30 m. and BC 11 gr. 30 m. the angle ABC will be found 69 gr. 21 m. 8 To finde an angle by the base, and the side opposite to the inquired angle. As the sine of the base is to the Radius: So the sine of the side to the sine of the angle required. So in the rectangle BCD, hauing BD 18 gr. 47 m. and BC 11 gr. 30 m. the angle BDC will be found 38 gr. 15 m. These eight Propositions haue been wrought by the sines alone; those which follow require ioynt help of the tangent. And forasmuch as the tangent could not well be extended beyond 63 gr. 30 m. I shall set downe two wayes for the reso∣lution of each Proposition; if the one will not hold, the o∣ther may.
9 To finde a side by hauing the other side, and the angle opposite to the inquired sine. 1 As the Radius to the sine of the side giuen: So the tangent of the angle, to the tangent of the side required. 2 As the sine of the side giuen, is to the Radius: So the tangent of the complement of the angle, to the tangent of the complement of the side required. So in the rectangle ACB, hauing the right side AC 27 gr. 54 m, and the angle BAC 23 gr. 30 m. the side BC will be sound to be 11 gr. 30 m. 10 To find a side, by hauing the other side, and the angle adiacent next to the inquired side. 1 As the tangent of the angle, to the tangent of the side giuen: So is the Radius to the sine of the side required. 2 As the tangent of the complement of the side, to the tangent of the complement of the angle: So is the Radius to the sine of the side required. This and the like, where the tangent standeth in the first place, are best wrought by parallell entrance. And so in the rectangle BCD, hauing BC the side of declination 11 gr. 30 m. and BDC the angle of the complement of the latitude 38 gr. 15 m. the side DC, which is the ascensionall difference, will be found 14 gr. 57 m. By the ascensionall difference is giuen the time of the Sunnes rising and setting, and length of the day; allowing
an houre for each 15 gr. and 4 minutes of time for each se∣uerall degree. As in the example the difference betweene the Sunnes ascension in a right sphere, which is alwayes at 6 of the clocke, and his ascension in our latitude being 14 gr. 57 m. it sheweth that the Sunne riseth very neare an houre before 6, because of the Northerne declination; or after 6, if the Sunne be declining to the Southward. 11 To finde a side by knowing the base, and the angle adiacent next to the inquired side. 1 As the Radius to the sine of the complement of the angle: So is the tangent of the base, to the tangent of the side required. 2 As the sine of the complement of the angle is to the Radius: So the tangent of the complement of the base, to the tangent of the complement of the side required. So in the rectangle ACB, knowing the place of the Sun from the next equinoctiall point, and the angle of his grea∣test declination, we may find his right ascension: viz. the base AB 30 gr. and the angle BAC 23 gr. 30 m. being giuen, the right ascension AC will be found 27 gr. 54 m. 12 To finde the base by knowing the oblique angles. As the tangent of the one angle, to the tangent of the complement of the other angle: So is the Radius to the sine of the complement of the base. So in the rectangle ACB, hauing BAC 23 gr. 30 m. and ABC 69 gr. 21 m. the base AB will be found 30 gr.
13 To finde the base, by one of the sides, and the angle adiacent next that side. 1 As the Radius is to the sine of the complement of the angle: So the tangent of the complement of the side, to the tangent of the complement of the base. 2 As the sine of the complement of the angle is to the Radius: So the tangent of the side giuen, to the tangent of the base required. So in the rectangle ACB, hauing AC 27 gr. 54 m. and BAC 23 gr. 30 m. the base AB will be found 30 gr. 0 m. 14 To find an angle, by knowing both the sides. 1 As the Radius is to the sine of the side next the inquired angle: So the tangent of the complement of the opposite side, to the tangent of the complement of the angle required. 2 As the sine of the side next the inquired angle, is to the Radius: So the tangent of the opposite side, to the tangent of the angle required. So in the rectangle ACB, hauing AC 27 gr. 54 m. and BC 11 gr. 30 m. the angle at A will be found 23 gr. 30 m. and the angle at B 69 gr. 21 m. 15 To finde an angle, by the base, and the side adiacent to the inquired angle. 1 As the tangent of the complement of the side, to the tangent of the complement of the base:
So is the Radius to the sine of the complement of the angle required. 2 As the tangent of the base, to the tangent of the side: So is the Radius, to the sine of the complement of the angle required. So in the rectangle BCD, hauing the base BD 18 gr. 47 m. and the side BC 11 gr. 30 m. the angle DBC between them will be found 53 gr. 15 m. 16 To find an angle, by knowing the other oblique angle, and the base. 1 As the Radius, to the sine of the complement of the base: So the tangent of the angle giuen, to the tangent of the complement of the angle required. 2 As the sine of the complement of the base, is to the Radius: So the tangent of the complement of the angle giuen, to the tangent of the angle required. So in the rectangle ACB, hauing the angle at A 23 gr. 30 m. and the base AB 30 gr. the angle ABC will be found 69 gr. 21 m. These sixteen cases are all that can fall out in a rectangle triangle: those which follow do hold In any sphericall triangle whatsoeuer 17 To find a side opposite to an angle giuen, by knowing one side, and two angles, whereof one is op∣posite to the giuen side, the other to the side required.
As the sine of the angle opposite to the side giuen, is to the sine of that side giuen: So the sine of the angle opposite to the side required, to the sine of the side required. So in the triangle ABE, hauing the place of the Sunne, the latitude, and the greatest declination, we may finde the amplitude. As hauing AB 30 gr. BAE 23 gr. 30 m. and AEB 38 gr. 15 m. the side BE which is the amplitude, will be found 18 gr. 47 m. 18 To finde an angle opposite to a side giuen, by hauing one angle and two sides, the one opposite to the giuen angle, the other to the angle required. As the sine of the side opposite to the angle giuen, is to the sine of that angle giuen: So the sine of the side opposite to the angle required, to the sine of the angle required. So in the triangle ZPS, hauing the azimuth, and lati∣tude, and declination, we may find the houre of the day. As hauing PZS 130 gr. 3 m. PS 70 gr. and ZS 40 gr. the an∣gle ZPS, which sheweth the houre from the meridian shall be found 31 gr. 34 m. 19 To find an angle by knowing the three sides. This proposition is most vsefull, but most difficult of all others: as in Arithmetique, so by the Sector, yet may it be per∣formed seuerall wayes. 1 According to Regiomontanus and others. As the sine of the lesser side next the angle required, to the difference of the versed sines of the base and diffe∣rence of the sides▪ So is the Radius to a fourth proportionall.
Then as the sine of the greater side next the angle required is to that fourth proportionall: So is the Radius to the versed sine of the angle required. So in the triangle ZPS, hauing the side PS, the cōplement of the declination 70 gr. 0 m. the side ZP the complement of the latitude 38 gr. 30 m. and the base ZS the complement of the altitude 40 gr. the angle of the houre of the day ZPS will be found 31 gr. 34 m. which is 2 h. 6 m. from the meridian. For the base being 40 gr. 0 m. and the difference of the sides 38 gr. 30 m. and 70 gr. 0 m. being 31 gr. 30 m. the difference of their versed sines wil be the same with the distance between the right sine of 50 gr. and 58 gr. 30 m. This difference I take out, and make it a parallell sine of the lesser side 38 gr. 30 m. so the parallell Radius wil be the fourth proportionall. Then coming to the second operation, I make this fourth propor∣tionall, a parallel sine of the greater side of 70 gr. 0 m. and take out his parallell Radius. For this measured from 90 gr. toward the center, will be the versed sine of 31 gr. 34 m. In the like sort in the same triangle ZPS, hauing the same complements giuen, the angle PZS which is the azimuth from the North part of the meridian, will be found 130 gr. 3 m. For here the base opposite to the angle required being 70 gr. and the difference of the sides 38 gr. 30 m. and 40 gr. being 1 gr. 30 m. the difference of their versed sines will be the same with the distance betweene the right sines of 20 gr. and 88 gr. 30 m. This difference I take, and make it a parallel sine of the lesser side 38 gr. 30 m. so the parallell Radius will be the fourth proportionall. Then coming to the second o∣peration, I make this fourth proportionall a parallell sine of the greater side 40 gr. and take out his parallell Radius. For this measured from 90 gr. beyond the center in the lines of sines stretched forth at their full length, will be the versed sine of 130 gr. 3 m. 2 I may finde an angle by knowing three sides, by that which I haue elsewhere demonstrated vpon Barth. Pitiscus,
and that at one operation in this maner. As the sine of the greater side is to the secant of the complement of the other side: So the difference of sines of the complement of the base, and the arke compounded of the lesser side with the complement of the greater, to the versed sine of the angle required. So in the same triangle ZPS, hauing the same comple∣ments giuen, the angle at P, which sheweth the houre from the meridian, will be found as before 31 gr. 34 m. For the sides being 38 gr. 30 m. and 70 gr. 0 m. I take the se∣cant of the complement of 38 gr. 30 m. and make it a paral∣lell sine of 70 gr; then keeping the Sector at this angle, I consider that the complement of 70 gr. being 20 gr. added vnto 38 gr. 30 m. the compounded side (which is here the meridian altitude) will be 58 gr. 30 m; and that the base be∣ing 40 gr. the difference of sines of the compounded side and the complement of the base will be (as before) the di∣stance betweene the sines of 50 gr. and 58 gr. 30 m. Where∣fore I take out this difference, and lay it on both the lines of sines from the center: so the parallell taken in the termes of this difference, and measured from 90 gr. toward the center, doth giue the versed sine of 31 gr. 34 m. The other angles PZS, PSZ, may be found in the same sort; but hauing the sides and one angle, it will be sooner done by that which we shewed before in the 18. Prop. 20 To find a side by knowing the three angles. If for the greater angle we take his complement to 180 gr. the angles shall be turned into sides, and the sides into an∣gles, & the operation shall be the same, as in the former Prop. 21 To finde a side, by hauing the other two sides, and the angle comprehended. This proposition being the conuerse of the nineteenth,
may be wrought accordingly; but the best way both for it and those which follow, is to resolue them into two rectan∣gles, by letting downe a perpendicular, as was shewed in the first Prop. So in the triangle ZPS, hauing ZP the complement of the latitude, and PS the complement of the declination, with ZPS the angle of the houre from the meridian, we may find ZS the complement of the altitude of the Sunne. For hauing let downe the perpendicular ZR by the first Prop. we haue two triangles, ZRP, ZRS, both rectangle at R. Then may we find the side PR, either by the second, or tenth, or eleuenth Prop; which taken out of PS, leaueth the side RS: with this RS and ZR we may find the base ZS by the fourth Prop. Or hauing let downe the perpendicular SM, we haue two rectangle triangles SMZ, SMP. Then may we find MP, from which if we take ZP, there remaineth MZ: but with MZ and SM, we may find the base ZS. 22 To find a side, by hauing the other two sides, and one of the angles next the inquired side. So in the triangle ZPS, hauing ZP the complement of the latitude, and PS the complement of the declination, with PZS the angle of the azimuth, we may finde ZS the complement of the altitude of the Sunne. For hauing ZP, and the angle at Z, we may to SZ produ∣ced, let downe a perpendicular PV. Then we haue two re∣ctangle triangles, PVZ, PVS, wherein if we find the sides VZ, VS, and take the one out of the other, there will remain the side inquired ZS. 23 To find a side, by hauing one side, and the two angles next the inquired side. So in the triangle ABD, hauing AB the place of the sun, and BAD the angle of the greatest declination, and ADB
the angle of the equator with the horizon, we may find AD the oblique ascention. For hauing let downe BC the perpendicular of declina∣tion, we haue two rectangle triangles, ACB, DCB. Then may we find AC the right ascention, and DC the ascentio∣nall difference; and comparing the one with the other, there remaineth AD. 24 To find a side, by hauing two angles, and the side inclosed by them. So in the triangle ZPS, hauing the angles at Z and P, with the side intercepted ZP, we may find the side PS. For hauing let downe the perpendicular PV, we haue two re∣ctangles PVZ, PVS. Then may we find the angle VPZ, ei- by the seuenth, or fifteenth, or sixteenth Prop. which added to ZPS, maketh the angle VPS: with this VPS and PV, we may find the base PS, according to the 13 Prop. 25 To find an angle by hauing the other two angles and the side inclosed by them. So in the triangle ZPS, hauing the angles at Z and P, with the side intercepted ZP, we may finde the other angle ZSP. For hauing let downe the perpendicular ZR, we haue two rectangles ZRP, ZRS. Then may we finde the angle PZR by the sixteenth Prop. and that compared with PZS, leaueth the angle RZS: with this RZS and ZR we may find the angle required ZSR, according to the sixth Prop. 26 To finde an angle, by hauing the other two angles, and one of the sides next the inquired angle. So in the triangle ABD, hauing the angles at A and D, with the side AB, we may find the angle ABD. For hauing let downe the perpendicular BC, we haue two rectangles,
ACB, DCB. Then may we find the angles ABC, DBC, and take DBC out of ABC; for so there remaineth the an∣gle required ABD. 27 To finde an angle, by knowing two sides, and the angle contained by them. So in the triangle ZPS, hauing the sides ZP, PS, with the angle comprehended ZPS, we may find the angle PZS. For hauing let downe the perpendicular SM, we haue two rectangles SMZ, SMP. Then may we find the side MP, and taking ZP out of MP, there remaineth MZ: with this MZ and the perpendicular MS, we may finde the angle MZS, by the fourteenth Prop. This angle MZS, taken out of 180 gr. there remaineth PZS. 28 To find an angle by knowing the two sides next it, and one of the other angles. So in the triangle ZPS, hauing the sides ZP and PS, with the angle PZS, we may find the angle ZPS. For ha∣uing let downe the perpendicular PV, we haue two rectan∣gles PVZ, PVS. Then may we find the angles VPZ, VPS; and taking VPZ out of VPS, there remaineth ZPS, which was required. These 28 cases are all that can fall out in any sphericall triangle: if any do not presently vnderstand them, let them once more reade ouer the vse of the globes, and they shall soone become easie vnto them▪
CHAP. VI. Of the vse of the Meridian line in Nauigation. THe Meridian line is here set on the side of the Sector, stretched forth at full length, on the same plane with the line of lines and Solids, and is diuided vnequally toward 87 gr. (whereof 70 gr. are about one halfe) in such sort as the Me∣ridian in the cart of Mercators proiection. The vse of it may be 1 To diuide a sea-chart according to Mer∣cators proiection. If a degree of the equator on the sea-chart be equall to the hundred part of the line of lines in the Sector, the degrees of the Meridian vpon the Sector, shall giue the like degrees vpon the sea-chart: if otherwise they be vnequall, then may the meridians of the sea-chart be diuided in such sort as the line of Meridians is diuided on the Sector, by that which we shewed before in the 8 Prop. of the line of lines. But to auoid error, I haue here set downe a Table, where∣by the Meridian line may be diuided out of the degrees of the equator, supposing each degree to be subdiuided into a thousand parts. By which Table, & the vsuall Table of Sines, Tangents and Secants, the proportions following may be also resolued arithmetically. For the maner of diuision, let the e∣quator (or one of the parallels if it be a particular chart) be drawne, and diuided, and crossed with parallell meridians, as in the common sea-chart: then looke into the Table, and let the distance of 40 gr. in the meridian, from the equator, be equall to 43 gr. 711 parts of the equator; let 50 gr. in the meridian from the equator, be equall to 57 gr. 909 parts of the equator; and so in the rest.
M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Par 0 0 0 3 3 001 6 6 011 9 9 037 12 12 088     100   3 101   6 111   9 138   12 190     200   3 201   6 212   9 239   12 293     300   3 301   6 312   9 341   12 395     400   3 402   6 413   9 442   12 497     500   3 502   6 514   9 543   12 600     600   3 602   6 614   9 645   12 702     700   3 702   6 715   9 746   12 805     800   3 803   6 816   9 848   12 907     900   3 903   6 916   9 949   13 010 1 1 000 4 4 003 7 7 017 10 10 051 13 13 112   1 100   4 103   7 118   10 152   13 215   1 200   4 204   7 219   10 254   13 318   1 300   4 304   7 319   10 355   13 421   1 400   4 404   7 420   10 457   13 523   1 500   4 504   7 521   10 559   13 626   1 600   4 605   7 622   10 661   13 729   1 700   4 705   7 723   10 762   13 832   1 800   4 805   7 824   10 864   13 935   1 900   4 906   7 925   10 966   14 038 2 2 000 5 5 006 8 8 026 11 11 068 14 14 141   2 100   5 106   8 127   11 170   14 244   2 200   5 207   8 228   11 272   14 347   2 300   5 307   8 329   11 374   14 450   2 400   5 408   8 430   11 476   14 553   2 500   5 508   8 531   11 578   14 656   2 601   5 609   8 632   11 680   14 760   2 701   5 709   8 733   11 782   14 863   2 801   5 810   8 834   11 884   14 967   2 901   5 910   8 936   11 986   15 070 3 3 001 6 6 011 9 9 037 12 12 088 15 15 174
M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr part M Gr part 15 15 174 18 18 303 21 21 486 24 24 734 27 28 058   15 277   18 408   21 593   24 844   28 171   15 381   18 513   21 701   24 953   28 283   15 485   18 619   21 808   25 063   28 396   15 588   18 724   21 915   25 173   28 508   15 692   18 830   21 023   25 282   28 621   15 796   18 935   22 130   25 392   28 734   15 900   19 041   22 238   25 502   28 847   16 004   19 146   22 345   25 613   28 959   16 107   19 251   22 453   25 723   29 072 16 16 211 19 19 356 22 22 561 25 25 833 28 29 186   16 316   19 463   22 669   25 943   29 299   16 420   19 569   22 777   26 054   29 413   16 524   19 675   22 885   26 164   29 526   16 628   19 781   22 993   26 275   29 640   16 732   19 887   23 101   26 386   29 753   16 836   19 993   23 210   26 497   29 867   16 941   20 100   23 318   26 608   29 981   17 045   20 206   23 427   26 719   30 095   17 150   20 312   23 535   26 830   30 300 17 17 255 20 20 419 23 23 643 26 26 941 29 30 324   17 359   20 525   23 752   27 052   30 438   17 464   20 632   23 861   27 164   30 553   17 568   20 738   23 970   27 275   30 667   17 673   20 845   24 079   27 387   30 782   17 778   20 952   24 188   27 499   30 897   17 883   21 059   24 297   27 610   31 012   17 988   21 165   24 406   27 722   31 127   18 093   21 272   24 515   27 834   31 242   18 198   21 379   24 624   27 946   31 357 18 18 303 21 21 486 24 24 734 27 28 058 30 31 473
M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Par 30 31 473 33 34 992 36 38 633 39 42 415 42 46 362   31 588   35 111   38 757   42 544   46 496   31 704   35 231   38 880   42 673   46 631   31 820   35 350   39 004   42 802   46 766   31 936   35 470   39 129   42 931   46 902   32 052   35 590   39 253   43 061   47 037   32 168   35 710   39 377   43 191   47 173   32 284   35 830   39 502   43 320   47 309   32 400   35 950   39 627   43 451   47 445   32 517   36 071   39 752   43 581   47 581 31 32 633 34 36 191 37 39 877 40 43 711 43 47 718   32 750   36 312   40 002   43 842   47 855   32 867   36 433   40 128   43 973   47 992   32 984   36 554   40 253   44 104   48 129   33 101   36 675   40 379   44 235   48 267   33 218   36 796   40 505   44 366   48 404   33 336   36 917   40 631   44 498   48 542   33 453   37 039   40 757   44 630   48 681   33 571   37 161   40 884   44 762   48 819   33 688   37 283   41 011   44 894   48 958 32 33 806 35 37 405 38 41 137 41 45 026 44 49 097   33 924   37 527   41 264   45 159   49 236   34 042   37 649   41 392   45 292   49 375   34 161   37 771   41 519   45 425   49 515   34 279   37 894   41 646   45 558   49 655   34 397   38 017   41 774   45 691   49 795   34 516   38 140   41 902   45 825   49 935   34 635   38 263   42 030   45 959   50 076   34 754   38 386   42 158   46 093   50 217   34 873   38 509   42 287   46 227   50 358 33 34 992 36 38 633 39 42 415 42 46 362 45 50 499
M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr part M Gr part 45 50 499 48 54 860 51 59 481 54 64 412 57 69 711   50 641   55 010   59 640   64 582   69 895   50 783   55 160   59 800   64 753   70 080   50 925   55 310   59 960   64 924   70 263   51 068   55 460   60 120   65 096   70 449   51 210   55 611   60 280   65 268   70 635   51 353   55 762   60 441   65 440   70 821   51 496   55 913   60 602   65 613   71 008   51 639   56 065   60 763   65 786   71 195   51 783   56 217   60 925   65 960   71 383 46 51 927 49 56 369 52 61 088 55 66 134 58 71 572   52 071   56 522   61 250   66 308   71 761   52 215   56 675   61 413   66 483   71 950   52 360   56 828   61 577   66 659   72 140   52 505   56 981   61 740   66 835   72 331   52 650   57 135   61 904   67 011   72 522   52 795   57 289   62 069   67 188   72 714   52 941   57 444   62 234   67 365   72 906   53 087   57 598   62 399   67 543   73 099   53 233   57 754   62 564   67 721   73 292 47 53 380 50 57 909 53 62 730 56 67 900 59 73 486   53 526   58 065   62 897   68 079   73 680   53 673   58 221   63 063   68 258   73 875   53 821   58 377   63 231   68 438   74 071   53 968   58 534   63 398   68 618   74 267   54 116   58 691   63 566   68 799   74 464   54 264   58 848   63 734   68 981   74 661   54 413   59 006   63 903   69 163   74 859   54 562   59 164   64 072   69 345   75 057   54 711   59 322   64 242   69 528   75 256 48 54 860 51 59 481 54 64 412 57 69 711 60 75 456
M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr Par M Gr. Par 60 75 450 63 81 749 66 88 725 69 96 575 72 105 579   75 656   81 970   88 971   96 854   105 904   75 857   82 191   89 219   97 135   106 230   76 059   82 413   89 467   97 418   106 558   76 201   82 635   89 716   97 701   106 888   76 464   82 860   89 967   97 986   107 220   76 667   83 084   90 218   98 272   107 553   76 871   83 310   90 470   98 560   107 888   77 076   83 536   90 723   98 849   108 226   77 281   83 763   90 978   99 139   108 565 61 77 487 64 83 990 67 91 232 70 99 431 73 108 906   77 694   84 219   91 489   99 724   10 249   77 901   84 448   91 746   100 018   109 594   78 109   84 678   92 005   100 314   109 941   78 317   84 909   92 264   100 612   110 290   78 526   85 141   92 525   100 910   110 641   78 736   85 374   92 787   101 211   110 994   78 947   85 607   93 050   101 513   111 349   79 158   85 842   93 314   101 816   111 707   79 370   86 077   93 579   102 121   112 066 62 79 583 65 86 313 68 93 846 71 102 427 74 112 428   79 796   86 550   94 113   102 735   112 792   80 010   86 788   94 382   103 044   113 158   80 225   87 027   94 652   103 356   113 526   80 441   87 267   94 923   103 668   113 897   80 657   87 508   95 195   103 983   114 270   80 874   87 749   95 468   104 299   114 645   81 091   87 992   95 743   104 616   115 023   81 310   88 235   96 019   104 936   115 403   81 529   88 480   96 296   105 257   115 786 63 81 749 66 88 725 69 96 575 72 105 579 75 116 171
M Gr. Par M Gr. Par M Gr. Par M Gr. Par M Gr. part 75 116 171 78 129 075 81 145 650 84 168 947 87 208 705   116 559   129 558   146 292   169 912   210 649   116 949   130 045   146 942   170 893   212 668   117 342   130 536   147 600   171 891   214 745   117 737   131 031   148 265   172 907   216 909   118 135   131 530   148 937   173 941   219 158   118 536   132 034   149 618   174 994   221 498   118 939   132 542   150 307   176 067   223 938   119 345   133 055   151 003   177 160   226 486   119 755   133 572   151 709   178 275   229 153 76 120 160 79 134 094 82 152 423 85 179 411 88 231 950   120 581   134 620   153 147   180 569   234 891   121 000   135 151   153 878   181 752   237 991   121 420   135 687   154 620   182 960   241 268   121 843   136 228   155 372   184 194   244 744   122 270   136 775   156 132   185 454   248 445   122 700   137 326   156 903   186 743   252 402   123 133   137 883   157 685   188 062   256 652   123 570   138 445   158 478   189 411   261 243   124 009   139 012   159 281   190 793   266 235 77 124 452 80 139 585 83 160 096 86 192 210 89 271 705   124 898   140 164   160 922   193 661   277 753   125 348   140 748   161 761   195 151   284 517   125 801   141 339   162 612   196 680   292 191   126 258   141 936   163 475   198 251   301 058   126 718   142 538   164 352   199 867   311 563   127 182   143 147   165 242   201 529   324 455   127 649   143 763   166 146   203 240   341 166   128 121   144 385   267 065   205 005   365 039   128 596   145 014   167 999   206 825   408 011 78 129 075 81 145 650 84 168 947 87 208 705 90 Infinite
geometric illustration
geometric illustration
If any desire to haue his chart to agree with his Sector, he may make each degree of longitude equall to the tenth part of the line of lines, and diuide the meridian of his chart out of the Sector: so shall each degree of the chart, be ten times as large as the like degree on the Sector, and the worke be easie from the one to the other. 2 To find how many leagues answer to one degree of longitude in euery seuerall latitude. In sailing by the compasse, the course holds sometime vpon a great circle, sometime vpon a parallel to the equator; but most commonly vpon crooked lines winding towards one of the poles, which lines are well knowne by the name of Rumbs. If the course hold vpon a great circle, it is either North or South, vnder some meridian, or East or West, vnder the e∣quator. And in these cases, euery degree requires an allow∣ance of twentie leagues, euery twentie leagues will make a degrees difference in the sailing: so that here needs no fur∣ther precept then the rule of proportion in the Chapter of lines. But if the course hold East or West, on any of the paral∣lels to the equator; As the Radius is to twentie leagues, the measure of one degree at the equator: So the sine of the complement of the latitude to the measure of leagues answering to one degree in that latitude. Wherefore I take 20 leagues out of the line of lines, and make it a parallell Radius, by fitting it ouer in the sines of 90 and 90: so his parallell sine taken out of the complement of the latitude, and measured in the line of lines, shall shew the number of leagues required.
Thus in the latitude of 18 gr. 12 m. we shall find 19 leagues answering to one degree of lon∣gitude, and 18 leagues in the latitude of 25 gr. 15 m. and as in this Table. Gr. 1 Lg 0 0 20 18 12 19 25 15 18 31 48 17 36 52 16 41 25 15 45 34 14 49 28 13 53 8 12 56 38 11 60 0 10 63 15 9 66 25 8 69 30 7 72 32 6 75 31 5 78 28 4 81 23 3 84 15 2 87 8 1 This may be done more readily without ope∣ning the Sector, by doubling the sine of the complement of the latitude, as may appeare in the same example. It may also be done by the line of meridians, either vpon the Sector, or vpon the chart. For if we open a paire of compasses to the quantitie of one degree of longitude in the equator, and measure it in the meridian line, setting one foot as much aboue the latitude giuen, as the other falleth beneath it, so that the latitude may be in the middle betweene the feete of the compasses, the number of leagues intercepted shall be that which was required. But if the course hold vpon any of the rumbs, betweene a parallell of the equator and the me∣ridian, we are to consider besides the quarter of the world to which we tend, which must be al∣wayes knowne. 1 The difference of longitude at least in generall. 2 The difference of latitude, and that in particular. 3 The rumb whereon the course holds. 4 The distance vpō the rumb, which is the distance, which we are here to consider, and is alwayes somewhat greater then the like distance vpon a greater circle. And for these first I shew in generall this third Prop. 3 To finde how many leagues do answer to one degree of latitude in euery seuerall Rumb. As the sine of the complement of the rumb frō the meridian, is to 20 leagues the measure of one degree at the meridian: So the Radius to the leagues answering to one degree vpon the Rumb.
Wherfore I take 20 leagues out of the line of lines, and make it a parallell sine of the complement of the Rumb from the meridian; so his parallell Radius ta∣ken and measured in the line of lines, shall shew the number of leagues requi∣red. Thus in the first Rumb from the me∣ridian, we shall finde 20 lgs 39 parts an∣swering to one degree of latitude, and 21 lgs 65 parts in the second Rumb, &c. as in this Table, where we subdiuide each league into a hundred parts, and shew besides what inclination the rumb hath to the meridian. This may be done more readily with∣out opening the Sector, by doubling the secant of the latitude, as may appeare in the same example. It may also be done vpon the chart, if we take the distance vpon the Rumb betweene two parallels, and measure it in the meridian line, as farre aboue the greater latitude as beneath the lesser. For so the number of leagues intercep∣ted, shall be that which was required. This considered in generall, I shew more particularly in twelue Prop. follow∣ing, how of these foure any two being giuen, the other two may be found, both by Mercators chart, and by this Sector. Rumbs. Inclina∣tiō to the meridian Number of leags. Gr. Mi. Lgs Par   2 49 20 02   5 37 20 10   8 26 20 22 1 11 15 20 39   14 4 20 62   16 52 20 90   19 41 21 24 2 22 30 21 65   25 19 22 12   28 7 22 68   30 56 23 32 3 33 45 24 05   36 34 24 90   39 22 25 87   42 11 26 99 4 45 0 28 28   47 49 29 78   50 37 31 52   53 26 33 57 5 56 15 36 00   59 4 38 90   61 52 42 43   64 41 36 78 6 67 30 52 26   70 19 59 37   73 7 68 90   75 56 82 31 7 78 45 102 52   81 34 136 30   84 22 205 24   87 11 407 60 8 90 0 Infinita.
1 By one latitude Rumb and distance to find the difference of latitudes. As the Radius to the sine of the complement of the Rumb from the me∣ridian: So the distance vpon the Rumb, to the difference of latitudes. Let the place giuen be A in the latitude of 50 gr. C in a greater latitude, but vnknowne, the distance vpon the Rumb being 6 gr. betweene them, and the Rumb the third from the meridian. First I take 6 gr. for the distance vpon the Rumb, out of the line of lines, and make it a parallell Radius, by putting it ouer in the sines of 90. and 90. Then keeping the Sector at this angle, I take out the parallell sine of 56 gr. 15 m. which is the sine of the complement of the third Rumb from the me∣ridian, and measuring it in the line of lines, I find it to be 5 gr. and such is the difference of latitude required. Or I may take out the sine of 56 gr. 15 m. for the comple∣ment of the third Rumb from the meridian, make it a paral∣lell Radius; then keeping the Sector at this angle, I take 6 gr. for the distance, either out of the line of lines, or any other scale of equall parts, or else out of the meridian line, and lay it on both sides of the Sector from the center, either on the line of lines or sines: so the parallell taken from the termes of this distance, and measured in the same scale wherein the di∣stance was measured, shall shew the difference of latitude to be 5 gr. as before. But in shorter distances, such as fall within the compasse of a dayes sailing, this worke will hold much better. As may appeare by comparing the worke with the Table following where the numbers in the front do signifie the leagues; those in the side, the Rumb; and the rest in the middle, the diffe∣rence of latitude.
Lgs 100 80 60 40 20 19 18 17 16 15 Rum. G. M G. M G. M G. M M M M M M M 5 0 4 0 3 0 2 0 60 57 54 51 48 45   4 59 3 59 2 59 1 59 60 57 54 51 48 45   4 58 3 58 2 59 1 59 60 57 54 51 48 45   4 56 3 57 2 58 1 58 59 56 53 50 47 44 1 4 54 3 55 2 56 1 57 59 56 53 50 47 44   4 51 3 53 2 55 1 56 58 56 52 50 47 43   4 47 3 50 2 52 1 55 57 55 52 49 46 43   4 42 3 46 2 49 1 53 56 54 51 48 45 42 2 4 37 3 42 2 46 1 51 55 53 50 47 44 41   4 31 3 37 2 43 1 48 54 52 49 46 43 40   4 25 3 32 2 39 1 46 53 50 48 45 42 39   4 17 3 26 2 34 1 43 51 49 46 44 41 38 3 4 10 3 20 2 30 1 40 50 47 45 42 40 37   4 1 3 13 2 25 1 36 48 46 43 41 39 36   3 52 3 5 2 19 1 32 46 44 42 39 37 35   3 42 2 58 2 13 1 28 44 42 40 38 36 33 4 3 32 2 50 2 7 1 25 42 40 38 36 34 32   3 22 2 41 2 1 1 21 40 38 36 34 32 30   3 10 2 32 1 54 1 16 38 36 34 32 30 28   2 59 2 23 1 47 1 12 36 34 32 30 29 27 5 2 47 2 14 1 40 1 7 33 32 30 28 27 25   2 34 2 3 1 32 1 2 31 29 28 26 25 23   2 22 1 53 1 25 0 57 28 27 25 24 23 22   2 8 1 43 1 17 0 52 26 24 23 22 21 19 6 1 55 1 32 1 8 0 46 23 22 21 20 18 17   1 41 1 20 1 0 0 40 20 19 18 17 16 15   1 27 1 9 0 52 0 35 17 16 16 15 14 13   1 13 0 58 0 44 0 30 15 14 13 12 12 11 7 0 59 0 47 0 35 0 24 12 11 11 10 9 9   0 44 0 36 0 26 0 18 9 8 8 7 7 7   0 30 0 24 0 18 0 12 6 6 5 5 5 4   0 15 0 12 0 9 0 9 3 3 3 3 2 2 8 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 Lg M M M M M M M M M M M M M M Rum. 40 39 36 33 30 27 24 21 18 15 12 9 6 3 42 39 36 33 30 27 24 21 18 15 12 9 6 3   42 39 36 33 30 27 24 21 18 15 12 9 6 3   42 39 36 33 30 27 24 21 18 15 12 9 6 3   41 38 35 32 29 26 24 21 18 15 12 9 6 3 1 41 38 35 32 29 26 23 20 17 15 12 9 6 3   40 37 34 32 29 26 23 20 17 14 11 9 6 3   40 37 34 31 28 25 23 20 17 14 11 8 6 3   39 36 33 31 28 25 22 19 17 14 11 8 6 3 2 38 35 33 30 27 24 22 19 16 14 11 8 5 3   37 34 32 29 26 24 21 19 16 13 11 8 5 3   36 33 31 28 26 23 21 18 15 13 10 8 5 3   35 32 30 27 25 22 20 17 15 12 10 7 5 2 3 34 30 29 26 24 22 19 17 14 12 10 7 5 2   33 30 28 26 23 21 19 16 14 12 9 7 5 2   31 29 27 24 22 20 18 16 13 11 9 7 4 2   30 28 25 23 21 19 17 15 13 11 8 6 4 2 4 28 26 24 22 20 18 16 14 12 10 8 6 4 2   27 25 23 21 19 17 15 13 11 10 8 6 4 2   25 23 21 20 18 16 14 13 11 9 7 5 4 2   23 22 20 18 17 15 13 12 10 8 7 5 3 2 5 22 20 18 17 15 14 12 11 9 8 6 5 3 2   20 18 17 16 14 13 11 10 8 7 6 4 3 1   18 17 15 14 13 12 10 9 8 6 5 4 3 1   16 15 14 13 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 3 2 1 6 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1   12 11 10 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 3 2 1   10 9 9 8 7 7 6 5 4 4 3 2 1 1   8 8 7 6 6 6 5 4 3 3 2 2 1 1 7 6 6 5 5 4 5 4 3 3 2 2 1 1 1   4 4 4 3 3 3 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 0   2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0   0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 8
In the Chart let a meridian AB be drawne through A, and in A with AB make an angle of the Rumb BAC. Then open the compasses, according to the latitude of the places, to EF the quantitie of 6 gr. in the meridian, transferring them into the Rumb from A to C, and through C draw the paral∣lell BC, crossing the meridian AB in B: so the degrees in the meridian from A to B, shall shew the difference of latitude to be 5 gr. 2 By the Rumb and both latitudes to find the distance vpon the Rumb. As the sine of the complement of the Rumb from the meri∣dian, is to the Radius: So the difference of latitudes, to the distance vpon the Rumb. As if the places giuen were A in the latitude of 50 gr. C in the latitude of 55 gr. and the Rumb the third from the meridian. Here I may take 5 gr. for the difference of latitude out of the line of lines, and put it ouer in the sine of 56 gr. 15 m. for the complement of the third Rumb from the meridian. Then keeping the Sector at this angle, I take out the parallell Ra∣dius, and measuring it in the line of lines, I find it to be 6 gr. and such is the distance vpon the Rumb, which was requi∣red. Or I may take the laterall Radius, and make it a parallell sine of 56 gr. 15 m. the complement of the Rumb from the meridian: then keeping the Sector at this angle, I take 5 gr. for the difference of latitude, either out of the line of lines, or out of some other scale of equall parts, and lay it on both sides of the Sector from the center, either on the line of lines or of sines: so the parallell taken from the termes of this diffe∣rence, and measured in the same scale with the difference, shall shew the distance vpon the Rumb to be 6 gr. or 120 leagues.
Or keeping the Sector at this angle, I may take the diffe∣rence betweene 50 gr. and 55 gr. out of the Meridian line, and measuring it in the equator, I shal find it to be equall to 8 gr. 22 p. of the equator. Wherefore I take the parallell betweene 822 and 822 out of the line of lines, and measuring it in the line of lines I shall find it to be 989; which shewes that accor∣ding to this proiection, the distance vpon this third Rumb, answerable to the former distance of latitudes, will be equall to 9 gr. 89 p. of the equator. Or the Sector remaining at this angle, I may take the diffe∣rence betweene 50 gr. and 55 gr. out of the Meridian line, and lay it from the center on both sides of the Sector, either on the line of lines or of sines: so the parallell taken from the termes of this difference, shall be the very line of distance re∣quired, the same with AC or EF vpon the chart; which may serue for the better pricking downe of the distance vpon the Rumb, without taking it forth of the Meridian line, as in the former Prop. Or if the Rumb fall nearer to the equator, that the laterall Radius cannot be fitted ouer in it, this proposition may be wrought by parallell entrance. For if I first take out the sine of 56 gr. 15 m. and make it a parallell Radius, by fitting it ouer in the sines of 90 and 90, or in the ends of the lines of lines, and then take 5 gr. for the difference of latitudes out of the line of lines, and carrie it pa∣rallell to the former, I shall find it to crosse both lines of lines in the points of 6: and so it giues the same distance as be∣fore. Or if the distance be small, it may be found by the former Table. For the Rumb being found in the side of the Table, and the difference of latitude in the same line; the top of the columne wherein the difference of latitude was found, shall giue the number of leagues in the distance required. Or we may finde this distance in the Table of Rumbs in the fift Prop. following. For according to the example looke into the Table of the third Rumb for 5 gr. of latitude, and there we shall finde 6 gr. 01 parts vnder the title of distance.
So if the difference of latitude vpon the same Rumb were 50 gr. the distance would be 60 gr. 13 parts. If the difference of latitude vpon the same Rumb were onely ½ of a degree, the distance would be onely 60 parts, such as 100 doe make a de∣gree. In the chart let a Meridian AB be drawne through A, and parallels of latitude through A and C; & then in A with AB make an angle of the Rumb BAC: so the distance taken from A to C, and measured in the Meridian line, according to the latitude of the places, shall be found to be 6 gr. or 120 leagues. And such is the distance required. 3 By the distance and both latitudes to find the Rumb. As the distance vpon the Rumb, to the difference of latitudes: So is the Radius to the sine of the complement of the Rumb from the Me∣ridian, As if the places giuen were A in the latitude of 50 gr. C in the latitude of 55 gr. the distance betweene them being 6 gr. vpon the Rumb. First I take 6 gr. for the distance vpon the Rumb, and lay it on both sides of the Sector from the cen∣ter; then out of the same scale I take 5 gr. for the difference of latitude, and to it open the Sector in the termes of the for∣mer distance: so the parallell Radius taken and measured in the sines, doth giue 56 gr. 15 m. the complement whereof 33 gr. 45 m. is the angle of the Rumbs inclination to the Meri∣dian, which was required. In the chart let a meridian AB be drawne through A, and parallels of latitude both through A and C; then open the compasses according to the latitude of the places to EF the quantitie of 6 gr. in the meridian, and setting one foote in A, turne the other till it crosse the parallell BC in C, and draw the right line AC: so the angle BAC shall shew the inclina∣tion of the Rumb to the Meridian to be 33 gr. 45 m. as before.
These three last Prop. depend one on the other, and may be wrought as truly by the common sea-chart as by this of Mercators proiection: and therefore in working them by the Sector, the distance and the difference of latitudes may as well or better be taken out of the line of lines (which here representeth the equator) or any other line of equall parts, as out of the inlarged degrees in the meridian line. But in the propositions following, the difference of longitude must be taken out of the equator; the difference of latitudes and di¦stance vpon the Rumb, must alwayes be taken out of the me∣ridian line; which I therefore call the proper difference, and proper distance. 4 By the longitude and latitude of two places to find the Rumb. As if the places giuen were A in the latitude of 50 gr. C in the latitude of 55 gr. and the difference of longitude be∣tweene them were 5 gr. 30 m. In the chart let meridians and parallels be drawn through A and C, and a straight line for the Rumb from A to C; then by that we shewed Cap. 2. Prop. 9. inquire the quantitie of the angle BAC, and it shall be found to be 33 gr. 45 m. which is the third Rumb from the Meridian. Wherefore the propor∣tion holds for the Sector, As AB the proper difference of latitude, is to BC the difference of longitude: So AB as Radius, to BC the tangent of the Rumb from the Meridian. According to this I take the proper difference of latitude from 50 gr. to 55 gr. out of the line of meridians, and lay it on both sides of the Sector from the center; then I take the diffe∣rence of longitude 5 gr. ½ out of the line of lines, and to it o∣pen the Sector in the termes of the former difference of lati∣tudes: so the parallell Radius taken from betweene 90 and 90, and measured in the greater tangent on the side of the Se∣ctor,
doth giue 33 gr. 45 m. for the Rumb required. But if the Rumb fall nearer to the equator; As AD the difference of longitudes, is to DC the proper difference of latitudes: So AD as Radius, to DC the tangent of the rumb from the equator. According to this I take the former difference of latitudes from 50 gr. to 55 gr. out of the line of Meridians, and to it o∣pen the Sector in the termes of the difference of longitude reckoned in the line of lines from the center: so the parallell Radius taken and measured in the tangent, doth giue 56 gr. 15 m. for the rumb from the equator; which is the complement to the former 33 gr. 45 m: and so both wayes it is found to be the third rumb from the Meridian. But if this rumb were to be found in the common sea-chart, it should seeme to be aboue 47 gr. which is more then the fourth rumb from the meridian. 5 By the Rumb and both latitudes to find the difference of longitude. As if the places giuen were A in the latitude of 50 gr. and C in the latitude of 55 gr. and the rumb the third from the meridian. In the chart, let a meridian be drawne through A, and a parallell of latitude through C; then in A with AB make the angle of the rumb from the meridian BAC, (as was shewed Cap. 2. Prop. 10.) So the degrees in the parallell be∣tweene B and C, shall be found to be 5 gr. ½, the difference of longitude which was required. Wherefore the proportion holds for the Sector. As AB the Radius, to BC the tangent of the rumb from the meridian: So AB as proper difference of the latitudes, to BC the difference of longitude.
According to this we may take the tangent of the Rumb which is here 33 gr. 45 m. from the meridian, out of the grea∣ter tangent on the side of the Sector; and putting it ouer be∣tweene 90 and 90, make it a Radius: then keeping the Sector at this angle, take the proper difference of latitudes from 50 gr. to 55 gr. out of the line of Meridians, and lay it on both sides of the Sector from the center: so the parallel taken from the termes of this difference, and measured in the line of lines, shall shew the difference of longitude to be 5 gr. ½. Or if the Rumb fall nearer the equator. As DC the tangent of the Rumb from the equator, to AD the Radius: So DC as proper difference of the latitudes, to AD the difference of longitude. According to this we may best work by parallell entrance, first taking 56 gr. 15 m. for the angle of the Rumb from the equator, out of the greater tangent, and make it a parallell Ra∣dius: then take the proper difference of latitudes out of the line of meridians, and carrie it parallell to the former: so we shall find it to crosse the line of lines in 5 gr. ½. And this is the difference of longitude required, the same as before. But if this difference were to be found by the common sea-chart, it should seeme to be only 3 gr. 20 m. which is more then 2 gr. lesse then the truth. And yet this error would be greater, if either the latitude be greater, or the Rumb fall nea∣rer the equator: as may appeare by comparing the common sea-chart with the Tables following.
The first Rumbe frm the Meridian. North and by East, South and by East, North and by West, South and by West. La Long. Dist. La Long. Dist. Long. Dist. Gr Gr. P Gr. P Gr Gr. P. Gr. P. G r P. Gr. P. 0 0 0 30 6 26 30 5 60 15 01 61 18 1 20 1 02 31 6 49 31 61 61 15 41 62 20 2 40 2 04 32 6 72 32 63 62 15 83 63 21 3 60 3 06 33 6 96 33 65 63 16 26 64 23 4 80 4 08 34 7 20 34 67 64 16 71 65 25 5 1 00 5 10 35 7 44 35 69 65 17 17 66 27 6 1 20 6 12 36 7 68 36 71 66 17 65 67 29 7 1 40 7 14 37 7 92 37 73 67 18 15 68 31 8 1 60 8 16 38 8 17 38 75 68 18 67 69 33 9 1 80 9 18 39 8 43 39 77 69 19 21 70 35 10 2 00 10 20 40 8 70 40 78 70 19 78 71 37 11 2 20 11 22 41 8 96 41 80 71 20 37 72 39 12 2 40 12 24 42 9 22 42 82 72 21 00 73 41 13 2 61 13 25 43 9 50 43 84 73 21 66 74 43 14 2 81 14 27 44 9 76 44 86 74 22 36 75 45 15 3 02 15 29 45 10 04 45 88 75 23 10 76 47 16 3 22 16 31 46 10 33 46 90 76 23 90 77 49 17 3 43 17 33 47 10 62 47 92 77 24 75 78 51 18 3 64 18 35 48 10 91 48 94 78 25 67 79 53 19 3 85 19 37 49 11 21 49 96 79 26 67 80 55 20 4 06 20 39 50 11 52 50 98 80 27 76 81 57 21 4 27 21 41 51 11 83 52 0 81 28 97 82 59 22 4 49 22 43 52 12 15 53 2 82 30 32 83 61 23 4 70 23 45 53 12 47 54 4 83 31 84 84 63 24 4 92 24 47 54 12 81 55 6 84 33 61 85 62 25 5 14 25 49 55 13 16 56 8 85 35 69 86 67 26 5 36 26 51 56 13 50 57 10 86 38 24 87 69 27 5 58 27 53 57 13 86 58 12 87 41 52 88 71 28 5 80 28 55 58 14 23 59 14 88 46 15 89 73 29 6 03 29 57 59 14 62 60 16 89 54 06 90 75 30 6 26 30 59 60 15 01 61 18 90    
The second Rumbe from the Meridian. North North-east. South South-east. North North-west South South-west La Long. Dist. La Long. Dist. La Long. Dist. Gr Gr. P Gr. P. Gr Gr. P Gr. P Gr Gr. P. Gr. P. 0 0 0 30 13 03 32 47 60 31 25 64 94 1 0 42 1 08 31 13 51 33 5 61 32 09 66 03 2 0 83 2 16 32 14 00 34 64 62 32 96 67 11 3 1 24 3 25 33 14 49 35 72 63 33 86 68 19 4 1 65 4 33 34 15 00 36 80 64 34 79 69 27 5 2 07 5 41 35 15 50 37 88 65 35 7 70 35 6 2 49 6 49 36 16 00 38 97 66 36 75 71 44 7 2 91 7 57 37 16 51 40 05 67 37 80 72 52 8 3 32 8 66 38 17 03 41 13 68 38 88 73 60 9 3 74 9 74 39 17 56 42 21 69 40 00 74 68 10 4 16 10 82 40 18 10 43 30 70 41 19 75 77 11 4 59 11 90 41 18 65 44 38 71 42 43 76 85 12 5 01 12 99 42 19 20 45 46 72 43 74 77 93 13 5 43 14 07 43 19 76 46 54 73 45 11 79 01 14 5 85 15 15 44 20 33 47 62 74 46 57 80 10 15 6 28 16 23 45 20 92 48 71 75 48 12 81 18 16 6 71 17 32 46 21 50 49 79 76 49 78 82 26 17 7 14 18 40 47 22 11 50 87 77 51 55 83 34 18 7 58 19 48 48 22 72 51 95 78 53 46 84 42 19 8 01 20 56 49 23 35 53 03 79 55 54 85 51 20 8 45 21 65 50 23 98 54 12 80 57 82 86 59 21 8 90 22 73 51 24 63 55 20 81 60 33 87 67 22 9 34 23 81 52 25 30 56 28 82 63 13 88 76 23 9 79 24 89 53 25 98 57 37 83 66 32 89 84 24 10 24 25 98 54 26 68 58 45 84 69 99 90 92 25 10 70 27 06 55 27 39 59 53 85 74 32 92 00 26 11 16 28 14 56 28 12 60 61 86 79 63 93 09 27 11 62 29 22 57 28 87 61 70 87 86 46 94 17 28 12 08 30 31 58 29 64 62 78 88 96 10 95 25 29 12 55 31 39 59 30 44 63 86 89 112 57 96 33 30 13 03 32 47 60 31 25 64 94 90    
The third Rumbe from the Meridian. North-east by North, South-east by South, North-west by North, South-west by South. La Long. Dist. La Long. Dist. La Long. Dist. Gr Gr. P. Gr. P. Gr Gr. P. Gr. P. Gr Gr. P. Gr. P. 0 0 0 30 21 03 36 08 60 50 42 72 16 1 0 66 1 20 31 21 80 37 28 61 51 78 73 36 2 1 33 2 40 32 22 58 38 49 62 53 18 74 56 3 2 00 3 61 33 23 38 39 69 63 54 63 75 77 4 2 67 4 81 34 24 18 40 89 64 56 12 76 97 5 3 34 6 01 35 25 00 42 09 65 57 68 78 17 6 4 01 7 22 36 25 82 43 30 66 59 29 79 37 7 4 68 8 42 37 26 64 44 50 67 60 96 80 58 8 5 36 9 62 38 27 48 45 70 68 62 71 81 78 9 6 03 10 82 39 28 34 46 90 69 64 53 82 98 10 6 71 12 03 40 29 21 48 11 70 66 44 84 19 11 7 39 13 23 41 30 09 49 31 71 68 45 85 39 12 8 07 14 43 42 30 98 50 51 72 70 55 86 59 13 8 76 15 64 43 31 88 51 71 73 72 77 87 79 14 9 44 16 84 44 32 80 52 92 74 75 12 89 00 15 10 13 18 04 45 33 74 54 12 75 77 62 90 20 16 10 83 19 24 46 34 69 55 32 76 80 30 91 40 17 11 53 20 45 47 35 67 56 52 77 83 15 92 61 18 12 23 21 65 48 36 66 57 73 78 86 25 93 81 19 12 93 22 85 49 37 67 58 93 79 89 60 95 01 20 13 64 24 05 50 38 69 60 13 80 93 27 96 22 21 14 35 25 26 51 39 74 61 33 81 97 32 97 42 22 15 07 26 46 52 40 82 62 54 82 101 85 98 62 23 15 80 27 66 53 41 91 63 74 83 106 97 99 82 24 16 53 28 86 54 43 03 64 94 84 112 90 101 03 25 17 26 30 07 55 44 19 66 15 85 119 90 102 23 26 18 00 31 27 56 45 37 67 35 86 128 45 103 43 27 18 75 32 47 57 46 58 68 55 87 139 47 104 64 28 19 50 33 67 58 47 82 69 75 88 155 00 105 84 29 20 26 34 88 59 49 11 70 96 9 181 58 107 04 30 21 03 36 08 60 50 42 72 16 90    
The eight Rumbe of East and West, with the Longitude answering to one degree of distance, and the distance belonging to one degree of Longitude. La Long. Dist. La Long. Dist. La Long. Dist. Gr Gr. P. Parts. Gr Gr. P. Parts. Gr Gr. P. Parts. 0 0 100 00 30 1 25 86 60 60 2 00 50 00 1 1 00 99 98 31 1 17 85 71 61 2 06 48 48 2 1 00 99 94 32 1 18 84 80 62 2 13 46 94 3 1 00 99 86 33 1 19 83 86 63 2 20 45 40 4 1 00 99 75 34 1 21 82 90 64 2 28 43 83 5 1 00 99 62 35 1 22 81 91 65 2 37 42 26 6 1 01 99 45 36 1 24 80 90 66 2 46 40 67 7 1 01 99 25 37 1 25 79 86 67 2 56 39 07 8 1 01 99 02 38 1 27 78 80 68 2 67 37 46 9 1 01 98 76 39 1 29 77 71 69 2 79 35 83 10 1 02 98 48 40 1 31 76 60 70 2 92 34 20 11 1 02 98 16 41 1 33 75 47 71 3 07 32 55 12 1 02 97 81 42 1 35 74 31 72 3 24 30 90 13 1 03 97 43 43 1 37 73 13 73 3 42 29 23 14 1 03 97 03 44 1 39 71 93 74 3 63 27 56 15 1 03 96 59 45 1 41 70 71 75 3 86 25 88 16 1 04 96 12 46 1 44 69 46 76 4 13 24 19 17 1 04 95 63 47 1 47 68 20 77 4 44 22 49 18 1 05 95 10 48 1 49 66 91 78 4 81 20 79 19 1 06 94 55 49 1 52 65 60 79 5 24 19 08 20 1 06 93 97 50 1 55 64 28 80 5 76 17 36 21 1 07 93 35 51 1 59 62 93 81 6 39 15 64 22 1 08 92 72 52 1 62 61 56 82 7 18 13 91 23 1 09 92 05 53 1 66 60 18 83 8 20 12 18 24 1 09 91 35 54 1 70 58 77 84 9 57 10 45 25 1 10 90 63 55 1 74 57 35 85 11 47 8 71 26 1 11 89 88 56 1 79 55 92 86 14 33 6 97 27 1 12 89 10 57 1 84 54 46 87 19 11 5 23 28 1 13 88 29 58 1 89 52 99 88 28 65 3 49 29 1 14 87 46 59 1 94 51 50 89 57 30 1 74 30 1 15 86 60 60 2 00 50 00 90   0
These tables are calculated for each of the Rumbs. The first seuen haue three columnes, and of them the first neth the degrees of Latitude, from the Equinoctiall to th Pole: the second doth giue the difference of Longitude; and the third the distance, both of them belonging to that mb and latitude. As in the Table of the third Rumb; at the latitude of 50 Gr. I fnd vnder the title of Longitude 38 Gr. 69 parts, and vn∣der the title of Distance 60 Gr. 13 parts. This shewes that if the course held constantly on the third Rumb from the Equi∣noctiall to the Latitude of 50 Gr. the difference of Longi∣tude would be 38 Gr 69 parts of a 100, and the distance vp∣on the Rumbe 60 Gr. 13 parts. For here I reckon the distance by degrees, rather then by leagues or miles, and subdiuide each degree into 100 parts, rather then it to 60 minutes, for the more ease in calculation, and withall to make the calcu∣lation to agree the better, both with this, and my Crosse-staffe, and other instruments. The vse of these Tables, for the finding of the difference of Longitude, is this. Turne to the table of the Rumb, and there see what longitude belongeth to either latitude, then take the one longitude out of the other, the remainder will be the difference of longitude required. As in the former example, where the places giuen were A, in the latitude of 50 Gr. C in the latitude of 55 Gr. and the Rumb the third from the meridian: I looke into the table of the third Rumb and there find, Latitude 50 gr. Longitude 38 gr. 69 parts. Latitude 55. Longitude 44. 19. Therefore the diff. of Longitude 5 50 There is another vse of these tables, for the describing of the Rumbs both on the Globe, and all sorts of Charts. For ha∣uing drawne the circles of longitude and latitude, and fin∣ding by the tables, the difference of longitude belonging to each Rumb and latitude: If we make a prick in the chart, at
euery degree of latitude, according to that difference of lon∣gitude, and draw lines through those prickes, so as they make no angles, the lines so drawne shall be the Rumbs re∣quired. The vse of the eight Rumb is something different from the rest. For there being here no change of latitude, I haue set to each latitude, the difference of longitude, belonging to one degree of distance, and the distance belonging to one degree of longitude. As if two places shall be 20 leagues, or one degree distant one from the other, in the latitude of 50 gr. the difference of longitude betweene them will be 1 gr. 55 parts. But if they differ one degree in longitude, the distance betweene them will be onely 64 parts, which fall short of 13 leagues, or at the most 6428 parts, such as 10000 do make a degree. 6 By the difference of longitude, Rumb, and one latitude, to find the other latitude. As if the places giuen were A, in the latitude of 50 gr. C in a greater latitude but vnknowne, the difference of longi∣tude 5 gr. ½, and the Rumb the third from the Meridian. In the chart let AB, DC, meridians, be drawne through A and C, according to the difference of longitude, one 5 gr. ½ from the other; and a parallel of latitude through A, cros∣sing the meridian CD in D: then in A, with AB, make an angle of the Rumb BAC: so the degrees in the meridian betweene D and C, shall be found to be 5 gr. the proper diffe∣rence of latitude which was required. Wherefore the propor∣tion holds for the Sector, As AD the Radius, to DC the tangent of the Rumb from the equator: So AD as difference of longitude, to DC the proper difference of latitude. According to this, I take 56 gr. 15 m. for the angle of the Rumb from the equator, out of the greater Tangent, and
make it a parallell Radius. Then I reckon 5 gr. ½ in the line of lines from the center, for the difference of longitude. So the parallell taken from the termes of this difference, and measu∣red in the line of meridians, shal reach from 50 gr. the latitude giuen, to 55 gr. which is the latitude required. Or if the Rumb fall nearer to the meridian. As BC the tangent of the Rumb from the meridian, is to AB the Radius: So BC as difference of longitude, to AD the proper difference of latitude. According to this we may best work by parallel entrance; first take 33 gr. 45 m. for the angle of the Rumb from the me∣ridian, out of the greater Tangent, and make it a parallell Ra∣dius; then take 5 gr. ½ for the difference of longitude out of the line of lines, and carrie it parallell to the former, till the feete of the compasses stay in like points: so the line between the center and the place of this stay, being taken and measu∣red in the line of meridians from 50 gr. forward, shall shew the latitude required to be 55 gr. as in the former way. The like may be found by the tables of Rumbs. For in the table of the third Rumb, at the latitude of 50 gr. I finde the longitude of 38 gr. 69 p; to this if I adde 5 gr. 50 p. for the diffe∣rence of longitude giuen, the compound longitude will be 44 gr. 19 p. and this answers to the latitude of 55 gr. But if this difference of latitude were to be found by the common sea-chart, it should seeme to be 8 gr. 13 m; and so the second latitude should be 58 gr. 13 m. which is aboue 3 gr. more then the truth. 7 By one latitude, rumb, and distance, to find the difference of longitude. As if the places giuen were A in the latitude of 50 gr. C in a greater latitude but vnknowne, the distance vpon the Rumb being 6 gr. betweene them, and the Rumb the third from the meridian.
In the chart, let a meridian AB, and a parallell AD be drawne through A; and in A, with AB, make an angle BAC for the Rumb from the meridian; then open the compasses aceording to the latitude of the places to EF, the quantitie of 6 gr. in the meridian, transferring them into the Rumb from A to C, and through C draw another meridian DC, crossing the parallell drawne through A in D: so the degrees intercepted in the parallell from A to D, shall shew the diffe∣rence of longitude required to be about 5 gr. ½. Wherefore the proportion holds for the Sector. As AC the Radius, is to AD, equall to BC, the sine of the Rumb from the meridian: So AC as proper distance vpon the Rumb, to AD the difference of longitude. According to this I take the sine of 33 gr. 45 m. for the an∣gle of the Rumb from the meridian, and make it a parallell Radius; then keeping the Sector at this angle, I take 6 gr. for the distance out of the meridian line, according to the estima∣ted latitudes of both places, and lay it on both sides of the Se∣ctor from the center: so the parallell taken from the termes of this distance, and measured in the lines of lines, shall shew the difference of longitude to be about 5. gr. ½. In this, and some of the Prop. following, where there is but one latitude knowne, there may be sometimes an error of a minute or two, in the estimation of the proper distance, yet it may be rectified at a second operation. This proposition may also be wrought by the Tables of Rumbs. For according to the example, in the Table of the third Rumb, at the latitude of 50 gr. I find the longitude of 38 gr. 69 p. and the distance of 60 gr. 13 p. to this I a de 6 gr. for the distance giuen; so the compound distance will be 66 gr. 13 p. and this answers to the longitude of 44 gr. 19 p; then if I take the one longitude out of the other, the difference will be 5 gr. 50 p. as before. But if this difference were to be found by the common sea-chart, it should seeme to be onely 3 gr. 20 m. which is
more then 2 gr. lesse then the truth. 8 By one latitude, Rumb, and difference of longitudes, to find the distance. As if the places giuen were A, in the latitude of 50 gr. C in a greater latitude but vnknowne, the difference of longi∣tude betweene them being 5 gr. ½, and the Rumb the third from the meridian. In the chart let AB, DC, meridians be drawne through A and C, according to the difference of longitude, and a pa∣rallell of latitude through A, crossing the meridian DC in D; then in A, with AB, make an angle of the Rumb BAC: so the distance on the Rumb from A to C taken and measu∣red in the meridian, according to the estimated latitude of the places, shall be found to be 6 gr. Wherefore the proportion holds for the Sector. As AD, equall to BC, the sine of the Rumb from the meri∣dian, is to AC the Radius: So AD as difference of longitudes, to AC the proper distance vpon the Rumb. According to this, I take the laterall Radius, and make it a parallell sine of 33 gr. 45 m. which is here the angle of the Rumb from the meridian; then I reckon 5 gr. ½ in the lines of lines from the center, for the difference of longitude: so the parallell taken from the termes of this difference, and measured in the line of meridians, according to the latitudes of the places, shall there shew the distance required to be a∣bout 6 gr. which are 120 leagues. Or if the Rumb fall nearer to the meridian, that the lateral Radius cannot be fitted ouer in his sine, this Prop. must be wrought by parallell entrance, and so also it giues the same distance as before. Or we may find this distance by the Table of Rumbs. For in the table of the third Rumb, at the latitude of 50 gr. I find the longitude of 38 gr. 69 p. and the distance of 60 gr. 13 p.
To this longitude here found, I adde 5 gr. 50 p. for the diffe∣rence of longitude giuen: so the compound longitude will be 44 gr. 19 p. and this answers to the distance of 66 gr. 15 p. Then if I take the one distance out of the other, the remain∣der will be 6 gr. 02 p. for the distance required. But if this distance were to be measured on the common sea-chart, it should seeme to be almost 10 gr. or at the least 197 leagues, aboue 77 leagues more then the truth. 9 By one latitude, distance, and difference of lon∣gitudes, to find the Rumb. As if the places giuen were A, in the latitude of 50 gr. C in a greater latitude but vnknowne, the difference of longi∣tude betweene them being 5 gr. ½, and the distance 6 gr. vpon the Rumb. In the chart let AB, DC, meridians, be drawne through A and C, and a parallell of latitude through A; then open the compasses according to the latitudes of the places, to EF the quantitie of 6 gr. in the meridian, and setting the one foote in A, the other foote shall crosse the other meridian in C; and if we draw the right line AC, the angle BAC shall shew the inclination of the Rumb to the meridian to be about 33 gr. 45 m. Wherefore the proportion holds for the Sector. As AC the proper distance vpon the Rumb, is to AD the difference of longitude: So AC as Radius, to AD, equall to BC, the sine of the Rumb from the meridian. According to this, I take the proper distance 6 gr. out of the line of meridians, and lay it on both sides of the Sector from the center; then I take the difference of longitude 5 gr. ½ out of the line of lines, and to it open the Sector in the terms of the former distance: so the parallell Radius taken from be∣tweene 90 and 90, and measured in the sines, doth giue about 33 gr. 45 m. for the Rumb required. But if this Rumb were to be found by the common sea-chart,
it should seeme to be aboue 66 gr. and so almost the sixt Rumb from the meridian. 10 By the longitude and latitude of two places, to find their distance vpon the Rumb. Let the Sector be opened in the lines of lines, vnto a right angle (as was shewed before Cap. 2. Prop. 7;) then take out the proper difference of latitude, and lay it on the one line, and the difference of longitude, and lay it on the other line, so as they may both meete in the center, marking how far they extend. For the line taken from the termes of their exten∣sion, and measured in the meridian, according to their lati∣tudes, shall shew the distance required. So if the places giuen were A and C, A in the latitude of 50 gr. C in the latitude of 55 gr. the proper difference of latitude shall be the line AB, and let BC the difference of longitude be 5 gr. ½, we shall find that AC the distance vpon the Rumb is about 6 gr. which make 120 leagues. For in the chart, let an occult meridian be drawne through A, and a parallell of latitude through C, crossing the former meridian in B, and a right line for the Rumb from A to C, so haue we a rectangle triangle ABC, whose base AC, taken and measured in the meridian from E below 50 gr. to F, as much aboue 55 gr. doth containe the quantitie of 6 gr. In the same maner the Sector being opened to a right an∣gle, in the lines of lines: if we take the difference of latitude out of the line of meridians, in his proper place from 50 gr. to 55 gr. and place it on one of the sides from the center, to re∣semble AB, then reckon the difference of longitude on the other perpendicular line from the center to 5 gr. ½, in stead of BC, we shall haue the like rectangle triangle on the Sector, to that which we had before on the chart; and if we take out the base of it, and measure it in the line of meridians from be∣low 50 gr. to as much aboue 55 gr. we shall finde as before, that it containeth about 6 gr. or 120 leagues. But if this distance were to be measured on the common
sea-chart, it should seeme to be almost 7 gr. ¼, or 145 leagues; which is 25 leagues more then the truth. 11 By the latitude of two places, and the distance vpon the Rumb, to find the difference of longitude. Let the Sector be opened in the lines of lines to a right an∣gle, then take out the proper difference of latitudes, and lay it on one of the lines from the center, then take the proper distance with a paire of compasses, and setting one foote in the termes of the difference, turne the other foote to the o∣ther line of the Sector, and it shall there shew the difference of longitude required. So if the places giuen were A, in the latitude of 50 gr. C in the latitude of 55 gr. with 6 gr. of distance one from ano∣ther, we shall find their difference of longitude to be about 5 gr. ½. For in the chart let a meridian AB be drawne for the one, and BC, AD, parallels of latitude for them both. Then open the compasses according to the latitude of the places, to EF the quantitie of 6 gr. in the meridian, and setting one foote in A, hauing latitude of 50 gr. turne the other to the parallell of 55 gr. and it shall there cut off the required difference of longitude BC 5 gr. ½. In the same maner, the Sector being opened to a right an∣gle, in the lines of lines: if we take the difference of latitude out of the line of meridians in his proper place from 50 gr. vnto 55 gr. and place it on one of the lines from the center; then take 6. gr. the distance vpon the Rumb out of the same line of meridians, according to the latitudes of the places, and set the one foote in the terme of the former difference, tur∣ning the other foote to the other perpendicular line, we shall finde that it will crosse it about 5 gr. ½ from the center: which is the difference of longitude required. But if this difference of longitude were to be found by the common sea-chart, it would seeme to be only 3 gr. 20 m. which is more then 2 gr. 10 m. lesse then the truth.
12 By one latitude, distance and difference of longitudes, to finde the difference of latitudes. Let the Sector be opened in the line of lines to a right an∣gle and let the difference of longitude be reckoned in one of those lines from the center; then take the proper distance with a paire of compasses, and setting the one foote in the terme of the former difference, turne the other foote to the other line of the Sector, and it shal thence cut off a line, equal to the proper difference of latitude required. So if the places giuen were A and C, A in the latitude of 50 gr. C in a greater latitude but vnknowne, the difference of longitude betweene them 5 gr. ½, and the distance vpon the Rumb 6 gr. or 120 leagues, we shall find the difference of latitude to be 5 gr. For in the chart, let occult meridians be drawne through A and C, and a parallell of latitude through A; then open the compasses according to the estimated latitudes of the pla∣ces to EF the quantitie of 6 gr. in the meridian, and setting the one foote in A, turne the other to the meridian drawne through C, and it shall there cut off the line DC, which is the difference of latitude required. In the same maner, the Sector being opened to a right an∣gle, in the lines of lines, if in the one line we reckon the diffe∣rence of longitude from the center to 5 gr. ½, then taking 6 gr or the distance out of the line of Meridians, according to the latitude of the places, we set the one foote in the terme of the giuen difference, and turne the other foote to the other perpendicular line, we shall finde that it cuts a line from it, which taken and measured in the line of meridians, from 50 gr. on forward, doth shew the difference of latitude to be as before 5 gr. But if this difference of latitude were to be found by the common sea-chart, it would seeme to be only 2 gr. 25 m. which is 2 gr. 35 m. lesse then the truth. Such is the difference be∣tweene both these charts.
THE THIRD BOOKE Containing the vse of the particular Lines. THE lines of lines, of superficies, of solids, of sines, with the laterall lines of tangents and meridians, whereof I haue hitherunto spoken, are those which I princi∣pally intended: that little roome on the Sector which remai∣neth, may be filled vp with such particular lines as each one shall think conuenient for his purpose. I haue made choise of such as I thought might be best prickt on without hindring the sight of the former, viz. lines of Quadrature, of Segments, of Inscribed bodies, of Equated bodies, and of Mettals. CHAP. I. Of the lines of Quadrature. THe lines of quadrature may be knowne by the letter Q, and by their place betweene the lines of sines. Q signifi∣eth the side of a square; 5 the side of a pentagon with fiue e∣quall sides, 6 of an hexagon with six equall sides, and so 7, 8, 9, and 10. S stands for the Semidiameter of a circle, and 90 for a line equall to 90 gr. in the circumference. The vse of them may be 1 To make a square equall to a circle giuen. 2 To make a circle equall to a square giuen. If the circle be first giuen, take his semidiameter, and to it open the Sector in the points at S: so the parallell taken from betweene the points at Q, shall be the side of the square re∣quired.
geometric illustration If the square be giuen take his side, and to it open the Se∣ctor, in the points at Q: so the parallell taken from betweene the points at S, shall be the Semidiameter of the circle requi∣red. Let the Semidiameter of the circle giuen be AB, the side of the square equall vnto it shall be found to be CD. 3 To reduce a circle giuen, or a square into an equall pen∣tagon, or other like sided and like angled figure. Take the side of the figure giuen, and fit it ouer in his due points: so the parallels taken from betweene the points of
the other figures, shall be the sides of those figures: which being made vp with equall angles, shall be all equall one to the other. Let the Semidiameter of the circle giuen be AB, the side of an hexagon equal to this circle, shall by these meanes be found to be GH; and the sides of an octagon to be IK. Other planes not here set downe, may first be reduced into a square, by the sixt Prop. Superf. and then into a circle, or other of these e∣quall figures, as before. 4 To find a right line, equall to the circumference of a circle, or other part thereof. Take the Semidiameter of the circle giuen, and to it open the Sector in the points at S; so the parallell taken from be∣tweene the points at 90 in this line, shall be the fourth part of the circumference: which being knowne, the other parts may be found out by the second and third Prop. of lines. Thus if the Semidiameter of the circle giuen be AB, the right line EF shall be found to be the fourth part of the cir∣cumference. Therefore the double of EF shall be equall to the circumference of 180 gr; and the halfe of EF shal be the circumference of 45 gr. and so in the rest. CHAP. II. Of the lines of Segments. THe lines of segments which are here placed between the lines of sines and superficies, and are numbred by 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, do represent the diameter of a circle, so diuided into a hundred parts, as that a right line drawne through these parts, perpendicular to the diameter, shall cut the circle into two segments, of which the greater segment shall haue that proportion to the whole circle, as the parts cut haue to 100. The vse of them may be
1 To diuide a circle giuen into two segments, according to a proportion giuen. 2 To finde a proportion betweene a circle and his segments giuen. Let the Sector be opened in the points of an 100, to the diameter of the circle giuen: so a parallell taken from the points proportionall to the greater segment required, shall giue the depth of that greater segment. Or if the segments be giuen, let the Sector be opened as be∣fore; then take the depth of the greater segment, and carry it geometric illustration
parallell to the diameter: so the number of points wherein they stay, shall shew the proportion to 100. As if the diameter of the circle giuen were BL, the depth of the greater segment LO being 75, doth shew the propor∣tion of the segment OMLN to the circle to be as 75 to 100. viz. three parts of foure. Hence I might shew, if there were any vse of it, To find the side of a square, equall to any knowne segment of a circle. The side of a square equall to the whole circle, may be found by the former Cap. and then hauing the proportion of the segment to the circle, we may dimmish the square in such proportion, by that which hath been shewed Lib. 1. Cap. 3. Prop. 3. CHAP. III. Of the lines of Inscribed bodies. THe lines of inscribed bodies are here placed betweene the lines of lines, and may be knowne by the letters, D, S, I, C, O, T; of which D signifieth the side of a dodecahedron, I of an Icosahedron, C of a cube, O of an octahedron, and T of a tetrahedron, all inscribed into the same sphere, whose semi∣diameter is here signified by the letter S. The vse of these lines may be, 1 The semidiameter of a sphere being giuen, to find the sides of the fiue regular bodies, which may be inscribed in the said sphere. 2 The side of any of the fiue regular bodies being giuen, to find the semidiameter of a sphere, that will circumscribe the said bodie. If the sphere be first giuen, take his semidiameter, and to it
open the Sector in the points at S: if any of the other bodies be first giuen, take the side of it, and fit it ouer in his due points: so the parallell taken from betweene the points of the other bodies, shall be the sides of those bodies, and may be inscribed into the same sphere. line segments So if the semidiameter of the sphere be AC, the side of the dodecahodron inscribed shall be DE. CHAP. IIII. Of the lines of Equated bodies. THe lines of equated bodies are here placed betweene the lns of lines  solids, noted with these letters, D, I, C, S, , T, of whic D stands for the side of a dodcahedron, I for the de of n Icoshedron, C for the side of a cube, S for the di∣ameter of a sphere, O for the side of an octahedron, and T for the side of a tetrahed on, all equall one to the other. The vse of these lins may be 1 The diameter of a sphere being giuen, to find the sides of he fiue regular bodies equall to that sphere. 2 The side of any of the fiue regular bodies being giuen, to find the diameter of a sphere, and the sides of the other bodies, equall to the first body giuen. If the sphere be first giuen, take his diameter, and to it o∣pen the Sector in the points at S: if any of the other bodies be first giuen, take the side of it, and fit it ouer in his due points: so the parallels taken from between the points of the other bodies, shall be the sides of those bodies equall to the first body giuen. Thus in the last diagram, if the diameter of a sphere giuen be BC, the side of the dodecahedron equall to this sphere, would be found to be FG.
CHAP. V. Of the Lines of Mettalls. THe lines of Mettalls are here ioyned with those before of equated bodies, and are noted with these characters ☉. ☿. ♄. ☽. ♀. ♂. ♃. of which ☉ stands for gold, ☿ for quicksiluer, ♄ for leade, ☽ for siluer, ♀ for copper, ♂ for iron, and ♃ for tin. The vse of them is to giue a proportion betweene these se∣uerall mettalls, in their magnitude and weight, according to the experiments of Marinus Ghetaldus, in his booke called Promotus Archimedes. 1 In like bodies of seuerall mettalls and equall weight, hauing the magnitude of the one, to finde the magnitude of the rest. Take the magnitude giuen out of the lines of Solids, and to it open the Sector in the points belonging to the mettall giuen: so the parallells taken from between the points of the other mettalls, and measured in the lines of Solids, shall giue the magnitude of their bodies. Thus hauing cubes or spheres of equall weight, but se∣uerall mettalls, we shall finde that if those of tin containe 10000 D, he others of iron wil contain 9250, those of copper 8222, those of siluer 7161, those of lead 6435, those full of quicksiluer 5453, and those of gold 3895. 2 In like bodies of seuerall mettalls and equall magnitude, hauing the weight of one to finde the weight of the rest. This proposition is the conuerse of the former, the pro∣portion not direct, but reciprocall, wherefore hauing two like bodies, take the giuen weight of the one out of the lines of Solids, and to it open the Sector in the points belonging to
the mettall of the other body: so the parallell taken from the points belonging to the body giuen, and measured in the lines of Solids, shall giue the weight of the body required. As if a cube of gold weighed 38 l. and it were required to know the weight of a cube of lead hauing equal magnitude. First I take 38 l. for the weight of the golden cube, out of the lines of Solids, & put it ouer in the points of ♄ belonging to lead: so the parallell taken from betweene the points of ☉ standing for gold, and measured in the lines of Solids, doth giue the weight of the leaden cube required to be 23 l. Thus if a sphere of gold shall weigh 10000, we shall finde that a sphere of the same diameter full of quicksiluer shall weigh 7143, a sphere of lead 6053, a sphere of siluer 5438, a sphere of copper 4737, a sphere of iron 4210, and a sphere of tin 3895. 3 A bodie being giuen of one mettall, to make another like vnto it, of another mettall, and equall weight. Take out one of the sides of the bodie giuen, and put it ouer in the points belonging to his mettall: so the parallell taken from between the points belonging to the other met∣tall, shall giue the like side, for the bodie required. If it be an irregular bodie, let the other like sides be found out in the same manner. line segments Let the bodie giuen be a sphere of lead containing in magnitude 16 D, whose diameter is A, to which I am to make a sphere of iron, of equall waight: If I take out the diameter A, and put it ouer in the points of ♄ belonging to lead, the parallell taken from betweene the points of ♂ standing for iron, shall be B, the diameter of the iron sphere required. And this compared with the other diameter, in the lines of
solids will be found to be 23 d. in magnitude. 4 A body being giuen of one mettall, to make another like vnto it of another mettall, accor∣ding to a weight giuen. First find the sides of a like bodie of equall weight, then may we either augment or diminish them according to the proportion giuen by that which we shewed before in the se∣cond and third Prop. of Solids. As if the bodie giuen were a sphere of lead, whose diame∣ter is A, and it were required to find the diameter of a sphere of iron, which shall weigh three times as much as the sphere of lead: I take A, and put it ouer in the points of ♄, his pa∣rallell taken from betweene the points of ♂, shall giue me B for the diameter of an equall sphere of iron: if this be aug∣mented in such proportion as 1 vnto 3, it giueth C for the diameter required.
geometric illustration CHAP. VI. Of the lines on the edges of the Sector. HAuing shewed some vse of the lines on the flat sides of the Sector, there remaine onely those on the edges. And here one halfe of the outward edge is di∣uided into inches, and numbred accor∣ding to their distance from the ends of the Sector. As in the Sector of fourteene inches long, where we find 1 and 13, it sheweth that diuision to be 1 inch from the nearer end, and 13 inches from the farther end of the Sector. The other halfe containeth a line of lesser tangents, to which the gnomon is Radius. They are here continued to 75 gr. And if there be need to produce them farther, take 45 out of the number of de∣grees required, and double the remain∣der: so the tangent and secant of this dou∣ble remainder being added, shall make vp the tangent of the degrees required. As if AB being the Radius, and BC the tangent line, it were required to find the tangent of 75 gr. If we take 45 gr. out of 75 gr. the remainer is 30 gr. and the double 60 gr. whose tangent is BD, and the secant is AD: if then we adde AD to BD, it maketh BC the tangent of 75 gr. which was required. In like sort the secant of 61 gr. added to the tangent of 61 gr. giueth the tangent of 75 gr. 30 m. and the secant of 62 gr. added to the tan∣gent of 62 gr. giueth the tangent of 76 gr.
and so in the rest. The vse of this line may be To obserue the altitude of the Sunne. Hold the Sector so as the tangent BC may be verticall, and the gnomon BA parallell to the horizon; then turne the gnomon toward the Sunne, so that it may cast a shadow vpon the tangent, and the end of the shadow shal shew the altitude of the Sunne. So if the end of the gnomon at A, do giue a shadow vnto H, it sheweth that the altitude is 38 gr. ½, if vnto D, then 60 gr. and so in the rest. There is another vse of this tangent line, for the drawing of the houre lines vpon any ordinary plane, whereof I will set downe these propositions. 1 To draw the houre lines vpon an horizontall plane. 2 To draw the houre lines vpon a direct verticall plane. First draw a right line AC for the horizon and the equa∣tor, and crosse it at the point A about the middle of the line with AB another right line, which may serue for the meri∣dian and the houre of 12; then take out 15 gr. out of the tan∣gents, and pricke them downe in the equator on both sides from 12: so the one point shall serue for the houre of 11, and the other for the houre of 1. Againe, take out the tangent of 30 gr. and pricke it downe in the equator on both sides from 12: so the one of these points shall serue for the houre of 10, and the other for the houre of 2. In like maner may you prick downe the tangent of 45 gr. for the houres of 9 and 3, and the tangent of 60 gr. for the houres of 8 and 4, and the tangent of 75 gr. for the houres of 7 and 5. Or if any please to set downe the parts of an houre, he may allow 7 gr. 30 m. for euery halfe houre, and 3 gr. 45 m. for eue∣ry quarter. This done, you are to consider the latitude of the place, and the qualitie of the plane: For the secant of the lati∣tude shal be the semidiameter in a vertical plane, & the secant of the complement of the latitude in an horizontall plane.
geometric illustration
For example, about London the latitude is 51 gr. 30 m. and let the plane be verticall. If you take AV the secant of 51 gr. 30 m. out of the Sector, and pricke it downe in the me∣ridian line from A vnto V, the point V shall be the center: and if you draw right lines from V vnto 11, and 10, and the rest of the houre points, they shall be the houre lines requi∣red. But if the plane be horizontall, then you are to take out AH the secant of 38 gr. 30 m. for the semidiameter, and prick it downe in the meridian line from A vnto H: so the right lines drawne from the center H vnto the houre points, shall be the houre lines required; only the houre of 6 is wanting, and that must alwayes be drawne parallell to the equator, through the center V in a verticall, through the center H in an horizontall plane. 3 To draw the houre lines on a polar plane. 4 To draw the houre lines on a meridian plane. In a polar plane the equator may be also the same with the horizontall line, and the houre points may be pricked on as before, but the houre lines must be drawne parallell to the meridian. In a meridian plane, the equator will cut the horizontall line with an angle equall to the complement of the latitude of the place; then may you make choise of the point A, and there crosse the equator with a right line, which may serue for the houre of 6: so the tangent of 15 gr. being pricked downe in the equator on both sides from 6, shal serue for the houres of fiue 5 and 7; and the tangent of 30 gr. for the houres of 8 and 4; and the tangent of 45 gr. for the houres of 3 and 9; and the tangent of 60 gr. for the houres of 2 and 10; and the tangent of 75 gr. for the houres of 1 and 11. And if you draw right lines through these houre points, crossing the equa∣tor at right angles, they shall be the houre lines requi∣red.
geometric illustration 5 To draw the houre lines in a verticall declining place. First, draw AV the meridian, and AE the horizontal line, crossing one the other at right angles in the point A.
2 Then take out AV, the secant of the latitude of the place, which you may suppose to be 51 gr. 30 m. and prick it downe in the meridian line from A vnto V. 3 Because it is a declining plane, and you may suppose it to decline 40 gr. Eastward, you are to make an angle of the declination vpon the center A, below the horizontall line, and to the left hand of the meridian line, because the decli∣nation is Eastward, for otherwise it should haue bin to the right hand, if the declination had bin Westward. 4 Take AH, the secant of the complement of the latitude out of the Sector, & pricke it downe in the line of declination from A vnto H, as you did before for the semidiameter in the horizontall plane. 5 Draw a line at full length through the point A, which must be perpendicular vnto AH, and cut the horizontall line according to the angles of declination, and it will be as the equator in the horizontall plane. 6 Take the houre points out of the Tangent line in the Sector, and pricke them downe in this equator on both sides from the houre of 12 at A. 7 Lay your ruler, & draw right lines through the center H, & each of these houre points: so haue you all the houre lines of an horizontall plane, onely the houre of 6 is wanting, and that may be drawne through H perpendicular to HA. Lastly you are to obserue and marke the intersections, which these houre lines do make with AE the horizontall line of the plane: and then if you draw right lines through the center V, and each of these intersections, they shal be the houre lines required. 6 To pricke downe the houre points another way. Hauing drawne a right line for the equator as before, and made choice of the point A, for the houre of 12: you may at pleasure cut of two equal lines A 10, and A 2. Then vpon the distance betweene 10 and 2, make an equilaterall triangle, and you shall haue B for the center of your equator, and the
line AB shall giue the distance from A to 9, and from A to 3. That done take out the distance betweene 9 and 3, and this shall giue the distance from B vnto 8, and from 8 vnto 7, and from 8 vnto 1: and againe from B vnto 4, and from 4 vnto 5, and from 4 vnto 11. So haue you the houre points, and if you take out the distance B 1, B 3, B 5, &c. You may finde the points not onely for the halfe houres, but also for the quarters. But if it so fall out, that some of these houre points fall out of your plane, you may helpe your selfe by the larger tangent, both in the verticall, and horizontall planes. For if at the houre points of 3 and 9, you draw occult lines parallell to the meridian; the distances DC, betweene the houre line of 6, and the houre points of 3 and 9, will be equal to the semidiameter AV in a verticall, and AH in a horizon∣tall plane, and if they be diuided in such sort as the line AC is diuided, you shall haue the points of 4, and 5, and 7, and 8, with their halfes and quarters. As in the horizontall plane, take out the semidiameter AH, and make it a parallell Radius by fitting it ouer in the sines of 90 and 90: Then take 15 gr. out of the larger tangent, and lay them on the lines of sines, where they will reach from the center vnto the sines of 15 gr. 32 m. therefore take out the parallell sine of 15 gr. 32 m. and it shall giue the distance from 6 vnto 5, and from 6 vnto 7, in your horizontall plane. That done take out 30 gr. out of the larger tangent, and lay them on the sines, from the center vnto the sines of 35 gr. 16 m. and the parallell sine of 35 g. 16 m. shall giue you the distance from 6 vnto 4, and from 6 vnto 8, in your horizontall plane. The like may be done for the halfe houres and quar∣ters. So also in the verticall declining plane. If you first take out the secant of the declination of the plane, and prick it downe in the horizontall line from A vnto E, and through E draw right lines parallell to the meridian, which will cut the for∣mer houre lines of 3 and 9, or one of them in the point C: then take out the semidiameter AV, and prick it downe in
those parallells from C vnto D, and draw right lines from A vnto C, and from V vnto D; the line VD shall be the houre of 6, and if you diuide these lines AC and DC, in such sort as you diuided the like line DC in the horizontall plane, you shall haue all the houre points required. Or you may find the point D, in the houre of 6, without knowledge either of H or C. For hauing prickt downe AV in the meridian line, and AE in the horizontall line, and drawne parallels to the meridian through the points at E, you may take the tangent of the latitude out of the Sector, and fit it ouer in the sines of 90 and 90: so the parallell sine of the declination measured in the same tangent line, shall there shew the complement of the angle DVA, which the houre line of 6 maketh with the meridian; then hauing the point D, take out the semidiameter VA, and pricke it downe in those parallels from D vnto C: so shall you haue the lines DC and AC to be diuided as before. The like might be vsed for the houre lines vpon all other planes. But I must not write all that may be done by the Se∣ctor. It may suffice that I haue wrote something of the vse of each line, and thereby giuen the ingenuous Reader occasion to thinke of more. The conclusion to the Reader. IT is well knowne to many of you, that this Sector was thus con∣triued, the most part of this booke written in latin, many copies transcribed and dispersed more then sixteene yeares since. I am at the last contented to giue way that it come forth in English. Not that I thinke it worthy either of my labour or the publique view, but partly to satisfy their importunity, who not vnderstanding the La∣tin, yet were at the charge to buy the instrument, and partly for my owne ease. For as it is painefull for others to transcribe my copie, so it is troublesome for me to giue satisfaction herein to all that de∣sire it. If I finde this to giue you content, it shall incourage me to do the like for my Crosse-staffe, and some other Instruments. In the meane time beare with the Printers faults, and so I rest. Gresham Coll. 1. Maij. 1623. E. G. FINIS.
THE FIRST BOOKE OF THE CROSSE-STAFFE. CHAP. I. Of the description of the Staffe. THe Crosse-Staffe is an instrument wel knowne to our Sea-men, and much vsed by the anci∣ent Astronomers and others, seruing Astro∣nomically for obseruation of altitude and an∣gles of distance in the heauens, Geometri∣cally for perpendicular heights and distan∣ces on land and sea. The description and seuerall vses of it are extant in print, by Gemma Frisius in Latin, in English by Dr. Hood. I differ something from them both, in the proiection of this Staffe, but so, as their rules may be applied vnto it, and all their pro∣positions be wrought by it: and therefore referring the Rea∣der to their bookes, I shal be briefe in the explanation of that which may be applied from theirs vnto mine, and so come to the vse of those lines which are of my addition, not extant heretofore. The necessary parts of this Instrument are fiue: the Staffe, the Crosse, and the three sights. The Staffe which I made for my owne vse, is a full yard in length, that so it may serue for measure.
The Crosse belonging to it is 26 inches ⅕ betweene the two outward sights. If any would haue it in a greater forme, the proportion betweene the Staffe and the Crosse, may be such as 360 vnto 262. The lines inscribed on the Staffe are of foure sorts. One of them serues for measure and protraction: one for obserua∣tion of angles: one for the Sea-chart; and the foure other for working of proportions in seuerall kinds. The line of measure is an inch line, and may be knowne by his equall parts. The whole yard being diuided equally into 36 inches, and each inch subdiuided, first into ten parts, and then each tenth part into halfes. The line for obseruation of angles may be knowne by the double numbers set on both sides of the line, beginning at the one side at 20, and ending at 90: on the other side at 40, and ending at 180: and this being diuided according to the degrees of a quadrant, I call it the tangent line on the Staffe. The next line is the meridian of a Sea-chart, according to Mercators proiection from the Equinoctiall to 58 gr. of lati∣tude, and may be knowne by the letter M, and the numbers 1. 2. 3. 4. vnto 58. The lines for working of proportions, may be knowne by their vnequall diuisions, and the numbers at the end of each line. 1 The line of numbers noted with the letter N, diuided vn∣equally into 1000 parts, and numbred with 1. 2. 3. 4. vnto 10. 2 The line of artificiall tangents is noted with the letter T, diuided vnequally into 45 degrees, and numbred both ways, for the Tangent and the complement. 3 The line of artificiall sines, noted with the letter S, di∣uided vnequally into 90 degrees, and numbred with 1. 2. 3. 4. vnto 90. 4 The line of versed sines for more easie finding the houre and azimuth, noted with V, diuided vnequally into about 164 gr. 50 m. numbred backward with 10. 20. 30. vnto 164. Thus there are seuen lines inscribed on the Staffe: there are fiue lines more inscribed on the Crosse.
1 A Tangent line of 36 gr. 3 m. numbred by 5. 10. 15. ledgento 35: the midst whereof is at 20 gr; and therefore I call it ledgehe tangent of 20; and this hath respect vnto 20 gr. in the Tan∣gent on the Staffe. 2 A Tangent line of 49 gr. 6 m. numbred by 5. 10. 15. vn∣ledgeo 45; the midst whereof is at 30 gr. and hath respect vnto ledge0 gr. in the Tangent on the Staffe, whereupon I call it the ledgeangent of 30. 3 A line of inches numbred with 1. 2. 3. vnto 26; each inch ledgequally subdiuided into ten parts, answerable to the inch line ledgepon the Staffe. 4 A line of seuerall chords, one answerable to a circle of ledgewelue inches semidiameter, numbred with 10. 20. 30. vnto ledge0: another to a semidiameter of a circle of six inches; and ledgehe third to a semidiameter of a circle of three inches; both ledgeumbred with 10. 20. 30. vnto 90. 5 A continuation of the meridian line from 57 gr. of la∣ledgetude vnto 76 gr; and from 76 gr. to 84 gr. For the inscription of these lines. The first for measure is ledgequally diuided into inches and tenth parts of inches. The tangent on the Staffe for obseruation of angles, with ledgee tangent of 20 and the tangent of 30 on the Crosse, may ledgel three be inscribed out of the ordinary table of tangents. The ledgeaffe being 36 inches in length; the Radius for the tangent ledge the Staffe will be 13 inches and 103 parts of 1000: so the ledgehole line will be a tangent of 70 gr. and must be numbred ledge their complements, & the double of their complements, ledgee tangent of 10 gr. being numbred with 80 and 160. The Radius for the tangent of 20 on the Crosse, will be 6 inches, and the whole line betweene the sights a tangent 36 gr. 3 m. according as it is numbred. The Radius for the ledgengent of 30 gr. on the Crosse, will be 22 inches and 695 ledgerts of 1000: so the whole line betweene the sights wil con∣ledgeine a tangent of 49 gr. 6 m. in such sort as they are num∣ledgeed. The meridian line may be inscribed out of the Table ledgehich I set downe for this purpose in the vse of the Sector.
The line of numbers may be inscribed out of the first Chi∣liad of Mr. Briggs Logarithmes: & the rest of the lines of pro∣portion out of my Canon of artificiall sines and tangents; and in recompence thereof this booke will serue as a comment to explane the vse of my Canon. CHAP. II. The vse of the lines of inches for perpen∣dicular heights and distances. IN taking of heights and distances, the Staffe may be held in such sort, that it may be euen with the distance, and the Crosse parallell with the height: and then if the eye at the beginning of the Staffe shall see his marks by the inward sides of the two first sights, there will be such proportion be∣tweene the distance and the height, as is betweene the part intercepted on the Staffe and the Crosse. Which may be far∣ther explaned in these propositions. geometric illustration 1 To find an height at one station, by knowing the distance. Set the middle sight vnto the distance vpon the Staffe
the height will be found vpon the Crosse. For As the segment of the Saffe vnto the segment on the Crosse: So is the distance giuen, vnto the height. As if the distance AB being knowne to be 256 feete, it were required to find the height BC: first I place the midle sight at 25 inches and 6 parts of 10; then holding the Staffe leuell with the distance, I raise the Crosse, parallell vnto the height, in such sort, as that my eye may see from A the be∣ginning of the inches on the Staffe by the sight E, at the be∣ginning of the inches on the Crosse vnto the mark C: which being done, if I find 19 inches and 2 parts of 10 intercepted on the Crosse betweene the sights at E and D, I would say the height BC were 192 feete. Or if the obseruation were to be made before the distance were measured, I would set the middle sight either vnto 10 inches, or 12, or 16, or 20, or 24, or some such other number as might best be diuided into seuerall parts, and then worke by proportion. As if in the former example the middle sight were at 24 on the Staffe, and 18 on the Crosse, it should seem that the height is ¾ of the distance; and therefore the distance being 256, the height should be 192. 2 To finde an height, by knowing some part of the same height. As if the height from G to C were knowne to be 48, and it were required to find the whole height BC: either put the third sight or some other running sight vpon the Crosse betweene the eye and the marke G. For then As the difference betweene the sights, vnto the whole segment of the Crosse: So is the part of the height giuen, vnto the whole height. If then the difference betweene the sights E and F, shall
be 45, and the segment of the Crosse ED 180, the whole height BC will be found to be 192. 3 To find an height at two stations, by knowing the difference of the same stations. As the difference of segments on the Staffe, vnto the difference of stations: So is the segment of the Crosse, vnto the height. Suppose the first station being at H, the segment of the Crosse ED were 180, and the segment of the Staffe HD 300: then coming 64 feete nearer vnto B, in a direct line, vn∣to a second station at A, and making another obseruation; suppose the segment of the Crosse ED were 180 as before, and the segment of the Staffe AD 240; take 240 out of 300, the difference of segments will be 60 parts. And As 60 parts vnto 64 the difference of stations: So DE 180 vnto BC 192 the height required. In these three Prop. there is a regard to be had of the height of the eye. For the height measured, is no more then from the leuell of the eye vpward. 4 To find a distance, by knowing the height. As the segment of the Crosse, vnto the segment of the Staffe: So is the height giuen, vnto the distance. So the segment ED being 18, and DA 24, the height CB 192, will shew the distance AB to be 256. 5 To find a distance, by knowing part of the height. As the difference betweene the sights, vnto the segment of the Staffe:
So is the part of the height giuen, vnto the distance. And thus the difference betweene E and F being 45, and the segment DA 240; the part of the height GC 48, will giue the distance AB to be 256. 6 To finde a distance at two stations, by knowing the difference of the same stations. As the difference of segments on the Staffe, vnto the difference of stations: So is the whole segment, vnto the distance. And thus the segment of the Crosse being 180, the seg∣ment of the Staffe at the first station 240, at the second 300, the difference of the segments 60, & the difference of stations 64, the distance AB at the first station will be found to be 256, and the distance HB at the second station 320. 7 To find a bredth by knowing the distance per∣pendicular to the bredth. This is all one with the first Prop. For this bredth is but an height turned sidewayes: and therefore As the segment of the Staffe, vnto the segment of the Crosse: So is the distance vnto the bredth. And thus the segment of the Staffe being 24, and the seg∣ment of the Crosse 18, the distance AB 256, will giue the bredth BC to be 192. 8 To find a bredth at two stations in a line perpen∣dicular to the bredth, by knowing the dife∣rence of the same stations. This is also the same with the third Prop: and therefore
As the difference of segments on the Staffe, vnto the difference of stations: So the segment on the Crosse betweene the two sights, vnto the bredth required. And thus the difference betweene the stations at A and H being 64, the difference of segments on the Staffe 60, the segment of the Crosse 180, the bredth BC will be found to be 192. In like maner may we finde the bredth GC for hauing found the bredth BC the proportion will hold. As DE is vnto FE, so BC vnto GC. Or otherwise, As Ha vnto HA, so FE vnto GC. Neither is it materiall whether the two stations be chosen at the one end of the bredth proposed, or without it, or with∣in it, if the line betweene the stations be perpendicular vnto the bredth: as may appeare if in stead of the stations at A and H, we make choise of the like stations at I and K. There might be other wayes proposed to work these Prop. by holding the Crosse euen with the distance, and the Staffe parallell with the height: but these would proue more trou∣blesome, and those which are deliuered are sufficient, and the same with those which others haue set downe vnder the name of the Iacobs staffe.
CHAP. III. The vse of the Tangent lines in taking of Angles. geometric illustration 1 To find an angle by the Tangent on the Staffe. LEt the middle sight be alwayes set to the middle of the Crosse, noted with 20 and 30, and then the Crosse
drawne nearer the eye, vntill the marks may be seene close within the sights. For so if the eye at A (that end of the Staffe which is noted with 90 and 180) beholding the marks K and N, betweene the two first sights, C and B, or the marks K and P betweene the two outward sights, the Crosse being drawne downe vnto H, shall stand at 30 and 60, in the Tan∣gent on the Staffe: it sheweth that the angle KAN is 30 gr. the angle KAP 60 gr. the on double to the other; which is he rason of the double numbers on this line of the Staffe: and this way wil serue for any angle from 20 gr. toward 90 gr. or from 40 gr. toward 180 gr. But if the angle be lesse then 20 gr. we must then make vse of the Tangent vpō the Crosse. 2 To find an angle by the Tangent of 20 vpon the Crosse. Set 20 vnto 20, that is, the middle sight to the middest of the Crosse at the end of the Staffe, noted with 20: so the eye at A, beholding the marks L and N, close betweene the two first sights, C and B, shall se them in an angle of 20 gr. If the marks shll be nearer together, as are M and N, then draw in the Crosse from C vnto E: if they be farther asunder, as are K and N, then draw out the Crosse from C vnto F; so the quantitie of the angle shal be still found in the Crosse in the Tangent of 20 gr. at the end of the Staffe; and this will serue for any angle from 0 gr. toward 35 gr. 3 To find an angle by the Tangent of 30 vpon the Crosse. This Tangent of 30 is here put the rather, that the end of the Staffe resting at the eye, the hand may more easily re∣moue th Crosse: for it supposeth the Radius to be no lon∣ger then AH, which is from the eye at the end of the Staffe vnto 30 gr. about 22 inches and 7 parts. Wherefore here set the middle sight vnto 30 gr. on the Staffe, and then either draw the Crosse in or out, vntill the marks be seene between
the two first sights; so the quantitie of the angle will be found in the Tangent of 30, which is here represented by the line GH; and this will serue for any angle from 0 gr. to¦ward 48 gr. 4 To obserue the altitude of the Sunne backward. Here it is fit to haue an horizontall sight set to the begin∣ning of the Staffe, and then may you turne your backe to¦ward the Sun, and your Crosse toward your eye. If the alti∣tude be vnder 45 gr. set the middle sight to 30 on the Staffe, and looke by the middle sight through the horizontall vn∣to the horizon, mouing the Crosse vpward or downward, vn∣till the vpper sight doe shadow the vpper halfe of the hori∣zontall sight: so the altitude will be found in the Tangent of 30. If the altitude shal be more then 45 gr. set the middle sight vnto the middest of the Crosse, and look by the inward edge of the lower sight through the horizontall to the horizon, mouing the middle sight in or out, vntill the vpper sight do shadow the vpper halfe of the horizontall sight: so the alti∣tude will be found in the degrees on the Staffe betweene 40 and 180. 5 To set the Staffe to any angle giuen. This is the conuerse of the former Prop. For if the middle sight be set to his place and degree, the eye looking close by the sights as before, cannot but see his obiect in the angle giuen. 6 To obserue the altitude of the Sunne another way. Set the middle sight to the middle of the Crosse, and hold the horizontall sight downward, so as the Crosse may be pa∣rallell to the horizon, then is the Staffe verticall; and if the outward sight of the Crosse do shadow the horizontall sight,
the complement of the altitude wil be found in the tangent on the Staffe. 7 To obserue an altitude by thread and plummet. Let the middle sight be set to the middest of the Crosse, and to that end of the Staffe which is noted with 90 and 180; then hauing a thread and a plummet at the beginning of the Crosse, and turning the Crosse vpward, and the Staffe toward the Sunne, the thread will fall on the complement of the al∣titude aboue the horizon. And this may be applied to other purposes. 8 To apply the lines of inches to the taking of angles. If the angles be obserued betweene the two first sights, there wil be such proportion between the parts of the Staffe and the parts of the Crosse, as betweene the Radius and the Tangent of the angle. As if the parts intercepted on the Staffe were 20 inches, the parts on the Crosse 9 inches. Then by proportion as 20 vnto 9, so 100000 vnto 45000 the tangent of 24 gr. 14 m. But if the angle shall be obserued betweene the two out∣ward sights, the parts being 20 and 9 as before, the angle will be 48 gr. 28 m. double vnto the former. In all these there is a regard to be had to the parallax of the eye, and his height aboue the Horizon in obseruations at Sea; to the Semidiameter of the Sun, his parallax and refraction, as in the vse of other staues. And so this will be as much, or more then that which hath been heretofore performed by the Crosse-staffe.
CHAP. IIII. The vse of the lines of equall parts ioyned with the lines of Chords. THe lines of equall parts do serue also for protraction, as may appeare by the former Diagrams; but being ioyned with the lines of Chords, which I place vpon one side of the Crosse, they will farther serue for the protraction and resolu∣tion of right line triangles; whereof I will giue one example in finding of a distance at two stations otherwise then in the second Cap. geometric illustration Let the distance required be AB. At A the first statiō I make choise of a station line toward C, and obserue the angle BAC by the tangent lines, which may be 43 gr. 20 m; then hauing gon an hundred paces toward C, I make my second station at D, where suppose I find the angle BDC to be 58 gr. or
the angle BDA to be 122 gr; this being done, I may finde the distance AB in this maner. 1 I draw a right line AC, representing the station line. 2 I take 100 out of the lines of equall parts, and pricke them downe from A the first station vnto D the second. 3 I open my compasses to one of the chords of 60 gr. and setting one foote in the point A, with the other I de∣scribe an occult arke of a circle intersecting the station line in E. 4 I take out of the same line of chords a chord of 43 gr. 20 m. (because such was the angle at the first station) and this I inscribe into that occult arke from E vnto F, which makes the angle FAD equall to the angle obserued at the first station. 5 I describe another like arke vpon the center D, and inscribe into it a chord of 58 gr. from C vnto G, and draw the right line DG, which doth meet with the other line AF in the point B, and makes the angle BDC equall to the an∣gle obserued at the second station. So the angles in the Dia∣gram being equall to the angles in the field, their sides wil be also proportionall: and therefore, 6 I take out the line AB with my compasses, and mea∣suring it in the same line of equall parts, from which I tooke AD, I find it to be 335, and such is the distance required.
CHAP. V. The vse of the Meridian line. 1 THe Meridian line, noted with the letter M, may serue for the more easie diuision of the plane sea-chart, ac∣cording to Mercators proiection. For if you shall draw paral∣lell meridians, each degree being halfe an inch distant from other, the degrees of this meridian line on the Staffe, shall giue the like degrees for the meridians on the chart, from the Equinoctiall toward the Pole: and then if through these de∣grees you draw streight lines perpendicular to the meridians, they shall be parallels of latitude. If any desire to haue the degrees of his chart larger then those which I haue put on the Staffe, he may take these and increase them in a double, or treble, or a decuple proportion at his pleasure. 2 This meridian line being ioyned with the line of chords, may serue for the protraction & resolution of such right line triangles as concerne latitude, longitude, rumb and distance in the practise of nauigation. As may appeare by this exam∣ple. Suppose two places giuen, A in the latitude of 50 gr. D in the latitude of 52 gr. ½, the difference of longitude be∣tweene them being 6 gr. and let it be required to know, first what Rumb leadeth from the one place to the other; second∣ly how many degrees distant they are asunder. 1 I draw a right line AE, representing the parallell of the place from whence I depart. 2 I take 6 gr. for the difference of longitude thr out of the line of inches, allowing halfe an inch for ey deree, o out of the beginning of the meridian line; (for there the meridian degrees d ffer very little from the equinoctall de∣grees) and these 6 gr. I pricke downe in the parallell from A to E. 3 In A and E, I erect two perpendiculars, AM and ED, representing the meridians of both places.
geometric illustration 4 I take the difference of latitude from 50 gr. to 52 gr. 30 m. out of the meridian line, and pricke it downe in the meridians from A vnto M, and from E to D, and draw the right line MD for the parallell of the second place, and the right line AD for the line of distance betweene both places: so the angle MAD shall giue the Rumb that leadeth from the one place to the other. 5 To finde the quantitie of this angle MAD, I may ei∣ther make vse of the Protractor, or else of a line of chords, and so I open my compasses vnto one of the chords of 60 gr. and setting one foote in the point A, with the other I de∣scribe an occult arke of a circle, intersecting the meridian in F, and the line of distance in G; then I take the chord FG with my compasses, and measuring it in the same line of chords as before, I find it 56 gr. ¼: and such is the inclination of
the Rumb to the meridian, which is the first thing that was required. 6 To find the quantitie of the line of distance AD, I take it out with my compasses, and measuring it in the meridian line, setting one foote beneath the lesser latitude, and the o∣ther foote as much aboue the greater latitude, I find about 4 gr. ½ intercepted between both feet: and such is the distance vpō the Rumb, which is the second thing that was required. But if this example were protracted according to the com∣mon Sea-chart, where the degrees of the equinoctiall and meridian are both alike; the Rumb MAD would be found to be aboue 67 gr. and AD the distance vpon the Rumb a∣bout 6 gr. ½. Suppose farther, that hauing set forth from A toward D, vpon the former Rumb of 56 gr. 15 m. NEbE, after the ship had runne 36 leagues, the wind changing, it ran 50 leagues more vpon the seuenth Rumb of EbN, whose inclination to the meridian is 78 gr. 45 m. And let it be required to know what longitude and latitude the ship is in, by pricking down the way thereof vpon the Chart. Hauing drawne a blanke chart as before, with meridians & parallels, according to the latitude of the places proposed. 1 I would make an angle MAD of 56 gr. 15 m. for the Rumb of NEbE, which is done after this maner: I open my compasses to one of the chords of 60 gr. and setting one foote in the point A, with the other I describe an occult ark of a circle, intersecting the meridian in F; then I take 56 gr. 15 m. out of the same line of chords, and pricke them downe from F vnto G: so the right line AG shall be the Rumb of NEbE. 2 I would take 36 leagues out of the meridian line, ex∣tending my compasses from 50 gr. to 51 gr. 48 m. or rather from as much below 50 as aboue 51, and prick them downe vpon the Rumb from A vnto I; so the point I, shal represent the place wherein the ship was when the wind changed. And this is in the latitude of 51 gr. 0 m. and in the longitude of 2 gr. 21 m. Eastward from the meridian AM.
3 By the same reason, I may draw the right line IK for the Rumb of EbN, and pricke downe the distance of 50 leagues from I vnto K: so the point K shal represent the place whither the ship came, after the running of these 50 leagues and this is in the latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. and in longitude 6 gr. 16 m. Eastward from the first meridian AM, and there∣fore 16 m. Eastward from the second meridian ED. But if these two courses were to be pricked downe by the common sea-chart, the point I would fall in the latitude of 51 gr. 0 m. and the point K in the latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. But the longitude of I would be onely 1 gr. 30 m. and the longi∣tude of K onely 3 gr. 57 m. which is 33 m Westward from the meridian of the place to which the ship was bound. Such is the difference betweene both these charts. CHAP. VI. The vse of the line of Numbers. 1 Hauing two numbers giuen to find a third in conti∣nuall proportion, a fourth, a fift, and so forward. EXtend the compasses from the first number vnto the se∣cond; then may you turne them, from the second to the third, and from the third to the fourth, and so forward. Let the two numbers giuen be 2 and 4. Extend the com∣passes from 2 to 4, then may you turne them from 4 to 8, and from 8 to 16, and from 16 to 32, and from 32 to 64, and from 64 to 128. Or if the one foote of the compasses being set to 64, the other fall out of the line, you may set it to another 64 nearer the beginning of the line, and there the other foot will reach to 128, and from 128 you may turne them to 256, and so forward. Or if the two first numbers giuen were 10 and 9: extend the compasses from 10 at the end of the line, backe vnto 9, then may you turne them from 9 vnto 8.1, and from 8.1
vnto 7.29. And so if the two first numbers giuen were 1 and 9, the third would be found to be 81, the fourth 729, with the same extent of the compasses. In the same maner, if the two first numbers were 10 and 12, you may finde the third proportionall to be 14.4, the fourth 17.28. And with the same extent of the compasses, if the two first numbers were 1 and 12, the third would be found to be 144, and the fourth to be 1728. 2 Hauing two extreme numbers giuen, to find a meane proportionall between them. Diuide the space betweene the extreme numbers into two equall parts, and the foote of the compasses will stay at the meane proportionall. So the extreme numbers giuen being 8 and 32, the meane betweene them will be found to be 16, which may be proued by the former Prop. where it was shew∣ed, that as 8 to 16, so are 16 to 32. 3 To find the square roote of any number giuen. The square roote is alwayes the meane proportionall be∣tweene 1 and the number giuen, and therefore to be found by diuiding the space betweene them into two equall parts. So the roote of 9 is 3, and the roote of 81 is 9, and the roote of 144 is 12. 4 Hauing two extreme numbers giuen, to find two meane proportionals between them. Diuide the space betweene the two extreme numbers gi∣uen, into three equall parts. As if the extreme numbers giuen were 8 and 27, diuide the space betweene them into three equall parts, the feet of the compasses will stand in 12 and 18. 5 To find the cubique roote of a number giuen. The cubique roote is alwayes the first of two meane pro∣portionals
betweene 1 and the number giuen, and therefore to be found by diuiding the space betweene them into three equall parts. So the roote of 1728 will be found to be 12. The roote of 17280 is almost 26: and the roote of 172800 is almost 56. 6 To multiply one number by another. Extend the compasses from 1 to the multiplicator; the same extent applied the same way, shall reach from the multipli∣cand to the product. As if the numbers to be multiplied were 25 and 30: either extend the compasses from 1 to 25, and the same extent will giue the distance from 30 to 750; or extend them from 1 to 30, and the same extent shall reach from 25 to 750. 7 To diuide one number by another. Extend the compasses from the diuisor to 1, the same ex∣tent shall reach from the diuidend to the quotient. So if 750 were to be diuided by 25, the quotient would be found to be 30. 8 Three numbers being giuen to find a fourth proportionall. This golden rule, the most vsefull of all others, is perfor∣med with like ease. For extend the compasses from the first number to the second, the same extent shall giue the distance from the third to the fourth. As for example, the proportion between the diameter and the circumference, is said to be such as 7 to 22: if the diame∣ter be 14, how much is the circumference? Extend the com∣passes from 7 to 22, the same extent shall giue the distance from 14 to 44: or extend them from 7 to 14, and the same extent shall reach from 22 to 44. Either of these wayes may be tried on seuerall places of
this line; but that place is best, where the seete of the com∣passes may stand nearest together. 9 Three numbers being giuen to finde a fourth in a duplicated proportion. This proposition concernes questions of proportion be∣tweene lines and superficies; where if the denomination be of lines, extend the compasses from the first to the second num∣ber of the same denomination: so the same extent being doubled, shall giue the distance from the third number vnto the fourth. The diameter being 14, the content of the circle is 154: the diameter being 28, what may the content be? Extend the compasses from 14 to 28, the same extent doubled will reach from 154 to 616. For first it reacheth from 154 vnto 308; and turning the compasses once more, it reacheth from 308 vnto 616: and this is the content required. But if the first denomination be of the superficiall con∣tent, extend the compasses vnto the halfe of the distance, be∣tweene the first number and the second of the same denomi∣nation: so the same extent shall giue the distance from the third to the fouth. The content of a circle being 154, the diameter is 14: the content being 616, what may the diameter be? Diuide the distance betweene 154 and 616 into two equall parts, then set one foote in 14, the other will reach to 28 the diame∣ter required. 10 Three numbers being giuen to find a fourth in a triplicated proportion. This proposition concerneth questions of proportion be∣tweene lines and solids; where if the first denomination be of lines, extend the compasses from the first number to the se∣cond of the same denomination: so the extent being tripled, shall giue the distance frō the third number vnto the fourth,
Suppose the diameter of an iron bullet being 4 inches, the weight of it was 9 l: the diameter being 8 inches, what may the weight be? Extend the compasses from 4 to 8, the same extent being tripled, will reach from 9 vnto 72. For first it reacheth from 9 vnto 18; then from 18 to 36; thirdly from 36 to 72. And this is the weight required. But if the first denomination shall be of the Solid content, or of the weight, extend the compasses to a third part of the distance betweene the first number and the second of the same denomination: so the same extent shal giue the distance from the third number vnto the fourth. The weight of a cube being 72 l, the side of it was 8 in∣ches: the weight being 9 l, what may the side be? Diuide the distance betweene 72 and 9, into three equall parts; then set one foote to 8, the other will reach to 4, the side required. CHAP. VII. The vse of the lines of artificiall Sines. THis line of sines hath such vse in finding a fourth pro∣portionall, as the ordinary Canon of Sines: and the ma∣ner of finding it, is alwayes such as in this example. As the sine of 30 gr. vnto the sine of 52 gr. So the sine of 38 gr. to a fourth sine. Extend the compasses in the line of sines from 30 gr. vnto 52 gr; the same extent shall giue the distance from 38 gr. vnto 76 gr. Or extend them from 30 gr. vnto 38 gr. the same extent will reach from 52 gr. vnto 76 gr. which is the fourth pro∣portionall sine required. And thus may the rest of all sinical proportions be wrought two wayes. The minutes which are wanting in the first de∣gree, may be supplied by the line of Numbers.
CHAP. VIII. The vse of the line of artificiall Tangents. THis line of Tangents hath like vse, but commonly ioy∣ned with the line of sines: the maner of working by it, may appeare by this example. As the Tangent of 38 gr. 30 m. is to the Tangent of 23 gr. 30 m. So the Sine of 90 gr. to a fourth Sine. This Prop. and such others vpon two lines, may be wrought two wayes. For extend the compasses from the Tangent of 38 gr. 30 m. to the Tangent of 23 gr. 30 m; the same extent shall giue the distance from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of 33 gr. 8 m. Or else extend them from 38 gr. 30 m. in the Tangents vnto 90 gr. in the line of sines; the same extent from the Tan∣gent of 23 gr. 30 m. shall reach to the sine of 33 gr. 8 m. which is the fourth proportionall sine required. And this crossework in many cases is the better, in regard the tangents which should passe on from 40 gr. to 50 gr. and so forward, do turne backe at 45 gr. These two lines of Sines and Tangents, may serue for the resolution of all sphericall tri∣angles, according to those Canons which I haue set downe in the vse of the Sector. Or if at any time one meete with a secant, let him account the sine of 80 gr. for a secant of 10 gr. and the sine of 70 gr. for a secant of 20 gr. and so take the sine of the complement in stead of the secant. As if the proposition were, As the Radius to the secant of 51 gr. 30 m. So the sine of 23 gr. 30 m. to a fourth sine. Extend the compasses from the Radius that is the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of 38 gr. 30 m. the same extent will giue the distance from the sine of 23 gr. 30 m. both to the sine of 14 gr.
22 m. and to the sine of 39 gr. 50 m. But in this case, the sine of 39 gr. 50 m. is the fourth required. For the first number being lesse then the second, that is, the Radius lesse then the secant, the sine of 23 gr. 30 m. which is the third, must also be lesse then the fourth. CHAP. IX. The vse of the line of Sines and Tangents ioyned with the line of numbers. THe lines of sines and tangents haue another like vse ioy∣ned with the line of numbers, especially in the resolution of right line triangles, where the angles are measured by de∣grees and minutes, and the sides measured by absolute num∣bers, whereof I will set downe these propositions. 1 Hauing three angles and one side, to find the two other sides. As the side of the angle opposite to the side giuen, is to the number belonging to that side giuen: So the sine of the angle opposite to the side required, to the number belonging to the side required. As in the example of the fourth Cap. of this booke, where knowing the distance betweene two stations at A and D to be 100 paces, the angle BAC to be 43 gr. 20 m. and the angle BDC to be 58 gr. it was required to find the distance AB. First hauing these two angles, I may find the third angle ABD to be 14 gr. 40 m. either by substraction or by comple∣ment vnto 180. Then in the triangle BAD, I haue three an∣gles, and one side, whereby I may find both AB and DB. I know the angle ABD opposite to the measured side AD to be 14 gr. 40 m. and the angle ADB opposite to the side required, to be 122 gr: wherefore I extend the compasses in
the line of sines from 14 gr. 40 m. vnto 122 gr. or (which is all one) to 58 gr. (for after 90 gr. the sine of 80 gr. is also the sine of 100 gr. and the sine of 70 gr. the sine of 100 gr. and so in the rest) so shall I find the same extent to reach in the line of numbers, from 100 vnto 335. And such is the distance requi∣red betweene A and B. geometric illustration In like maner if I extend my compasses from the sine of 34 gr. 40 m. to the sine of 43 gr. 20 m. the same extent will reach in the line of numbers from 100 to 271. And such is the distance betweene D and B. Or in crosse worke, I may extend the compasses from 14 gr. 40 m. in the sines, vnto 100 parts in the line of numbers: so the same extent will giue the distance from 58 gr. to 335 parts, and from 43 gr. 20 m. to 271 parts.
2 Hauing two sides giuen, and one angle opposite to either of these sides, to find the other two angles and the third side. As the side opposite to the angle giuen, is to the sine of the angle giuen: So the other side giuen, to the sine of that angle to which it is opposite. So in the former triangle, hauing the two sides AB 335 paces and AD 100 paces, and knowing the angle ADB, which is opposite to the side AB, to be 122 gr. I may find the angl ABD, which is opposite to the other side AD. For if I extend the compasses from 335 to 100 in the line of numbrs, I shall finde the same extent to reach in the line of sines from 122 gr. to 14 gr. 40 m; and therefore such is the an∣gle ABD. Then knowing these two angles ABD and ADB, I may find the third angle BAD either by subtraction or by com∣plement to 180, to be 43 gr. 20 m; and hauing three angles and two sides, I may well find the third side DB, by the for∣mer Prop. This may be done more readily by crosse worke. For if I extend the compasses from 335 parts, in the line of numbers, to the sine of 122 gr. the same extent wil reach from 100 parts to the sine of 14 gr. 40 m. and backe from 43 gr. 20 m. to 271 parts; and such is the third side DB. 3 Hauing two sides and the angle between them, to find the two other angles and the third side. If the angle contained betweene the two sides be a right angle, the other two angles will be found readily by this ca∣non. As the greater side giuen, is to the lesser side:
So the tangent of 45 gr. to the tangent of the lesser angle. So in the rectangle triangle AIB, knowing the side AI to be 244, and the side IB to be 230: if I extend the com∣passes from 244 to 230 in the line of numbers, the same ex∣tent will reach from 45 gr. to about 43 gr. 20 m. in the line of tangents; and such is the lesser angle BAI, and the comple∣ment 46 gr. 40 m. shewes the greater angle ABI. The angles being knowne, the third side AB may be found by the first Prop. So likewise in the example of the third Cap. of this booke, concerning taking of angles by the line of inches, where the parts intercepted on the Staffe being 20 inches, and the parts on the Crosse 9 inches, it was required to find the angle of al∣titude. For I may extend the compasses in the line of num∣bers, from 20 vnto 9, the same extent will reach in the line of tangents, from 45 gr. to 24 gr. 14 m. Or in the crosse worke, I may extend the compasses from 20 parts in the line of num∣bers to the tangent of 45 gr; the same extent shall giue the distance from 9 parts vnto the tangent of 24 gr. 14 m. And such is the angle of altitude required. But if it be an oblique angle that is contained betweene the two sides giuen, the triangle may be reduced into two rectangle triangles, and then resolued as before. As in the triangle ADB, where the side AB is 335, and the side AD 100, and the angle BAD 43 gr. 20 m: if I let downe the perpendicular DH vpon the side AB, I shal haue two rectangle triangles, AHD, DHB; and in the rectangle AHD, the angle at A being 43 gr. 20 m. the other angle ADH will be 46 gr. 40 m; and with these angles and the side AD, I may find both AH and DH, by the first Prop. Then taking AH out of AB, there remaines HB for the side of the re∣ctangle DHB; and therefore with this side HB and the other side DH, I may find both the angle at B, and the third side DB, as in the former part of this Prop. Or I may find the angles required, without letting downe any perpendicular. For
As the summe of the sides, is to the difference of the sides: So the tangent of the halfe summe of the opposite angles, to the tangent of half the difference between those angles. As in the former triangle ADB, the summe of the sides AB, AD, is 435, and the difference betweene them 235; the angle contained 43 gr. 20 m; and therefore the summe of the two opposite angles 136 gr. 40 m. and the halfe summe 68 gr 20 m. Hereupon I extend the compasses in the line of num∣bers from 455 to 235, and I find them to reach in the line of tangents from 68 gr. 20 m. vnto 53 gr. 40 m; and such is the halfe difference betweene the opposite angles at B and D. This halfe difference being added to the halfe summe, doth giue 122 gr. for the greater angle ADB: and being sub∣tracted, it leaueth 14 gr. 40 m. for the lesser angle ABD. Then the three angles being knowne, the third side BD may be found by the first Prop. 4 Hauing the three sides of a right line triangle, to find the perpendicular and the three angles. Let one of the three sides giuen be the base, but rather the greater side, that the perpendicular may fall within the trian∣gle; then gather the summe, and the difference of the two o∣ther sides, and the proportion will hold. As the base of the triangle, is to the summe of the sides: So the difference of the sides to a fourth, which being taken forth of the base, the perpendicular shal fall on the middle of the remainder. As in the former triangle ADB, where the base AB is 335, the summe of the sides AD and DB 371, and the difference of them 171. If I extend the compasses in the line of num∣bers from 335 vnto 371, I shall find the same extent to reach from 171 vnto 189.4. This fourth number I take out of the
base 335.0, and the remainder is 145.6, the halfe whereof is 72.8, and doth shew the place H, where the perpendicular shall fall, from the angle D, vpon the base AB, diuiding the former triangle ADB into two right angle triangles, DHA and DHB, in which the angles may be found by the former part of the third Prop. And this may suffice for right line tri∣angles. But for the more easie protraction of these triangles, I will set downe one proposition more concerning chords. 5 Hauing the semidiameter of a circle, to find the chords of euery arke. As the sine of 30 gr. to the sine of halfe the arke proposed: So is the semidiameter of the circle giuen, to the chord of the same arke. As if in protracting the former triangle ADB, it were re∣quired to find the length of a chord of 43 gr. 20 m. agreeing to the semidiameter AE, which is knowne to be 3 inches. The halfe of 43 gr. 20 m. is 21 gr. 40 m; wherefore I extend the compasses from the sine of 30 gr. to the sine of 21 gr. 40 m. and I finde the same extent to reach in the line of numbers from 3.000 parts to 2.215; which shewes, that the semidia∣meter being 3 inches, the chord of 43 gr. 20 m. will be 2 in∣ches and 215 parts of 1000. In like maner the chord of 58 gr. agreeing to the same se∣midiameter, would be found to be 2 inches and 909 parts. For the halfe of 58 being 29; if I extend the compasses in the line of sines from 30 gr. to 29 gr. the same extent will reach in the line of numbers from 3.000. vnto 2.909. Or in crosse worke, if I extend the compasses from the sine of 30 gr. to 3.000 in the line of numbers, I shall find the same extent to reach from 21 gr. 40 m. to 2.215 parts, and from 29 gr. to 2.909 parts, and from 7 gr. 20 m. to 765 parts; for the chord of 14 gr. 40 m. for the third angle ABD.
CHAP. X. The vse of the line of versed sines. THis line of versed sines is no necessary line. For all trian∣gles, both right lined and sphericall, may be resolued by the three former lines of numbers, sines and tangents; yet I thought good to put it on the Staffe for the more easie fin∣ding of an angle hauing three sides, or a side hauing three an∣gles of a sphericall triangle giuen. Suppose the three sides to be, one of them 110 gr. the other 78 gr. and the third 38 gr. 30 m. and let it be required to find the angle, whose base is 110 gr. I first adde them together, and from halfe the summe sub∣tract the base, noting the difference after this maner. The base 110 gr. 0 m. The one side 78 0 The other side 38 30 The summe of all three 226 30 The halfe summe 113 15 The difference 3 15 This done, I come to the Staffe, and extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of 78 gr. which is one of the sides; and applying this extent from the sine of the other side 38 gr. 30 m. I find it to reach to a fourth sine, about 37 gr. 30 m. From this fourth sine of 37 gr. 30 m. I extend the compas∣ses again, to the sine of the halfe summe 113 gr. 15 m. (which is all one with the sine of 66 gr. 45 m.) and this second extent wil reach from the sine of the difference 3. gr. 15 m. to the sine of 4 gr. 54 m. Ouer against this sine you shal find 146 gr. in the line of versed sines; and such is the angle required.
THE SECOND BOOKE. geometric illustration Of the vse of the former lines of proportiō, more particularly exemplified in seuerall kinds. THe former booke containing the gene∣rall vse of each line of proportion, may be sufficient for all those which know the rule of Three, and the doctrine of triangles. But for others, I suppose it would be more diffi∣cult to find either the declination of the Sunne, or his amplitude, or the like, by that which hath been said in the vse of the line of sines, vnlesse they may haue the particular proportions, by which such propositions are to be wrought. And therefore for their sakes I haue adioyned this se∣cond booke, containing seuerall proportions for propositions of ordinary vse, and set them down in such order, that the Reader considering which is the first of the three numbers giuen, may easily apply them to the Sector, and also resolue them by Arithmetique, beginning with those which require help onely of the line of numbers. CHAP. I. The vse of the line of Numbers in broade measure, such as boord, glasse, and the like. THe ordinary measure for bredth and length are feete and inches, each foote diuided in∣to 12 inches, and euery inch into halues & quar∣ters,
which being parts of seueral denominations, doth breed much trouble both in arithmetique and the vse of instru∣ments. For the auoiding whereof, where I may preuaile I giue this counsell, that such as are delighted in measure would vse seuerall lines, first a line of inch measure, wherein euery inch may be diuided into 10 or 100 parts; secondly a line of foote measure, wherein euery foote may be diuided into 100 or 1000 parts, both which lines may be set on the same side of a two foote ruler, after this or the like maner. two foot ruler Then if they be to giue the content of any superficies or solid in inches, they may measure the sides of it by the line of inches and parts of inches; but if they be to giue the content in feete, it would be more easie for them to measure those sides by the foote line and his parts. For example, let the length of a plane be 30 inches, and the bredth 21 inches and 6/10 of an inch; this length multi∣plied into the bredth, would giue the content to be 648 inches: but if I were to find the content of the same plane in feet, I would measure the sides of it by the foote line and his parts; so the length would proue to be 2 feete 50/100, and the bredth 1 foote 80/100, and the length multiplied by the bredth, cutting off the foure last figures, for the foure figures of the parts, would giue the content to be 4.5000, which is 4 foote and 5000 parts, of a foot being diuided into 10000 parts. 21.6 2.50 30.0 1.80 648.00 20000   250   4.5000
The like reason holdeth for yards and elnes, and all other measures diuided into 10, 100, or 1000 parts. This being presupposed, the worke will be more easie both by arithmetique and the line of numbers, as may appeare by these propositions. 1 Hauing the bredth and length of any oblong super∣ficies giuen in inch-measure, to finde the content in inches. As 1 inch vnto the bredth in inches: So the length in inches vnto the content in inches. geometric illustration Suppose in the plane AD, the bredth AC to be 30 inches, and the length AB to be 183 inches; extend the compasses from 1 vnto 30, the same extent will reach from 183 vnto 5490; or extend them from 1 vnto 183, the same extent will reach from 30 vnto 5490. So both wayes the content requi∣red is found to be 5490 inches. As 1 vnto 30: so are 183 vnto 5490. 2 Hauing the length and bredth of any oblong super∣ficies giuen in inches, to finde the con∣tent in feete. As 144 inches vnto the bredth in inches: So the length in inches vnto the content in feete. And thus in the former plane AD, working as before, the content will be found to be 38.125, which is 38 foote and ⅛ of a foote. As 144 vnto 30: so are 183 vnto 38.125.
3 Hauing the length and bredth of any oblong super∣ficies giuen in foote measure, to finde the content in feete. As 1 foote vnto the bredth in foote measure: So the length in feete vnto the content in feete. And thus in the former plane AD, the bredth will be 2 foote 50 parts, and the length 15 foot 25 parts; then working as before, the content will be found to be 38.125. As 1 vnto 2.50: so are 15.25 vnto 38.125. 4 Hauing the bredth of any oblong superficies giuen in inches, and the length in foote measure, to find the content in feet. As 12 inches to the bredth in inches: So the length in feet to the content in feet. So also in the former plane, the content will be found to be 38.125. As 12 vnto 30: so are 15.25 vnto 38.125. 5 Hauing the bredth of an oblong superficies giuen in inches, to find the length of a foot su∣perficiall in inch measure. As the bredth in inches, vnto 144 inches: So 1 foot vnto the length in inch measure. So the bredth being 30 inches, the length of a foot wil be found to be 4 inches 80 parts. As 30 vnto 144: so are 1 vnto 4.80. 6 Hauing the bredth and length of an oblong superficies giuen in feet, to find the length of a foot superficiall in foot measure. As the bredth in foot measure to 1 foot: So the number of feet to the length in foot measure.
So the bredth being 2 foot 50 parts, the length of a foot will be found to be 40 parts, the length of 2 feete 80 parts, and the length of 3 feet 1 foot 20 parts, &c. As 250 vnto 1: so are 1 vnto 0.40. 7 Hauing the length and bredth of an oblong superficies, to find the side of a square equall to the oblong. Diuide the space betweene the length and the bredth in∣to two equall parts, and the foot of the compasses will stay at the side of the square. So the length being 183 inches, and the bredth 30 inches, the side of the square will be found to be almost 74 inches and 10 parts of 100. Or the bredth being 2 foot and 50 parts, the length 15 foot and 25 parts, the side of the square wil be found to be about 6 feet and 17 parts. As 30 vnto 74.10: so are 74.10 vnto 183.027. And as 2.50 vnto 6.174: so are 6.174 vnto 15.247. 8 Hauing the diameter of a circle, to find the side of a square equall to that circle. As 10000 to the diameter: So 8862 vnto the side of the square. So the diameter of a circle being 15 inches, the side of the square will be found about 13 inches and 29 parts. As 10000 vnto 8862: so are 15 vnto 13.29. 9 Hauing the circumference of a circle to find the side of a square equall to the same circle. As 10000 to the circumference: So 2821 to the side of the square. So the circumference of a circle being 47 inches 13 parts, the side of the square will be about 13 inches 29 parts. As 10000 vnto 2821: so are 47.13 vnto 13.29.
10 Hauing the diameter of a circle, to find the circumference. 11 Hauing the circumference of a circle, to find the diameter. As 1000 to the diameter: So 3142 to the circumference. So the diameter being 15 inches, the circumference will be found about 47 inches 13 parts: or the circumference be∣ing 47.13, the diameter will be 15. CHAP. II. The vse of the line of Numbers in the measure of land by perches and acres. 1 Hauing the bredth and length of an oblong superficies giuen in perches, to find the content in perches. As 1 perch to the bredth in perches: So the length in perches to the content in perches. So in the former plane AD, if the bredth AC be 30 per∣ches, and the length AB 183 perches, the content will be found to be 5490 perches. 2 Hauing the length and bredth of an oblong superficies giuen in perches, to find the content in acres. As 160 to the bredth in perches: So the length in perches to the content in acres. So in the former plane AD, the content will be found to be 34 acres, and 31 centesms or parts of an 100. As 160 vnto 30: so are 183 vnto 34.31.
3 Hauing the length and bredth of an oblong superficies giuen in chaines, to find the content in acres. It being troublesome to diuide the content in perches by 160, we may measure the length and bredth by chaines, each chaine being 4 perches in length, and diuided into 100 links, then will the worke be more easie in arithmetique. For As 10 to the content in chaines: So the length in chaines to the content in acres. And thus in the former plane AD, the bredth AC will be 7 chaines 50 links, and the length AB 45 chaines 75 links; then working as before, the content will be found as before, 34 acres 31 parts. 4 Hauing the perpendicular and base of a triangle giuen in perches, to find the content in acres. If the perpendicular go for the bredth, and the base for the length, the triangle will be the halfe of the oblong. As the triangle CED is the halfe of the oblong AD, whose content was found in the former Prop. Or without hal∣fing, As 320 to the perpendicular: So the base to the content in acres. So in the triangle CED, the perpendicular being 30, and the base 183, the content will be found to be about 17 acres and 15 parts. 5 Hauing the perpendicular and base of a triangle giuen in chaines, to find the content in acres. As 20 to the perpendicular: So the base to the content in acres. And so in the triangle CED, the perpendicular EF be∣ing
7.50, and the base CD 45.75, the content will be found as before to be about 17 acres 15 parts. 6 Hauing the content of a superficies after one kind of perch, to find the content of the same super∣ficies according to another kind of perch. As the length of the second perch to the length of the first perch: So the content in acres to a fourth number; and that fourth to the content in acres required. Suppose the plane AD measured with a chaine of 66 feet, or with a perch of 16 feete and an halfe, contained 34 acres 31 parts; and it were demanded how many acres it would containe if it were measured with a chaine of 18 foot to the perch: these kind of propositions are wrought by the back∣ward rule of three, after a duplicated proportion. Wherefore I extend the compasses from 16.5 vnto 18.0, and the samredge extent doth reach backward, first from 34.31 to 31.45, and then from 31.45 to 28.84, which shewes the content to be 28 acres 84 parts. 7 Hauing the plot of a plane with the content in acres, to find the scale by which it was plotted. Suppose the plane AD contained 34 acres 31 centesines if I should measure it with a scale of 10 in the inch, thredge length AB would be 38 chaines and about 12 centesmes, and the bredth AC 6 chaines and 25 centesmes; and the contenredge would be found by the third Prop. of this Chapter, to be a∣bout 23 acres 82 parts, whereas it should be 34 acres 31 parts Wherefore I diuide the distance betweene 23.82, and 34 31, vpon the line of numbers into two equall parts; then set∣ting one foote of the compasses vpon 10, my supposed scale, I find the other to extend to 12, which is the scale required
CHAP. III. The vse of the line of Numbers in solid measure, such as stone, timber, and the like. geometric illustration 1 Hauing the side of a square equall to the base of any solid giuen in inch measure, to find the length of a foot solid in inch measure. THe side of a square equall to the base of a solid, may be found by diuiding the space betweene the length and bredth into two equall parts, as in the 7 Prop. of broad mea∣ledgeure. Then As the side of the square in inches to 41.57: So is 1 foot to a fourth number; and that fourth to the length in inches. So in the solid AH, the side of the square equall to the ledgeas EC, being about 25 inches 45 parts, the length of a foot ledgeolid will be found about 2 inches 67 parts, and the length of wo foot solid 5 inches 33 parts. As 25.45 vnto 41.57: so 1.00 vnto 1.63: and so are 1.63 vnto 2.67. 2 Hauing the side of a square equall to the base of any so∣lid giuen in foot measure, to find the length of a foot solid in foot measure. As the side of the square in feet vnto 1: So is 1 vnto a fourth number; And that fourth to the length in foot measure. So in the solid AH, the side of the square equall to the
base EC, being about 2 foote 120 parts, the length of a foot solid will be found about 222 parts of a foot. As 2.120 vnto 1.000: so 1.000 vnto 0.471: and so are 471 vnto 222. 3 Hauing the bredth and depth of a squared solid giuen in foot measure, to find the length of a foot solid in foot measure. As 1 vnto the bredth in foot measure: So the depth in feet to a fourth number; which is the content of the base in foot measure. Then As this fourth number vnto 1: So 1 vnto the length in foot measure. So in the solid AH, the bredth being 2 foot 50 parts, the depth 1 foot 80 parts, the content of the base EC will be found 4 foot 50 parts, and the length of one foot solid about 222 parts, the length of two foot solid about 444 parts of 1000. As 1.00 vnto 2.50: so are 1.80 vnto 4.50. As 4.50 vnto 1.00: so 1.000 vnto 0.222. 4 Hauing the bredth and depth of a squared solid gi∣uen in inches, to find the length of a foot solid in inch measure. As 1 hath to the bredth in inches: So the depth in inches to a fourth number; which is the content of the base in inches. Then As this fourth number vnto 1728: So 1 vnto the length of a foot in inch measure. So in the solid AH, the bredth AC being 30 inches, and the d pth AE 21 inches 60 parts, the content of the base EC will be found to be 648 inches, and the length of a foot solid about 2 inches 67 parts.
As 1 vnto 21.6: so 30 vnto 648: As 648 vnto 1728: so 1 vnto 2.667. Or as 12 to the bredth in inches: So the depth in inches to a fourth number. As this fourth number to 144: So 1 vnto the length of a foot solid in inch measure. So in the solid AH, the bredth being 30 inches, the depth 21 inches 6 parts, the fourth number will be found to be 54, and the depth of a foot solid 2 inches 67 parts. As 12 vnto 21.6: so 30 vnto 54. As 54 vnto 144: so 1 vnto 2.667. 5 Hauing the side of a square equall to the base of any solid, and the length thereof giuen in inch measure, to find the content thereof in feet. As 41.57 to the side of the square in inches: So the length in inches to a fourth number; and that fourth to the content in foot measure. So in the solid AH, the length AB being 183 inches, and the side of the square equall to the base EC about 25 in∣ches 45 parts, the fourth number will be found about 112, and the whole solid content about 68 feet 62 parts. As 41.57 vnto 25.45: so 183 vnto 112: and so are 112 vnto 68.62. 6 Hauing the side of a square equall to the base of any solid, and the length thereof giuen in foot measure, to find the content thereof in feet. As 1 to the side of the square in foot measure: So the length in feet to a fourth number; and that fourth to the content in foot measure.
So in the former solid AH, the side of the square equall to the base AE, being about 2 foot 12 parts, and the length AB 15 foot 25 parts, the conent will be found to be about 68 foot 62 parts. As 1 vnto 2.12: so 15.25 vnto 32.35: and so are 32.35 vnto 68.62. 7 Hauing the side of a square equall to the base of any solid giuen in inch measure, & the length of the solid giuen in foot measure, to find the content thereof in feete. As 12 to the side of the square giuen in inches: So the length in feet to a fourth number; and that fourth to the content in foot measure. So in the former solid AH, the side of the equall square being 25 inches 45 parts, the content will be found to be a∣about 68 feet 62 parts. As 12 vnto 25.45: so 15.25 vnto 32.35: and so are 32.35 vnto 68.62. 8 Hauing the length, bredth and depth of a squared solid giuen in inches, to find the content in inches. As 1 vnto the bredth in inches: So the depth in inches vnto the base in inches. Then As 1 vnto the base: So the length in inches vnto the solid content in inches. So in the solid AH, whose bredth AC is 30 inches, the depth AE 21 inches and 6 parts of 10, and length AB 183, the content of the base EC wil be found 648 inches, and the whole solid content about 118500 inches. As 1 vnto 21.6: so are 30 vnto 648: As 1 vnto 648: so are 183 to 118584.
9 Hauing the length, bredth and depth of a squared solid giuen in inches, to find the content in feet. As 1 to the bredth in inches: So the depth in inches to the base in inches. As 1728 to that base: So the length in inches to the content in feet. So in the solid AH, the content will be found to be about 68 feet 62 parts. As 1 vnto 21.6: so 30 vnto 648: As 1728 vnto 648: so 183 to 68.62. Or as 12 to the bredth in inches: So the depth in inches to a fourth number. As 144 to that fourth number: So the length in inches to the content in feet. And so also in the same solid AH, the content will be found to be about 68 feet 62 parts. As 12 vnto 21.6: so 30 vnto 54: As 144 vnto 54: so 183 vnto 68.62. 10 Hauing the length, bredth and depth of a squared solid giuen in foot measure, to finde the content in feet. As 1 vnto the bredth in foot measure: So the depth in feet to the base in feet. As 1 vnto that base: So the length in feet to the content in feet. And thus in the former solid AH, the bredth AC will be 2 foot 50 parts, the depth AE 1 foot 80 parts, and the length AB 15 foot 25 parts; then working as before, the content of the base AF will be found 4 feet 50 parts, and the whole so∣lid content about 68 foot 62 parts, which of all others may
very easily be tried by arithmetique. As 1 vnto 2.50: so 1.80 vnto 4.50. As 1 vnto 4.50: so 15.25 vnto 68.625. 11 Hauing the bredth and depth of a squared solid giuen in inches, and the length in foot measure, to find the content thereof in feet. As 1 vnto the bredth in inches: So the depth in inches vnto a fourth number: which is the content of the base in inches. As 144 hath vnto that fourth number: So the length in feet to the content in feet. And so in the same solid AH, the content will be found to be about 68 feet 62 parts. As 1 vnto 21.6: so 30 vnto 648. As 144 vnto 15.25: so 648 vnto 68.62. Or as 144 vnto the bredth in inches: So the depth in inches vnto a fourth number: which is the content of the base in feet. As 1 hath vnto that fourth number: So the length in feet to the content in feet. And so in the same solid AH, the content will be found to be about 68 feet 62 parts. As 144 vnto 21.6: so 30 vnto 4.50: As 1 vnto 4.50: so 15.25 vnto 68.62. Or as 12 vnto the bredth in inches: So the depth in inches vnto a fourth number. As 12 vnto this fourth number: So the length in feet to the content in feet. And so also in the same solid AH, the content wil be found to be about 68 feet 62 parts. As 12 vnto 21.6: so 30 vnto 54. As 12 vnto 54: so 15.25 vnto 68.62. All these varieties (and such like not here mentioned)
do follow vpon making of the base of the solid, to be EC; there would be as many more if any shall begin with the base EH, and so likewise if they make the base to be FD. 12 Hauing the diameter of a cylinder giuen in inch mea∣sure, to find the length of a foot solid in inches. As the diameter in inches vnto 46.90: cylinder So is 1 vnto a fourth number: and that fourth to the length in inches. So the diameter of a cylinder being 15 inches, the fourth number will be about 3.12, and the length of a foote solid 9 inches 78 parts. As 15 vnto 46.90: so 1 vnto 3.127: and so are 3.127 vnto 9.778. 13 Hauing the diameter of a cylinder giuen in foot measure, to find the length of a foot solid in foot measure. As the diameter in feet vnto 1.128: So is 1 vnto a fourth number; and that fourth to the length in foot measure. So the diameter being 1 foot 25 parts, the length of a foot solid wil be found about 8.14 parts of 1000. As 1.25 vnto 1.128: so 1.00 to 0.9027: and so are 9027 vnto 8148. 14 Hauing the circumference of a cylinder giuen in inches, to find the length of a foot solid in inch measure. As the circumference in inches to 147.36: So is 1 to a fourth number; and that fourth to the length in inches. So the circumference being 47 inches 13 parts, the length of a foot solid will be found about 9 inches 78 parts.
As 47.13 vnto 147.36: so 1.00 to 3.13: and so are 3.13 vnto 9.78. 15 Hauing the circumference of a cylinder giuen in foot measure, to find the length of a foot solid in foot measure. As the circumference in feete to 3.545: So is 1 to a fourth number; and that fourth to the length in foot measure. So the circumference being 3 foot 927 parts, the length of a foot solid will be found to be about 815 parts. As 3.927 vnto 3.545: so 1.000 vnto 0.903: and so are 903 vnto 815. 16 Hauing the side of a square equall to the base of a cy∣linder, to find the length of a foot solid. The side of a square equall to the circle, may be found by the eighth Prop. of broad measure, and then this Prop. may be wrought by the first and second Prop. of solid measure. 17 Hauing the diameter of a cylinder, and the length giuen in inches, to find the content in inches. As 1.128 vnto the diameter in inches: So the length in inches to a fourth number; and that fourth number to the content in inches. So the diameter being 15 inches, and the length 105, the content of the cylinder will be found to be about 18560 in∣ches. As 1.1284 vnto 15: so are 105 vnto 1395.87: and so are 1395.87 vnto 18555.34.
18 Hauing the diameter and length of a cylinder in foot measure, to find the content in feet. As 1.128 to the diameter in feet: So the length in feet to a fourth number; and that fourth to the content in feet. So the diameter being 1 foote 25 parts, and the length 8 foot and 75 parts, the content of the cylinder will be found about 10 foot 74 parts. As 1.128 vnto 1.25: so 8.75 vnto 9.69: and so are 9.69 vnto 10.737. 19 Hauing the diameter of a cylinder, and the length giuen in inches, to find the content in feet. As 46.90 to the diameter in inches: So the length in inches to a fourth number; and that fourth to the content in feet. So the diameter being 15 inches, and the length 105, the content will be found about 10 foot 74 parts. As 46.906 vnto 15: so 105 vnto 33.58: and so are 33.58 vnto 10.737. 20 Hauing the diameter of a cylinder giuen in inches and the length in feet, to find the content in feet. As 13.54 to the diameter in inches: So the length in feet to a fourth number; and that fourth to the content in feete. So the diameter being 15 inches, and the length 8 foote 75 parts, the content will be found about 10 foot 74 parts. As 13.54 vnto 15: so 8 75 vnto 9.69: and so are 9.69 vnto 10.74.
21 Hauing the circumference and the length of a cylinder giuen in inches, to find the content in inches. As 3.545 to the circumference in inches: So the length in inches to a fourth number; and that fourth to the content in inches. So the circumference being 47 inches 13 parts, and the length 105 inches, the content will be found about 18560 inches. As 3.545 vnto 47.13: so 105 vnto 1396: and so are 1396 vnto 18555. 22 Hauing the circumference and length of a cylinder giuen in inches, to find the content in feet. As 147.36 to the circumference in inches: So the length in inches to a fourth number; and that fourth to the content in feet. So the circumference being 47 inches 13 parts, and the length 105 inches, the content will be found about 10 foote 74 parts. As 147.36 vnto 47.13: so 105 vnto 33.58: and so are 33.58 vnto 10.74. 23 Hauing the circumference and length of a cylinder giuen in foot measure, to find the content in feet. As 3.545 to the circumference in feet: So the length in feet to a fourth number; and that fourth to the content in feet. So the circumference being 3 foote 927 parts, and the length 8 foot 75 parts, the content wil be found to be 10 foot 74 parts. As 3.545 vnto 3.927: so 8.75 vnto 9.69: and so are 9.69 vnto 10.74.
24 Hauing the circumference of a cylinder giuen in inches and the length in foot measure, to find the content in feete. As 42.54 to the circumference in inches: So the length in feet to a fourth number; and that fourth to the content in feet. So the circumference being 47 inches 13 parts, and the length 8 foot 75 parts, the content will be found as before, 10 foot 74 parts. As 42.54 vnto 47.13: so 8.75 vnto 9.69: and so are 9.69 vnto 10.74. CHAP. IIII. The vse of the line of Numbers in gauge∣ing of vessels. THe vessels which are here measured, are supposed to be cylinders, or reduced vnto cylinders, by taking the mean betweene the diameter at the head and the diameter at the bongue, after the vsuall maner. 1 Hauing the diameter and the length of a vessell with the content thereof, to find the gauge point. Extend the compasses in the line of numbers to halfe the distance betweene the content and the length of the vessell, the same extent will reach from the diameter to the gauge point. I put this proposition first, because these kind of measures are not alike in all places. Here at London it is said that a wine vessell being 66 inches in length, and 38 inches the dia∣meter, would containe 324 gallons: which if it be true, we
may diuide the space betweene 324 and 66 into two equall parts, and the middle will fall about 146, and the same ex∣tent which reacheth from 324 to 146, wil reach from the dia∣meter 38 vnto 17.15 the gauge point for a gallon of wine or oyle after London measure. The like reason holdeth for the like measures in all other places. 2 Hauing the meane diameter and the length of a vessell, to find the content. Extend the compasses from the gauge point to the meane diameter, the same extent being doubled, shall giue the di∣stance from the length to the content. So the meane diameter of a wine vessell being 20 inches, and the length 25 inches, the content will be found to be 34 gallons after Londō measure. For extend the compasses from 17.25 vnto 20, the same extent wil reach from 25 vnto 29.15, and from 29.15 vnto 34. In like maner if the meane diameter were 16 inches, and the length 23, the content would be found to be about 20 gallons. For the same extent which reacheth back from 17.15 vnto 16, will reach from 23 to 21.45, and from 21.45 vnto 20. So that if the meane diameter shall be 17 inches and 15 centesmes or parts of 100, the number of inches in the length of the vessell, will giue the number of gallons contained in the same vessell: if the diameter shall be more or lesse then 17.15, the content in gallons will be accordingly more or lesse then the length in inches. 3 Hauing the diameter and content, to find the length. Extend the compasses from the diameter to the gauge point, the same extent being doubled shall giue the distance from the content to the length of the vessell. So the gauge point standing as before, if the diameter shal be 38 inches, and the content 324 gallons wine measure, the
length of the vessels will be found about 66 inches. 4 Hauing the length of a vessell and the content, to find the diameter. Extend the compasses to halfe the distance betweene the length and the content, the same extent shall reach from the gauge point to the diameter. So the length being 66 inches, and the content 324 gal∣lons wine measure, the gauge point standing as before, the diameter of the vessell will be found to be about 38 inches. CHAP. V. Containing such Astronomicall propositions as are of ordinary vse in the pra∣ctise of Nauigation. 1 To find the altitude of the Sunne by the shadow of a gnomon set perpendicular to the horizon. As the parts of the shadow are to the parts of the gnomon: So the tangent of 45 gr. to the tangent of the altitude. Extend the compasses in the line of numbers, from the parts of the shadow to the parts of the gnomon; the same extent wil giue the distance from the tangent of 45 gr. to the tangent of the Sunnes altitude. So the gnomon being 36, and the shadow 27, the altitude will be found to be 36 gr. 32 m. Or the gnomon being 27, and the shadow 36, the altitude will be found to be 53 gr. 8 m. Or the shadow being 20, and the gnomon 9, the altitude will be found to be 25 gr. 14 m. as in the eighth Prop. of the vse of the tangent line.
2 Hauing the distance of the Sunne, from the next equi∣noctiall point, to find his declination. As the Radius is in proportion to the sine of the Sunnes greatest declination: So the sine of the Suns distance from the next equi∣noctiall point, to the sine of the declination required. Extend the compasses in the line of sines, from 90 gr. to 23 gr. 30 m. the same extent will giue the distance from the Sunnes place vnto his declination. So the Sunne being either in 29 gr. of ♉, or 1 gr. of ♒, or 1 gr. of ♌, or 29 gr. of ♏, that is 59 gr. distant from the next e∣quinoctiall point, the declination will be found about 20 gr. If the Sunne be so neare the equinoctiall point that his declination fall to be vnder 1 gr. it may be found by the line of numbers. As if the Sunne were in 2 gr. 5 m. of ♈, that is, 125 m. from the equinoctiall point, the former extent of the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of 23 gr. 30 m. will reach in the line of numbers from 125 vnto 50, which shewes the declination to be about 50 m. 3 Hauing the latitude of the place, and the declination of the Sun, to find the time of the Suns rising and setting. As the cotangent of the latitude to the tangent of the Suns declination: So is the Radius to the line of the ascensionall difference betweene the houre of 6 and the time of the Suns rising or setting. Extend the compasses from the tangent of the comple∣ment of the latitude, to the tangent of the declination: the same extent wil reach from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the ascensionall difference. Or extend the compasses from the cotangent of the latitude
to the sine of 90 gr. the same extent will reach from the tan∣gent of the declination to the sine of the ascensionall diffe∣rence. So the latitude being 51 gr. 30 m. Northward, and the de∣clnation 20 gr. the difference of ascension wil be found to be 27 gr. 14 m. which resolued into houres and minutes, doth giue 1 houre and almost 49 m. for the difference betweene the Sunnes rising or setting, and the houre of 6, according to the time of the yeare. 4 Hauing the latitude of the place, and the distance of the Sun from the next equinoctiall point, to find his amplitude. As the cosine of the latitude to the sine of the Suns greatest declination: So the sine of the place of the Sun, to the sine of the amplitude. So the latitude being 51 gr. 30 m. and the place of the Sun in 1 gr. of ♒, that is 59 gr. distant from the next equinoctiall point, the amplitude will be found about 33 gr. 20 m. For ex∣tend the compasses in the line of sines, from 38 gr. 30 m. the sine of the complement of the latitude, vnto 23 gr. 30 m. the sine of the Suns greatest declination; the same extent will reach from 59 gr. vnto 33 gr. 20 m. Or extend them from 38 gr. 30 m. vnto 59 gr. the same extent will reach from 23 gr. 30 m. vnto 33 gr. 20 m. as before. 5 Hauing the latitude of the place, and the declination of the Sun, to find his amplitude. As the cosine of the latitude is to the Radius: So the sine of the declination, to the sine of the amplitude. Extend the compasses from the cosine of the latitude to
the sine of 90 gr. the same extent will reach from the sine of the Suns declination to the sine of the amplitude. Or extend them from the cosine of the latitude to the sine of the declination, the same extent will reach from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the amplitude. So the latitude being 51 gr. 30 m. and the declination 20 gr. the amplitude will be found to be 33 gr. 20 m. 6 Hauing the latitude of the place, and the declination of the Sun, to find the time when the Sun cometh to be due East or West. As the tangent of the latitude, is to the tangent of the declination: So the Radius to the cosine of the houre from the meridian. Extend the compasses from the tangent of the latitude to the tangent of the declination; the same extent will reach from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the complement of the houre. Or extend them from the tangent of the latitude to the sine of 90 gr; the same extent will reach from the tangent of the declination to the sine of the complement of the houre. So the latitude being 51 gr. 30 m. and the declination 20 gr. the Sunne will be 73 gr. 10 m: that is 4 houres and 53 m. frō the meridian, when he cometh to be in the East or West. 7 Hauing the latitude of the place, and the declination of the Sun, to find what altitude the Sun shall haue, when he cometh to be due East or West. As the sine of the latitude is to the sine of the declination: So the Radius to the sine of the altitude. Extend the compasses in the line of lines from the latitude
to the sine of the declination, the same extent will reach from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the altitude. Or extend them from the sine of the latitude to the sine of 90 gr; the same extent will reach from the sine of the de∣clination to the sine of the altitude. So the latitude being 51 gr. 30 m. and the declination 20 gr. the altitude will be found about 25 gr. 55 m. 8 Hauing the latitude of the place, and the declination of the Sun, to find what altitude the Sun shall haue at the houre of six. As the Radius is in proportion to the sine of the sine of the declination: So the sine of the latitude to the sine of the altitude. Extend the compasses in the line of sines, from 90 gr. to the declination; the same extent will reach from the latitude to the altitude. Or extend them from 90 gr. to the latitude, the same ex∣tent will hold from the declination to the altitude. So the latitude being 51 gr. 30 m. and the declination of the Sunne 20 gr. the altitude of the Sun will be found to be about 15 gr. 30 m. 9 Hauing the latitude of the place, and the declination of the Sun, to find what azimuth the Sun shall haue at the houre of six. As the cosine of the latitude is to the Radius: So the cotangent of the Suns declination, to the tangent of the azimuth from the North part of the meridian.
So the latitude being 51 gr. 30 m. and the declination 20 gr. the azimuth will be found to be 77 gr. 14 m. For extend the compasses in the line of sines, from 38 gr. 30 m. to 90 gr. the same extent will reach from the tangent of 70 gr. to the tan∣gent of 77 gr. 14 m. 10 Hauing the latitude of the place, and the declination of the Sun, and the altitude of the Sun, to find the azimuth. First consider the declination of the Sunne, whether it be toward the North or the South, so haue you his distance from your pole: then adde this distance, the complement of his altitude, and the complement of your latitude, all three together, and from halfe the summe subtract the distance from the pole, and note the difference. 1 As the Radius is in proportion to the cosine of the altitude: So the cosine of the latitude, to a fourth sine. 2 As this fourth sine is to the sine of the halfe summe: So the sine of the difference, to a seuenth sine. Then find a meane proportionall betweene this seuenth sine and the Radius, this meane shall be the sine of the com∣plement of halfe the azimuth from the North part of the me∣ridian. Suppose the declination of the Sun being knowne by the time of the yeare to be 20 gr. Southward, the altitude aboue the horizon found by obseruation 12 gr. and the latitude Northwards 51 gr. 30 m. it were required to find the azimuth. The declination is Southward, and therefore the distance from the pole 110 gr; then turning the altitude and latitude vnto their complements, I adde them all three together, and from halfe the summe subtract the distance from the pole,
noting the difference after this maner. Declin. South 20 gr. 0 m. The distance 110 gr. 0 m. Altitude 12 0 The complement 78 0 Latitude N. 51 30 The complement 38 30   The summe of all three 226 30   The halfe summe 113 15   The difference 3 15 This done, I come to the Staffe, and extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of 78 gr. and find the same extent to reach from the sine of 38 gr. 30 m. vnto 37 gr. 30 m Or if I extend them from 90 gr. to 38 gr. 30 m. the same ex∣tent doth reach from 78 gr. vnto 37 gr. 30 m. which is the fourth sine required. Then I extend the compasses againe, from this fourth sine of 37 gr. 30 m. vnto the sine of the halfe summe 113 gr. 15 m. that is to the sine of 66 gr. 45 m. (for after 90 gr. the sine of 80 gr. doth stand for a sine of 100 gr. and the sine of 70 gr. for a sine of 110 gr. and so the rest for those which are their complements to 180 gr.) and this second extent doth reach from the sine of the difference 3 gr. 15 m. to the sine of 4 gr. 54 m. Or if I extend them from the fourth sine of 37 gr. 30 m. to the sine of the difference 3 gr. 15 m. the same extent will reach from the sine of the halfe summe 113 gr. 15 m. vnto 4 gr. 54 m. which is the seuenth sine required. Lastly, I diuide the space betweene this seuenth sine of 4 gr. 54 m. and the sine of 90 gr. into two equall parts, and I find the meane proportionall sine to fall on 17 gr. whose comple∣ment is 73 gr; the double of 73 gr. is 146 gr. and such is the azimuth required. Or hauing found the seuenth sine to be 4 gr. 54 m. I might looke ouer against it, in the line of versed sines, and there I should find 146 gr. for the azimuth from the North part of the meridian; and the complement of 146 gr. to a semicircle being 34 gr. will giue the azimuth from the South part of the meridian. But if it were required to find the azimuth in the same la∣titude of 51 gr. 30 m. Northward, with the same altitude of
12 gr. and like declination of 20 gr. to the Northward, it would be found to be onely 72 gr. 52 m. though the maner of worke be the same as before. Declin. North 20 gr. 0 m The distance is 70 gr. 0 m. Altitude 12 0 The complement 78 0 Latitud. North 51 30 The complement 38 0   The summe of all three 186 30   The halfe summe 93 15   The difference 23 15 Here as the Radius is to the sine of 78 gr: so the sine of 38 gr. 30 m. to the sine of 37 gr. 30 m. which is the fourth sine, and the same as before. Then as this fourth sine of 37 gr. 30 m. is to the sine of 93 gr. 15 m: so the sine of 23 gr. 15 m. to the sine of 40 gr. 20 m. which is the seuenth sine. The halfe way betweene this seuenth sine and the sine of 90 gr. doth fall at 53 gr. 34 m. whose complement is 36 gr. 26 m; and the double of that is 72 gr. 52 m. the azimuth requi∣red. Or I may find this same azimuth in the line of versed sines, ouer against the seuenth sine of 40 gr. 20 m. 11 Hauing the latitude of the place, the declination of the Sun, and the altitude of the Sun, to find the houre of the day. Adde the complement of the Suns altitude, and the di∣stance of the Sun from the pole, and the complement of your latitude, all three together, and from halfe the summe sub∣tract the complement of the altitude, and note the diffe∣rence. 1 As the Radius is in proportion to the sine of the Suns distance from the pole: So the sine of the complement of the latitude, to a fourth sine.
2 As this fourth sine is to the sine of the halfe summe: So the sine of the difference to a seuenth sine. The meane proportionall betweene this seuenth sine and the sine of 90 gr. will be the sine of the complement of halfe the houre from the meridian. Thus in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. the declination of the Sun being 20 gr. Northward, and the altitude 12 gr. I might find the Sun to be 95 gr. 52 m. from the meridian. Altitude 12 gr. 0 m. The complement is 78 gr. 0 m. Declin. North 20 0 the dist. from the pole 70 0 Latitude 51 30 the complement is 38 30   The summe of all three 186 30   The halfe summe 93 15   The difference 15 15 Here as the Radius is to the sine of 70 gr. So the sine of 38 gr. 30 m. to the sine of 35 gr. 48 m. As this sine of 35 gr. 48 m. is to the sine of 93 gr. 15 m. So the sine of 15 gr. 15 m. to the sine of 26 gr. 40 m. The halfe may between this seuenth sine of 26 gr. 40 m. and the sine of 90 gr. doth fall at 42 gr. 4 m. whose complement is 47 gr. 56 m. and the double of that, 95 gr. 52 m. which con∣uerted into houres, doth giue 6 houres and almost 24 m. from the meridian. Or I might find these 95 gr. 52 m. in the line of versed sines, ouer against the seuenth sine of 26 gr. 40 m. 12 Hauing the azimuth, the Suns altitude, and the declination, to find the houre of the day. As the cosine of the declination is to the sine of the azimuth: So the cosine of the altitude to the sine of the houre.
Thus the declination being 20 gr. Southward, the altitude 12 gr. and the azimuth found by the tenth Prop. 146 gr. I might find the time to be 35 gr. 36 m. that is 2 houres 22 m. from the meridian. 13 Hauing the houre of the day, the Sunnes altitude, and the declination, to find the azimuth. As the cosine of the altitude is to the sine of the houre: So the cosine of the declination, to the sine of the azimuth. So the altitude of the Sun being 12 gr. and the declination 10 gr. Southward, and the angle of the houre 35 gr. 36 m. I should find the azimuth to be 34 gr. And so it is if it be rec∣koned from the South; but 146 gr. if it be taken from the North part of the meridian. 14 Hauing the distance of the Sun from the next equi∣noctiall point, to find his right ascension. As the Radius to the cosine of the greatest declination: So the tangent of the distance, to the tangent of the right ascension. So the Sun being in the first degree of ♒, that is 59 gr. di∣stant from the next equinoctiall point, and the greatest de∣clination 23 gr. 30 m. the right ascension will be found to be 56 gr. 46 m. short of the beginning of ♈, and therefore 303 gr. 14 m. 15 Hauing the declination of the Sun, to find his right ascension. As the tangent of the greatest declination it to the tangent of the declination giuen:
So the Radius to the sine of the right ascension. So the greatest declination being 23 gr. 30 m. and the de∣clination of the Sun giuen 20 gr. the right ascension will be found about 56 gr. 50 m. These are such Astronomicall propositions as I take to be vsefull for Sea-men. For the first and second will help them to find their latitude; the third to find the Suns rising and setting; the 4.5.6.7.8.9.10.13. Prop. to finde the variation of their compasse; the 11 and 12 Prop. to find the houre of the day; and the two last toward the finding of the houre of the night. For hauing the latitude of the place, with the decli∣nation and altitude of any starre, they may find the houre of the starre from the meridian, as in the 11 Prop. Then com∣pring the right ascension of the starre with the right ascen∣sion of the Sunne, they may haue the houre of the night. All these propositions and such others may be wrought so by the tables of sines and tangents. For where foure num∣bers do hold in proportion; as the first to the second, so the third to the fourth; there if we multiply the second into the third, and diuide the product by the first, the quotient will giue the fourth required. As in the example of the last Prop. where the delination being giuen, it was required to find the right ascension. The tangent of 20 gr. the declination giuen is 3639702, which being multiplied by the Radius, the product is 36397020000000, and this diuided by 4348124 the tangent of 23 gr. 30 m. the quotient is 8370741 the sine of 56 gr. 50 m. for the right ascension re∣quired. Or if any will vse my tables of artificiall sines and tangents, they may adde the second and the third together, and from the summe subtract the first, the remainder will giue the fourth required. And so my tangent of 20 gr. is 9561.0638, which being added to the Radius, makes 19561.0658; from this if they subtract 9638.3019 the tangent of 23 gr. 30 m. they shall find the remainder to be 9922.7639, which in my
Canon is the sine of 56 gr. 49 m. 56 secōds; and such is the right ascension required, if it be reckoned from the next equino∣ctiall point. The like reason holdeth for all other Astronomicall pro∣positions, as I will farther shew by those two examples which I gaue before for the finding of the azimuth in the 10 Prop. because they are thought to be harder then the rest, and re∣quire three operations. In the first example. Declin. South 20 gr. 0 m. The distance 110 gr. 0 m. Altitude 12 0 the complement 78 0 Latitude Nor. 51 30 the complement 38 30   The summe of all three 226 30   The halfe summe 113 15   The difference 3 15 The first operation will be to finde the fourth sine; and that is done by adding the sine of the complement of the al∣titude to the sine of the complement of the latitude, and subtracting the Radius: so adding 9990.4044 the sine of 78 gr. vnto 9794.1495 the sine of 38 gr. 30 m. the summe wll be 19784.5539. And the Radius being subtracted, the remain∣der 9784.5539 is the fourth sine, and belongeth to 37 gr. 30 m. The second operation will be to find the seuenth sine; and that is done by adding the sine of the halfe summe to the sine of the difference, and subtracting the fourth sine. So the halfe summe being 113 gr. 15 m. I take his complement to a semicircle, and so find his sine to be 9963.2168, to which I adde 8753.5278, the sine of the difference 3 gr. 15 m; and the summe is 18716.7446. From this I take the fourth sine 9784.5539, and the remainder will be 8932.1907, which is the seuenth sine, and belongeth to 4 gr. 54 m. The third operation will be to finde the meane proportio∣nall sine betweene the seuenth sine and the Radius. This in common arithmetique is done by multiplying the two ex∣tremes, and taking the square roote of the product. As in
finding a meane proportionall betweene 4 and 9, we mul∣tiply 4 into 9, and the product is 36, whose square root is 6, the meane proportionall between 4 and 9. But here it is done by adding the sine and the Radius, and taking the halfe of them. So the summe of the last seuenth sine and the Radius is 18932.1907 and the halfe of that 9466.0953, which is the meane proportionall sine required, and belongeth to 17 gr. whose complement is 73 gr. and the double of that 146 gr. the same azimuth as before. In the second example. Declin. North 20 gr. 0 m. The distance 70 gr. 0 m. Altitude 12 0 the complement 78 0 Latitud. North 51 30 the complement 38 30   The summe of all three 186 30   The halfe summe 93 15   The difference 23 15 The first operation will be to finde the fourth sine; and ledgehat is here 9784.5539, as in the former example. The second operation wil be to find the seuenth sine; and ledgeo here the sine of the halfe summe 93 gr. 15 m. being the ledgeame with the sine of 86 gr. 45 m. his complement to 180 gr. I ledgend it to be 9999.3009, to which I adde 9596.3153 the sine ledgef the difference 23 gr. 15 m. and the summe is 19595.6162. ledgerom this I take the fourth sine 9784.5539, and the remain∣ledgeer will be 9811.0623 for the seuenth sine, and belongeth to ledge0 gr. 20 m. The third operation will be to find the meane proportio∣ledgeall sine betweene the seuenth sine and the Radius. And so ledgeere the Radius being added to the seuenth sine, the summe ledgeill be 19811.0623, and the halfe of that 9905.5311 doth ledgeiue the meane proportionall sine belonging to about 53 gr. 4 m. whose complement is 36 gr. 26 m. & the double of that 2 gr. 52 m. the same azimuth as before. I haue set downe these three examples thus particularly, ledgehat I might shew the agreement between the Staffe and the ledgeanon. But otherwise I might deliuer both the precept and
the worke, for the two last, more compendiously. For gene∣rally in all sphericall triangles, where three sides are knowne, and an angle required, make that side which is opposite to the angle required, to be the base; and gather the summe, the halfe summe, and the difference as before. As the rectangle contained vnder the sines of the sides, is to the square of the whole sine: So the rectangle contained vnder the sines of the halfe summe and the difference, to the square of the cosine of halfe the angle. Then for the worke, we may for the most part leaue out the two last figures; and if they be aboue 50, put an vnitie to the sixt place, after this maner. The second example. 70 gr. 0 m     78 0 9990 40 38 30 9794 15 186 30 19784 55 93 15 9999 30 23 15 9596 32     20000 00     39595 62     19811 07 36 26 9905 53 72 52     53 gr. 34 m. 107 8 Or for such numbers as are to be subtracted, I may take them out of the Radius, and write downe the residue, and then adde them together with the rest. As in the same se∣cond example, the sines of 78 gr. and of 38 gr. 30 m. being the numbers to be subtracted; if I take 9990.4044 the sine of 78 gr. out of the Radius 10000 0000, the residue is 9.5956: and so the residue of 9794.1495 is 205.8505 Wherefore in stead of subtracting those sines, I may adde these residues after this maner:
70 gr. 0 m. 78 0 38 30 186 30 93 15 23 15 36 26 72 52 9 59 205 85 9999 30 9596 32 19811 06 9905 53 53 gr. 34 m. 107 8 Hauing these meanes to find the Sunnes azimuth, we may compare it with the magneticall azimuth, and so finde the variation of the needle. geometric illustration For let the circle AMB, drawne on the center Z, be a plane, parallell to the horizon; A the point whereon the Sun beareth from vs, M the North point of the magneticall nee∣dle, and the angle AZM the magneticall azimuth. If we find the Sunnes azimuth as before, to be 72 gr. 52 m. from the North to the Westward, we may allow so many degrees from A vnto N, and so we haue the true North point from the meridian, and consequently the East, South, and West points of the horizon; and the distance betweene N and M shall be
the variation of the needle. So that if the magneticall azi∣muth AZM shall be 84 gr. 7 m. and the Suns azimuth AZN 72 gr. 52 m. then must NZM the difference betweene the two meridians, giue the variation to be 11 gr. 15 m. as Mr. Bou∣rough heretofore found it by his obseruations at Limehouse in the yeare 1580. But if the magneticall azimuth AZM shall be 79 gr. 7 m. and the Suns azimuth AZN 72 gr. 52 m. then shall the variation NZM be only 6 gr. 15 m. as I haue some∣times found it of late. Herevpon I enquired after the place where Mr. Bourough obserued, and went to Limehouse with some of my friends, and tooke with vs a quadrant of 3 foote semidiameter, and two needles, the one aboue 6 inches, and the other 10 inches long, where I made the semidiameter of my horizontall plane AZ 12 inches: and toward night the 13 of Iune 1622, I made obseruation in seuerall parts of the ground, and found as followeth. Alt. ☉ AZM AZN Variat Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr. M. 19 0 82 2 75 52 6 10 18 5 80 50 74 44 6 6 17 34 80 0 74 6 5 54 17 0 79 15 73 20 5 55 16 18 78 12 72 32 5 40 16 0 77 50 72 10 5 40 20 10 71 2 64 49 6 13 9 52 70 12 64 25 5 47
CHAP. VI. geometric illustration Containing such nauticall questions, as are of ordinary vse, concerning longitude, latitude, Rumb, and distance. 1 To keep an account of the ships way. THe way that the ship maketh, may be knowne to an old sea-man by experience, by others it may be found for some small por∣tion of time, either by the log line, or by the di∣stance of two knowne markes on the ships side. The time in which it maketh this way, may be measured by a watch, or by a glasse. Then as long as the wind continueth at the same stay, it fol∣loweth by proportion, As the time giuen is to an houre: So the way made, to an houres way. Suppose the time to be 15 seconds, which make a quarter of a minute, and the way of the ship 88 feet: then because there are 3600 seconds in an houre, I may extend the compasses in the line of numbers, from 15 vnto 3600, and the same extent will reach from 88 vnto 21120. Or I may extend them from 15 vnto 88, and this extent will reach from 3600 vnto 21120; which shewes that an houres way came to 21120 feete. But this were an vnnecessary businesse, to hear∣ken after feet or fadoms. It sufficeth our sea-men to find the way of their ship in leagues or miles. And they say that there are 5 feet in a pace, 1000 paces in a mile, and 60 miles in a degree, and therefore 300000 feete in a degree. Yet compa∣ring
seuerall obseruations, and their measures with our feete vsuall about London, I find that we may allow 352000 feete to a degree; and then if I extend the compasses in the line of numbers from 352000 vnto 21120, I shall find the same extent to reach from 20 leagues the measure of one degree, to 1.2, and from 60 miles to 3.6; which shewes the houres way to be 1 league and 2 tenths of a league, or 3 miles and 6 tenths of a mile. But to auoid these fractions and other tedious reductions, I suppose it would be more easie to keep this account of the ships way (as also of the difference of latitude, and the diffe∣rence of longitude) by degrees and parts of degrees, allow∣ing 100 parts to each degre, which we may therefore call by the name of centosmes. Neither would this be hard to con∣ceiue. For if 100 such parts do make a degree, then shall 50 parts be equall to 30 minutes, as 30 minutes are equall to 10 leagues. And 5 parts shall be equall to 3 minutes, as 3 minutes are equall to 1 league. And so the same extent as before, will reach from 100 parts vnto 6; which shewes that the houres way required is 6 cent. such as 100 do make a degree, and 5 do make an ordinary league. This might also be done at one operation. For vpon these suppositions, diuide 44 feet into 45 lengths, and set as many of them as you may conueniently betweene two markes on the ships side, and note the seconds of time in which the ship goeth these lengths: so the lengths diuided by the time, shall giue the cent. which the ship goeth in an houre. Suppose the distance betweene the two markes to be 60 lengths (which are 58 feet and 8 inches) and let the time be 12 seconds: extend the compasses from 12 to 1, in the line of numbers; so the same extent will reach from 60 vnto 5. Or ex∣tend them from 12 vnto 60, and the same extent will reach from 1 vnto 5. This shewes that the ships way is according to 5 cent. in an houre. This may be found yet more easily, if the log line shall be∣fitted to the time. As if the time be 45 seconds, the log line may haue a knot at the end of euery 44 feete; then doth the
ship run so many cent. in an houre, as there are knots vered out in the space of 45 seconds. If 30 seconds do seeme to be a more conuenient time, the log line may haue a knot at the end of euery 29 feet and 4 inches; and then also the centesmes will be as many as the knots. Or if the knots be made to any set number of feet, the time may be fitted vnto the distance. As if the knots be made at the end of euery 24 feet, the glasse may be made 24 seconds and somewhat more then an halfe of a second; and so these knots will shew the cent. If there be 5 knots vered out in a glasse, then 5 cent; if 6 knots, then the ship goeth 6 cent. in the space of an houre; and so in the rest. For vpon this supposition, the proportion between the time and the feet will be as 45 vnto 44. But according to the com∣mon supposition it should seeme to be as 45 vnto 37 ½, or in lesser termes as 6 vnto 5. Those which are vpon the place, may make proofe of both, and follow that which agrees best with their experience. 2 By the latitude and difference of longitude, to find the distance vpon a course of East and West. Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the sine of the complement of the latitude; the same extent shal reach in the line of numbers from the difference of longitude to the distance. So the measure of one degree in the equator, being 100 cent. the distance belonging to one degree of longitude in the latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. will be found about 62 cent. and ¼. Or if the measure of a degree be 60 miles, the distance will be found about 37 miles and ⅓. If the measure be 20 leagues, then almost 12 leagues and ½. If the measure be 17 ½, as in the Spanish charts, then somewhat lesse then 11 leagues sai∣ling vpon this parallell, will giue an alteration of one degree of longitude.
geometric illustration 3 By the latitude and distance vpon a course of East or West, to find the difference of longitude. Extend the compasses from the sine of the complement of the latitude, to the sine of 90 gr; the same extent wil reach in the line of numbers from the distance to the difference of longitude. So the distance vpon a course of East or West, in the lati∣tude of 51 gr. 30 m. being 100 cent. the difference of longitude will be found 1.60, which make one degree and 60 centesmes or 1 gr. 36 m. Or if it be 60 miles, the difference of longitude wil be 96, which also make 1 gr. 36 m. as before.
4 The longitude and latitude of two places being giuen, to find the Rumb leading from the one to the other. Extend the compasses in the line of numbers from the diffe∣rence of latitudes to the difference of longitudes; the same extent will giue the distance from the tangent of 45 gr. vnto the tangent of the Rumb, according to the proiection of the common sea-chart. So the latitude of the first place being 50 gr. the latitude of the second 52 gr. 30 m. and the difference of longitude 6 gr. the Rumb will be found to be about 67 gr. 23 m. which is neare the inclination of the sixth Rumb to the meridian. But this Rumb so found, is alwayes greater then it should be, and therefore to be limited; which may be done sufficiently for the Sea-mans vse, after this maner: Extend the compasses either from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the sine of the complement of the middle latitude, the same extent will reach frō the tangent of the Rumb before found, to the tangent of the Rumb limited. Or else extend them from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the tan∣gent of the Rumb before found; the same extent will reach from the sine of the complement of the middle latitude, vnto the tangent of the Rumb limited. So the middle latitude between 50 gr. and 52 gr. 30 m. be∣ing 51 gr. 15 m. and the Rumb before found 67 gr. 23 m. the Rumb limited will be found to be about 56 gr. 20 m. which is but fiue minutes more then the inclination of the fift Rumb to the meridian. 2 This Rumb may be found by the help of the meridian line vpon the Staffe. For if I take the difference of latitude out of the meridian line from 50 gr. vnto 52 gr. 30 m. and mea∣sure it in his equinoctiall, or at the beginning of the meridian line, I shall find it there to be equal to 4 gr. Wherefore I work as if the difference of latitude were 4 gr. and extend the com∣passes in the line of numbers from 4 vnto 6: so shall I finde
the same extent to reach from the tangent of 45 gr. vnto the tangent of 56 gr. 20 m. and this is the inclination of the Rumb required. 5 By the Rumb and both latitudes, to find the distance vpon the Rumb. Extend the compasses from the sine of the complement of the Rumb, vnto the sine of 90 gr. the same extent in the line of numbers shall reach from the difference of latitude vnto the distance vpon the Rumb. So the latitude of the first place being 50 gr. the latitude of the second 52 gr. 30 m. and the Rumb the fift from the me∣ridian. If I extend the compasses from 33 gr. 45 m. vnto the sine of 90 gr. I shall find the same extent in the line of num∣bers to reach from 2 gr. 50 cent. to 4 gr. 50 cent. and such is the distance required. 6 By the distance and both latitudes to find the Rumb. Extend the compasses in the line of numbers from the di∣stance vnto the difference of latitudes; the same extent will reach in the line of sines, from 90 gr. vnto the complement of the Rumb. So the one place being in the latitude of 50 gr. the other in the latitude of 52 gr. 30 m. and the distance between them 4 gr. 50 cent. If I extend the compasses from 4.50 vnto 2.50 in the line of numbers, I shall find the same extent to reach from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the complement of 56 gr. 15 m. and such is the inclination of the Rumb required. 7 By one latitude, Rumb, and distance, to find the difference of latitudes. Extend the compasses in the line of sines, from 90 gr. vnto the complement of the Rumb; the same extent in the line of
numbers, will reach from the distance, vnto the difference of latitudes. So the lesser altitude being 50 gr. and the distance 4 gr. 50 cent. vpon the fifth Rumb from the meridian: if I extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. to 33 gr. 45 m. I shall finde the same extent to reach from 4.50 in the line of numbers, vn∣to 2.50; and therefore the second latitude to be 52 gr. 30 m. 8 By the Rumb and both latitudes, to find the difference of longitude. Extend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. vnto the tangent of the Rumb; the same extent will reach in the line of numbers from the difference of latitudes vnto the diffe∣rence of longitude, according to the proiection of the com∣mon sea-chart. So the first latitude being 50 gr. and the second 52 gr. 30 m. and the Rumb the fifth from the meridian: if I extend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. vnto 56 gr. 15 m. I shall find the same extent to reach from 2.50 in the line of num∣bers to about 3.75, which make 3 gr. 45 m. But this difference of longitude so found, is alwayes lesser then it should be, and therefore to be enlarged, which may be done sufficiently for the sea-mens vse, after this maner: Extend the compasses from the sine of the complement of the middle latitude, vnto the sine of 90 gr. the same extent will reach in the line of numbers from the difference of lon∣gitude before found, vnto the difference of longitude in∣larged. So the middle latitude in this example being 51 gr. 15 m. and the difference of longitude before found 3 gr. 75 cent. the difference of longitude inlarged will be found about 5 gr. 99 cent. which are neare 6 gr. 2 This difference of longitude may be found by help of the meridian line vpon the Staffe. For if I take the proper diffe∣rence of latitude out of the meridian line, and measure it in his equinoctiall, or at the beginning of the meridian line,
I shall find it to be equall to foure of those degrees. Where∣fore hauing extended the compasses as before from the tan∣gent of 45 gr. vnto the tangent of 56 gr. 15 m. the same ex∣tent will reach from 4.00 in the line of numbers, vnto 5.99: which shewes the difference of longitude to be about 5 gr. 99 cent. or about halfe a minute short of six degrees. 9 By the Rumb and both latitudes, to finde the distance belonging to the chart of Mercators proiection. Take the proper difference of latitudes out of the meri∣dian line of the chart, and measure it in his equinoctiall, or one of the parallels, and it will there giue the difference of latitudes inlarged. Then extend the compasses from the sine of the complement of the Rumb vnto the sine of 90 gr. the same extent will reach in the line of numbers, from the lati∣tude inlarged, vnto the distance required. Or extend them from the complement of the Rumb to the latitude inlarged, the same extent will reach from 90 gr. vnto the distance. For example, let the place giuen be A in the latitude of 50 gr. D in the latitude of 52 gr. 30 m. AM the difference of latitudes, and the Rumb MAD the fifth from the meri∣dian. First I take out AM the difference of latitudes, and measure it in AE one of the parallels of the equinoctiall; I find it to be very neare 4 gr: this is the difference of latitudes inlarged. Then if I extend the compasses from the sine of 33 gr. 45 m. the complement of the fifth Rumb vnto the sine 90 gr. I shall find the same extent to reach in the line of num∣bers from 4.00 vnto 7.20. And this is the distance belonging to the chart. Wherefore I take out these 7 gr. 20 cent. out of the scale of the parallell AE, and pricke it downe vpon the Rumb from A vnto D, where it meeteth with the parallell of the second latitude. Lastly, I measure it in the meridian line, setting one foote of the compasses as much below the lesser latitude as the other aboue the greater latitude, and find it to be 4 gr. 50 cent. which is the same distance that I found before in the 5. Prop.
10 By the way of the ship, and two angles of position, to find the distance betweene the ship and the land. The way of the ship may be knowne as in the first Prop. The angles may be obserued either by the Staffe, or by a nee∣dle set on the Staffe. For example, suppose that being at A, I had sight of the land at B, the ship going East Northeast from A toward C, and the angle of the ships position BAC being 43 gr. 20 m: and after that the ship had made 10 cent. or 2 leagues of way from A vnto D, I obserued againe, and found the second angle of the ships position BDC to be 58 gr. or the inward angle BDA to be 122 gr. then may I finde the third angle ABD to be 14 gr. 40 m. either by subtraction or by complement vnto 180 gr. geometric illustration In this and the like cases, I haue a right line triangle, in which there is one side and three angles knowne, and it is required to finde the other two sides and the Canon for it, is this:
As the sine of the angle opposite to the knowne side, is to that knowne side: So the sine of the angle opposite to the side required, is to the side required. Wherefore I extend the compasses from 14 gr. 40 m. in the fines, to 10 in line of numbers, and this extent doth reach from 58 gr. to 33 ½, and such is the distance between A and B, and it reacheth from 43 gr. 20 m. vnto 27 in the line of numbers; and such is the distance from D to B. These two distances being knowne, I may set out the land vpon the chart. For hauing set downe the way of the ship from A to D by that which I shewed before in the vse of the meridian line, I may by the same reason set off the distance AB and DB, which meeting in the point B, shall there re∣semble the land required. 11 By knowing the distance between two places on the land, and how they beare one from the other, and hauing the angles of position at the ship to find the distance betweene the ship and the land. If it may be conueniently, let the angle of position be ob∣serued at such time as the ship cometh to be right ouer a∣gainst one of the places. As if the places be East and West, seeke to bring one of them South or North from you, and then obserue the angle of position: so shall you haue a right line triangle, with one side and three angles, whereby to find the two other sides. First you haue the angle of position at the ship; then a right angle at the place that is ouer against you; and the third angle at the other place is the complement to the angle of position. Wherefore As the sine of the angle of position, is to the distance betweene the two places: So the cosine of the angle of position, to the distance betweene the ship and the nearer place.
And so is the sine of 90 gr. to the distance from the ship to the farther place. So the places being 15 cent. or three leagues one from the other, and the angle of position 29 gr; the nearer distance will be found about 27 cent. and the farther distance about 31 cent. Or howsoeuer the angle of position were obserued, the distance betweene the ship and the land may be found gene∣rally as in this example: Suppose A and D were two head lands knowne to be East Northeast, and West Southwest, 10 cent. or two leagues one from the other; and that the ship being at B, I obserued the angle of the ships position DBA, and found it to be 14 gr. 40 m. and that D did beare 9 gr. 30 m. and A 24 gr. 10 m. from the meridian BS, this example would be like the for∣mer. For if the angle SBD be 9 gr. 30 m. from the South to the Westward, then shall NDB be 9 gr. 30 m. from the North to the Eastward. Take these 9 gr. 30 m. out of the angle NDE which is 67 gr. 30 m. because the two head lands lie East Northeast, and there will remaine 58 gr. for the angle BDE, and the inward angle BDA shall be 122 gr. Take these two angles ABD and BDA out of 180 gr. and there wil remaine 43 gr 20 m. for the third angle BAD. Wherefore here also are three angles and one side, by which I may find the two other sides, as in the last Prop. These propositions thus wrought by the Staffe, are such as I thought to be vsefull for sea-men, and those that are skil∣full may apply the example to many others. Those that be∣gin, and are willing to practise, may busie themselues with this which followeth. Suppose foure ports, L, N, O, P; of which L is in the lati∣tude of 50 gr. N is North from L 200 leagues or 1000 cen∣tesmes; O West from L 1000 cent. and P West from N 1000 cent: so that L and O will be in the same latitude of 50 gr. N and P both in the latitude of 60 gr. Then let two ships depart from L, the one to touch at O, the other at N,
and then both to meet at P, there to lade, and from thence to returne the nearest way vnto L. Here many questions may be proposed. 1 What is the longitude of the port at O? 2 What is the longitude of P? And why O and P should not be in the same longitude? 3 What is the Rumb from O vnto P? 4 What is the distance from O vnto P? And why the way should be more from L vnto P, going by O, then by N? 5 What is the Rumb from P vnto L? 6 What is the distance from P vnto L? 7 What is the Rumb from N vnto O? 8 What is the distance from N vnto O? And why it should not be the like Rumb and distance from N vnto O, as from P vnto L? These questions well considered, and either resolued by the Staffe, or pricked downe on the chart, and compared with the globe and the common Sea-chart, will giue some light to the direction of a course, and reduction of places to their due longitude, which are now fouly distorted in the common Sea-charts.
An Appendix concerning The description and vse of an instrument, made in forme of a Crosse-bow, for the more ea∣sie finding of the latitude at Sea. THe former Prop. suppose the latitude to be knowne, I will here shew how it may be easily obserued. Vpon the center A, and semidiameter AB, describe an ark of a circle SBN. The same semidiameter will set of 60 gr. from B vnto S for the South end, and other 60 gr. from B vn∣to N for the North end of the Bow: so the whole Bow will containe 120 gr. the third part of a circle. Let it therefore be diuided into so many degrees, and each degree subdiuided into six parts, that each part may be ten minutes: but let the numbers set to it be 5. 10. 15. vnto 90 gr. and then againe 5. 10. 15. vnto 25. that 55 may fall in the middle, as in this fi∣gure. geometric illustration The Bow being thus diuided and numbred, you may se the moneths and dayes of each moneth vpon the backe, and
such starres as are fit for obseruation vpon the side of the Bow. If you desire to make vse of it in North latitude, you may number 23 gr. 30 m. from 90 towards the end of the Bowe at N, and there place the tenth day of Iune. And 23 gr. 30 m. from 90 toward S; and there at 66 gr. 30 m. place the tenth day of December. And so the rest of the dayes of the yeare, according to the declination of the Sunne at the same dayes. The starres may be placed in like maner according to their declinations. Arcturus at 21 gr. 10 m. The Buls eye 15 42 The Lions heart 13 45 The Vultures heart 7 58 The little dog 6 9 from 90 toward the North end of the Bow at N. Then for Southerne starres, you may number their declination from 90 toward the South end of the Bow at S. As first the three starres in Orions gir∣dle, The first at 0 gr. 37 m. The second 1 28 The third 2 11 The Hydra's heart 7 5 The virgins spike 9 10 The great dog 16 12 The Scorpions heart 25 30 Fomahant 31 30 And so the South crowne, the triangle, the clouds, the crosiers, or what other starres you think fit for obseruation. This I call the fore side of the Bow. If you desire to make vse of it in South latitude, you may turne the Bow, and diuide the backe side of it, and number it in like maner; and then put on the moneths and dayes of the yeare, placing the tenth of December at the South end, and the tenth of Iune toward the middle of the Bow, and the rest of the dayes according to the Sunnes declination as before.
The chiefest of the Northrne starres may here be placed in like maner according to their declination, Anno 1625. The pole starre at 87 gr. 20 m. The first guard 75 45 The second guard 73 25 The great Beares backe 63 45 In the great Beares taile first second third 58 2 57 55 51 15 The side of Perseus 48 28 The goate 45 33 The taile of the swan 44 0 The head of Medusa 39 30 The harp 38 30 Castor 32 38 Pollux 28 52 The North crowne 28 0 The Rams head 21 40 Arcturus 21 10 The Buls eye 15 42 The Lions heart 13 45 The Vultures heart 7 58 Orions right shoulder 7 17 Orions left shoulder 5 57 And so any other starre, whose declination is knowne vnto you, which being done. The vse of this Bow may be 1 The day of the moneth being knowne, to finde the declination of the Sunne. 2 The declination being giuen, to finde the day of the moneth. These two Prop. depend on the making of the Bow. If the day be knowne, looke it out in the backe of the Bow: so the declination will appeare in the side. Or if the declination be knowne, the day of the moneth is set ouer against it. As if the day of the moneth were the 14 of Iuly: looke for
this day in the backe of the Bow, and you shall find it ouer a∣gainst 20 gr. of North declination. If the declination giuen be 20 gr. to the Southward, you shal find the day to be either the eleuenth of Nouember, or the eleuenth of Ianuary. 3 To find the altitude of the Sunne or starres. Here it is fit to haue two running sights, which may be easily moued on the backe of the Bow. The vpper sight may be set either to 60 gr. or to 70 gr. or to 80 gr. as you shall find to be most conuenient: the other sight may be set on, to any place betweene the middle and the other end of the Bow. Then with the one hand hold the center of the Bow to your eye, so as you may see the Sunne or starre by the vpper sight, and with the other hand moue the lower sight vp or downe vntill you haue brought one of the edges of it to be euen with the horizon (as when you obserue with the Crosse∣staffe:) so the degrees contained betweene that edge and the vpper sight, shall shew the altitude required. Thus if the vpper sight shal be at 80 gr. and the lower sight at 50 gr. the altitude required is 30 gr. 4 To find any North latitude, by knowing either the day of the moneth, or the declination of the Sunne. As oft as you are to obserue in North latitude, place both the sights on the foreside of the Bow, the vpper sight to the declination of the Sunne, or the day of the moneth at the North end, and the lower sight toward the South end. Then when the Sunne cometh to the meridian, turne your face to the South, and with the one hand hold the center of the Bow to your eye, so as you may see the Sunne by the vpper sight; with the other hand moue the lower sight, vntill you haue brought one of the edges of it to be euen with the horizon: so that edge of the lower sight shall shew the latitude of the place in the fore side of the Bow. Thus being in North latitude vpon the ninth of October:
if I set the vpper sight to this day, at the fore side and North end of the Bow, I shall find it to fall to the Southward of 90 vpon 80 gr. and therefore at 10 gr. of South declination. Then the Sunne coming to the meridian, I may set the center of the Bow to mine eye, as if I went to find the altitude of the Sunne, holding the North end of the Bow vpward, with the vpper sight betweene mine eye and the Sunne, and mouing the lower sight, vntill it come to be euen with the horizon. If here the lower sight shall stay a 50 gr. I may well say, that the latitude is 50 gr. For the meridian altitude of the Sunne is 30 gr. by the last Prop. and the Sun hauing 10 gr. of South declination, the meridian altitude of the equator would be 40 gr; and therefore the obseruation was made in 50 gr. of North latitude. By the same reason, if the lower side had stayed at 51 gr. 30 m. the latitude must haue been 51 gr. 30 m. and so in the rest. 5 To find any North latitude, by the meridian altitude of the starres to the Southward. Let the vpper sight be set to the starre, which you intend to obserue, here placed in the fore side of the Bow. Then hold the North end of the Bow vpward, and turning your face to the South, obserue the meridian altitude as before: so the lower sight shall shew the latitude of the place in the fore side of the Bow. Thus if in obseruing the meridian altitude of the great Dog-starre, the lower sight shall stay at 50 gr. it would shew the latitude to be 50 gr. For this starre being here placed at 73 gr. 48 m. if we take thence 50 gr. his meridian altitude would be 23 gr. 48 m. to this if we adde 16 gr. 12 m. for the South declination of this starre, it would shew the meridian altitude of the equator to be 40 gr. and therefore the latitude to be 50 gr.
6 To find any North latitude, by the meridian altitude of the starres to the Northward. Let the vpper sight be set to the starre which you intend to obserue, here placed on the backe side of the Bow. Then hold the North end of the Bow vpward, and turning your face to the North, obserue the altitude of the starre when he cometh to be in the meridian and vnder the pole: so the lower sight shall shew the altitude of the pole in the back side of the Bow. Thus the former guard coming to be in the meridian vn∣der the pole, if you obserue and find the lower sight to stay at 50 gr. such is the eleuation of the pole, and the latitude of the place to the Northward. For the distance betweene the two sights will shew the altitude to be 35 gr. 45 m. & the star is 14 gr. 15 m. distant from the North pole. These two doe make vp 50 gr. for the eleuation of the North-pole, and there∣fore such is the North latitude. 7 To find any South latitude, by knowing either the day of the moneth, or the declination of the Sunne. When you are come into South latitude, turne both your sights to the backside of the Bow: the vpper sight to the de∣clination of the Sun, or the day of the moneth at the South end, and the lower sight toward the North end of the Bow. Then the Sunne coming to the meridian, turne your face to the North, and holding the South end of the Bow vpward, obserue the meridian altitude as before: so the lower sight shall shew the latitude of the place in the backe side of the Bow. Thus being in South latitude, vpon the tenth of May if you obserue and finde the lower sight to stay at 30 gr. on the backe side of the Bow, such is the latitude. For the declina∣tion is 20 gr. Northward, the altitude of the Sunne betweene the two sights 40 gr. the altitude of the equator 60 gr. and
therefore the latitude 30 gr. 8 To find any South latitude, by the meridian altitude of the starres to the Northward. Let the vpper sight be set to the starre which you intend to obserue, here placed on the backe side of the Bow. Then hold the South end of the Bow vpward, and turning your face to the North, obserue the meridian altitude as before: so the lower sight shall shew the latitude of the place in the back side of the Bow. Thus being in South latitude, and the former guard com∣ming to be in the meridian ouer the pole. If you obserue and finde the lower sight to stay at 5 gr. such is the latitude. For this starre is 14 gr. 15 m. from the North pole, the alti∣tude of the starre betweene the two sights 9 gr. 15 m. the North pole depressed 5 gr. and therefore the latitude 5 gr. to the Southward. 9 To obserue the altitude of the Sunne backward. Set the vpper sight either to 60, or 70, or 80 gr. as you shall find it to be most conuenient, the lower sight on any place betweene the middle and the other end of the Bow, and haue an horizontall sight to be set to the center. Then may you turne your backe to the Sunne, and the back of the Bow toward your selfe, looking by the lower sight through the horizontall sight, and mouing the lower sight vp & downe, vntill the vpper sight doe cast a shadow vpon the middle of the horizontall sight: so the degrees contained betweene the two sights on the Bow, shall giue the altitude requi∣red. Thus if the vpper sight shall be at 80 gr. and the lower sight at 50 gr. the altitude required is 30 gr. as in the third Prop.
10 To find any North latitude by a backe obseruation, knowing either the day of the moneth, or the declination of the Sunne. When you obserue in North latitude, place your three sights on the fore side of the Bow: the vpper sight to the de∣clination of the Sun, or the day of the moneth, at the North end; the lower sight toward the South end of the Bow; and the horizontall sight to the center. Then the Sunne coming to the meridian, turne your face to the North, & holding the North end of the Bow vpward, the South end downeward, with the back of it toward your selfe, obsrue the shadow of the vpper sight as in the former Prop. so the lower sight shall shew the latitude of the place in the fore side of the Bow. Thus being in North latitude vpon the ninth of Octo∣ber, if you obserue and find the lower sight to stay at 50 gr. on the fore side of the Bow, such is the latitude. For the de∣clination is 10 r. Southward, and the altitude of the Sunne betweene the two sights 30 gr. the altitude of the equator 40 gr. and herefore the latitude 50 gr. as in the fourth Prop. 11 To find any South latitude by a back obseruation, knowing either the day of the moneth, or the declination of the Sunne. When you obserue in South latitude, place your three sights on the backe side of the Bow: the vpper sight to the declination of the Sunne, or the day of the moneth at the South end; the lower sight towar the North end of the Bow, and the horizontall sight to the cnter. Then the Sun coming to the meridian, turne your face to the South, and holding the South end of the Bow vpward, with the backe of it toward your selfe, obserue the shadow of the vpper sight as before: so the lower sight shal shew the latitude of the place in the back side of the Bow. Thus being in the South latitude vpon the tenth of May,
if you obserue and find the lower sight to stay at 30 gr. on the ledgeacke of the Bow, such is the altitude. For the declination ledge 20 gr. Northward, the altitude of the Sunne betweene the ledgewo sights 40 gr. the altitude of the equator 60 gr. and there∣ledgere the latitude 30 gr. as in the seuenth Prop. 12 To find the day of the moneth, by knowing the latitude of the place, and obseruing the meridian al∣titude of the Sunne. Place your three sights according to your latitude; the ho∣ledgezontall sight to the center, the lower sight to the latitude, ledged the vpper sight among the moneths. Then when the ledgenne cometh to the meridian, obserue the altitude, looking ledge the lower sight through the horizontall, and keeping the ledgewer sight still at the latitude, but mouing the vpper sight ledgetil it giue shadow vpon the middle of the horizontal sight: ledge the vpper sight shall shew the day of the moneth requi∣ledged. Thus in our latitude if you set the lower sight to 51 gr. 30 ledge and obseruing finde the altitude of the Sunne betweene ledgeat and the vpper sight to be 28 gr. 30 m. this vpper sight ledgell all vpon the ninth of October, and the twelfth of Fe∣ledgeuare. And if yet you doubt which o them two is the day, ledgeu may expect another meridian altitude; and then if you ledged the vpper sight vpon the tenth of October, and the ele∣ledgenth of Februarie, the question will be soone resolued. 13 To find the declination of any vnknowne starre, and so to place it on the Bow, by knowing the latitude of the place, and obseruing the Meridian altitude of the Starre. When you find a starre in the Meridian that is fit for ob∣ledgeuation. Set the center of the Bow to your eye, the lower ledgeht to the latitude, and moue the vpper sight vp or downe ledgetill you see the horizon by the lower sight, and the starre
by the vpper sight, then will the vpper sight stay at the decli∣nation and place of the starre. Thus being in 20 gr. of North latitude, if you obserue anredge find the meridian altitude of the head of the Crosier to bredge 14 gr. 50 m. The vpper sight will stay at 34 gr. 50 m. and therredge may you place this starre. For by this obseruatiō the distance oredge this starre from the South pole should be 34 gr. 50 m. and thredge declination from the equator 55 gr. 10 m. And so for the resredge The starres which I mntione bere, do come to the me¦ridian in this order, after the first point of Aries.   Ho. Mi. The pole starre at 0 29 The rams head 1 46 The head of Medusa 2 44 The sid of Perseus 2 58 The Buls eye. 4 15 The goate 4 49 Orions left shoulder 5 5 Orions girdle the first the second the third. 5 13 5 17 5 22 Orions right shoulder 5 35 The great dog 6 29 Castor 7 10 The little dog 7 20 Pollux 7 22 The Hydra's hart 9 9 The lions hart 9 48 The great beares backe 10 40 First in gr. beares taile 12 37 The Virgins spike 13 5 Second in gr. bea taile 13 9 Third in gr. beares taile 13 33 Arcturus 13 58 The formost gu rd 14 52 The North crowne 15 19 Th h dmost guard 15 25 Scorpions hart 16 7 The harpe 18 24 Vulturs hart 19 33 Swans taile 20 29 Fomahant 22 36 The end of the second Booke.
THE THIRD BOOKE. Of the vse of the lines of Numbers, Sines and Tangents for the drawing of Houre-lines on all sorts of Planes. THere are ten seuerall sorts of Planes, which take their denomination frō those great circles to which they are parallels, and may sufficiently for our vse be represented in this one fundamentall Diagram described before in the vse of the Sector, and be knowne by their horizontall and perpendicular lines, of such as know the latitude of the place, and the circles of the sphere. 1 An horizontall plane parallell to the horizon, here re∣presented by the outward circle ESWN. 2 A verticall plane parallell to the prime verticall circle which passeth through the zenith and the points of East and West in the horizon, and is right to the horizon and the meridian; that is, maketh right angles with them both. This is represented by EZW. 3 A polar plane parallell to the circle of the houre of 6, which passeth through the pole and the points of East and West, being right to the Equinoctiall and the Meridian, but inclining to the horizon, with an angle equall to the la∣titude. This is here represented by EPW. 4 An equinoctiall plane parallell to the Equinoctiall, which passeth through the points of East and West, being right to the Meridian, but inclining to the Horizon, with an angle equall to the complement of the latitude. This is here represented by EAW. 5 A verticall plane inclining to the horizon, parallell to any great circle, which passeth through the points of East and West, being right to the meridian, but inclining to the horizon, and yet not passing through the pole, nor parallell
geometric illustration to the equinoctiall. This is here represented either by EIW, or EYW, or ELW. 6 A meridian plane parallell to the meridian, the circle of the houre of 12, which passeth through the zenith, the pole, and the points of South and North, being right to the horizon, and the prime verticall. This is here represented by SZN. 7 A meridian plane inclining to the horizon, parallell to any great circle, which passeth through the points of South and North, being right to the prime verticall, but in∣clining
to the horizon. This is here represented by SGN. 8 A verticall declining plane, parallell to any great circle, which passeth through ye zenith, being right to the horizon, but inclining to the meridian. This is represented by BZD. 9 A polar declining plane, parallell to any great circle, which passeth through the pole, being right to the equi∣noctiall, but inclining to the meridian. This is here repre∣sented by HPQ. 10 A declining inclining plane, parallell to any great cir∣cle, which is right to none of the former circles, but decli∣ning from the prime verticall, and inclining both to the ho∣rizon and the meridian, and all the houre circles. This may be here represented either by BMD, or BFD, or BKD, or any such great circle, which passeth neither through the South and North, nor East and West points, nor through the zenith nor the pole. Each of these planes (except the horizontall) hath two fa∣ces whereon houre-lines may be drawne; and so there are 19 planes in all. The meridian plane hath one face to the East, and another to the West: the other verticall planes haue one to the South, and another to the North, and the rest one to the zenith, and another to the nadir: but what is said of the one, may be vnderstood of the other. To find the inclination of any Plane. For the distinguishing of these Planes we may finde whe∣thr they be horizontall, or verticall, or inclining to the ho∣rizon, and how much they incline, either by the vsuall incli∣natorie quadrant, or by fitting a thread and plummet vnto the Sector. For let the Sector be opened to a right angle, the lines of Sines to an angle of 92 gr. the inward edges of the Sector to 90 gr. and let a thread and plummet be hanged vpon a line parallell to the edges of one of the legs, so that leg shall be verticall, and the other leg parallell to the horizon. If the plane seeme to be verticall (like the wall of an vp∣right
building with angles marked building) you may trie it by holding the Sector, so that the thread may fall vpon his plummet line. For then if the verticall edge of the Sector shall lie close to the plane, the plane is erect, and therefore said to be verticall; and if you daw a line by that edge of the Sector, it shall be a ver∣ticall line. If the plane seeme to be leuell with the horizon, you may trie it by setting the horizontall leg of the Sector to the plane, and holding the other leg vpright: for then if the thread shall fall on his plummet line, which way soeuer you turne the Sector, it is an horizontall plane. If the one end of the plane be higher then the other, and yet not verticall, it is an inclining plane, and you may find the inclination in this maner.
First hold the verticall leg of the Sector vpright, and turne the horizontall le about, vntill it lie close with the plane, and the thread fall on his plūmet line: so the line drawne by the edge of that horizontall leg, shall be an horizontall line. Suppose the plane to be BGED, and that BD were thus found to be the horizontall line vpon the plane; then may you crosse the horizontall line at right angles with a per∣pendicular CF: that done, if you set one of the legs of the Sector vpon the perpendicular line CF, and make the other leg with a thread and plummet to become verticall, you shal haue the angle betweene the verticall line and the perpen∣dicular on the Plane, as before in the vse of the Sector, pag. 50. and the complement of this angle is the inclination of the plane to the horizon. To find the declination of a Plane. The declination of a Plane is alwayes reckoned in the ho∣rizon betweene the line of East and West, and the horizon∣tall line vpon the Plane. As in the fundamentall Diagram, the prime verticall line (which is the line of East and West) is ECW; if the horizontall line of the plane proposed shal be BCD, the angle of declination is ECB. But because a Plane may decline diuers wayes, that we may the better distinguish them, we consider three lines be∣longing to euery Plane: the first is the horizontall line; the second the perpendicular line, crossing the horizontall at right angles; the third the axis of the plane, crossing both the horizontall line, and his perpendicular, and the plane it selfe at right angles. The perpendicular line doth help to find the inclination of the plane as before, the horizontall to finde the declina∣tion, the axis to giue denomination vnto the plane. For example, in a verticall plane here represented by EZW, the horizontall line is ECW, the same with the line of East and West, and therefore no declination; the perpen∣dicular crossing it, CZ the same with the verticall line,
drawne from the center to the zenith, right vnto the hori∣zon, and therefore no inclination. The axis of the plane is SCN, the same with the meridian line, drawne from the South to the North, and accordingly giues the denomina∣tion to the plane. For the plane hauing two faces, and the axis two poles, S and N; the pole S falling directly into the South, doth cause that face to which it is next to be called the South face; and the other pole at N, pointing into the North, doth giue the denomination to the other face, and make it to be called the North face of this plane. In like maner in the declining inclining plane here re∣presented by BFD, the horizontall line is BCD, which crosseth the prime verticall line ECW, and therefore it is called a declining plane, according to the angle of declina∣tion ECB or WCD. The perpendicular to this horizon∣tall line is CF, where the point F falleth in the plane QZH perpendicular to the plane proposed, betweene the zenith and the North part of the horizon, and therefore it is called a plane inclining to the Northward, according to the arke FQ, or the angle FCQ. The axis of the plane is here re∣presented by the line CK, where the pole K is 90 gr. distant from the plane, and so is as much aboue the horizon at H, and the other pole as much below the horizon at Q, as the plane at F is distant from the zenith: and this pole K here falling betweene the meridian and the prime verticall circle into the Southwest part of the world, this vpper face of the plane is therefore called the Southwest face, and the lower the Northeast face of the plane. The declination from the prime verticall may be found by the needle in the vsuall inclinatorie Quadrant, or rather by comparing the horizontall line drawne vpon the plane with the azimuth of the Sunne and the meridian line, in such sort as before we found the variation of the magneticall needle. For take any boord that hath one side strait, and draw the line HO parallell to that side, and the line ZM perpendicular vnto it, and on the center Z make a semicircle HMO: this done, hold the boord to ye plane, so as HO may
be parallel to BD the horizontall line on the plane and the boord parallell to the horizon; then the Sunne shining vp∣on it, hold out a thread and plummet, so as the thread being verticall, the shadow of the Sunne may fall on the center Z, and draw the line of shadow AZ representing the common section, which the azimuth of the Sunne makes with the plane of the horizon, and let another take the altitude of the Sunne at the same instant: so by resoluing a triangle, as I shewed before pag. 65. you may find what azimuth the Sun was in when he gaue shadow vpon AZ. Suppose the azimuth to be (as before pag. 64.) 72 gr. 52 m. from the North to the Westward, and therefore 17 gr. 8 m. from the West, we may allow these 17 gr. 8 m. from A vnto V, and draw the line ZV, and so we haue the true West point of the prime verticall line: then allowing 90 gr. from V vn∣to S, we haue the South point of the meridian line ZS, and the angle HZV shall giue the declination of the plane from the verticall, and the angle OZS the declination of the plane from the meridian. Or we may take out onely the angle AZH, which the line of shadow makes with the horizontall line of the plane, and compare it with the angle AZV, which the line of sha∣dow makes with the prime verticall. And so here if AZV the Sunnes azimuth shall be 17 gr. 8 m. past the West, and yet the line of shadow AZ 7 gr. 12 m. short of the plane, the declination of the plane shall be 24 gr. 20 m. as may appeare by the site of the plane and the circles. If the altitude of the Sunne be taken at such time as the shadow of the thread falleth on BD or HO, and then a tri∣angle resolued, the declinaton of the plane will be such as the azimuth of the Sunne from the prime verticall. If at such a time as the shadow falleth on MZ, the decli∣nation will be such as the azimuth of the Sunne from the meridian. If it be a faire Summers day you may first finde what alti∣tude the Sunne will haue when he cometh to be due East or West, and then expect vntill he come to that altitude; so the
declination of the plane shall be such as the angle contained betweene the line HO and the line of the shadow. Hauing distinguished the Planes, the next care will be for the placing of the style and the drawing of the houre-lines. The style will be as the axis of the world, sometimes pa∣rallell to the plane, sometimes perpendicular, sometimes cut the plane with oblique angles. The houre-lines will be either parallell one to the other, or meete in a center with equall angles, or meete with vn∣equall angles. If the style be perpendicular to the plane, the angles at the center will be equall; and this falls out onely in the South and North face of an equinoctiall plane: if the style be parallell to the plane, the houre-lines wil be also pa∣rallell one to another; and this falls out in all polar planes; as in the East and West meridian planes parallel to the circle of the houre of 12, in the vpper and lower direct polars pa∣rallell to the circles of the houre of 6, and in the vpper and lower declining polars which are parallell to any of the other houre circles. But in the horizontall and all other planes, the style will cut the plane with an acute angle, and the houre lines will meet at the root of the style, and there make vnequall angles. CHAP. I. To draw the houre-lines in an equi∣noctiall Plane. AN equinoctiall plane is that which is parallell to ye equi∣noctiall circle here represented by EAW, wherein the spaces betweene the houre circles being equall, there is no need of further precept, but onely to draw a circle and to di∣uide it into 24 equall parts for the 24 houres, and subdi∣uide each houre into halues and quarters, and then to set vp
geometric illustration the style perpendicular to the plane in the center of the cir∣cle. The help which these lines of proportion doe here af∣foord vs, is onely in the diuision of the circle, which may be done readily by that which I shewed before, Pag. 29. For example, suppose the semidiameter of the equino∣ctiall circle to be six inches, and that it were required to know the distance of the houre-points each from other: here each houre being 15 gr. distant from other, I extend the compasses from the sine of 30 gr. vnto the sine of 7 gr. 30 m. the halfe of 15 gr. and I find the same extent to reach in the line of numbers from 6.00 vnto 1.56. Or in crosse worke I extend them from the sine of 30 gr. vnto 6.00 in the line of numbers, the same extent will reach from the sine of 7 gr. 30 m. vnto 1.56 in the line of numbers; which shewes that in a circle of six inches semidiameter, the
geometric illustration distance of the houre-points each from other will be about 1 inch and 56 centesmes or parts of 100. The like reason holds for the inscribing of all other chords in the Prop. following. CHAP. II. To draw the houre-lines in a direct polar plane. A Direct polar plane is that which is parallell to the houre of 6, here represented by EPW, wherein the style will be parallell to the plane, and the houre-lines parallell one to the other, and therefore may be best drawne by that which I haue shewed in the vse of the Sector. They may be also drawne by the helpe of these lines of proportion, in this maner. First draw a right line WE for the horizon and the equator, and crosse it at the point C, a∣bout the middle of the line with CB another right line, which may serue for the meridian and the houre of 12, and must also be the substylar line wherein the style shall stand. Then, to pro∣portion the style vnto the plane, consider the length of the horizontall line, and what houre-lines you would haue to fall on your plane. For the distance of any one houre-line from the meridian being knowne, we may finde both the length of the style and the distance of the rest: because As the tangent of the houre giuen, is to the distance from the meridian: So the tangent of 45 gr. to the height of the style.
Suppose the length of the horizontall line to be 12 in∣ches, and that it were required to put on all the houre-lines from 7 in the morning vnto 5 in the euening. Here we haue 5 houres and 6 inches on either side the meridian. Where∣fore I allow 15 gr. for an houre, and extending the compasses the compasses from the tangent of 75 gr. the measure of 5 houres vnto the tangent of 45 gr. I find the same extent to reach in the line of numbers from 6.00 to about 1.61. This shewes both the height of the style, and the distance of the houre-points of 9 & 3 frō the meridian to be 1 inch, 61 parts. To find the length of the Tangent betweene the substylar and the houre-points. As the tangent of 45 gr. to the tangent of the houre: So the height of the style to the length of the tangent line betweene the sub∣stylar and the houre-points. Thus hauing found the length of the style in our exam∣ple to be 1.61, if I exend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. vnto the tangent of 15 gr. the measure of the first houre from the substylar, I shall find the same extent to reach in the line of numbers from 1.61 vnto 0.43 for the length of the
tangent betweene the substylar and the houre-points of 11 and 1. If I extend them from the tangent of 45 gr. vnto the tangent of 75 gr. the measure of the fift houre, I shall finde them to reach in the line of numbers from 1.61 vnto 6.00 for the length of the tangent from the substylar to the houre-points of 7 and 5. For howsoeuer it be the same distance in the line of tan∣gents from 45 vnto 75, as from 45 vnto 15; yet because 75 are more, and 15 lesse then 45, the tangent lines that answer to them wil be accordingly more or lesse then the length of the style. Ho. An. Po Tang. Gr. M. In. Par 12 0 0 0 0 11.1 15 0 0 43 10.2 30 0 0 93 9.3 45 0 1 61 8.4 60 0 2 79 7.5 75 0 6 0 6.6 90 0 Infin Againe, if I extend them from 45 gr. in the tangents vnto 30 gr. the measure of the second houre, I shall finde them to reach in the line of numbers from 1.61 vnto 0.93 for the houre of 10 and 2: if I extend them from the tangent of 45 gr. vnto the tangent of 60 gr. for the fourth houre, I shal find them to reach in the line of numbers from 1.61 vnto 2 79, and such is the length of the tangent line from the substylar vnto the houre of 8 and 4. And the like reason holdeth for the inscribing of all other tangent lines in the propositions following. But for such tangents as fall vnder 45 gr. I may better vse crosse worke, and extend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. vnto 1.61 in the line of numbers, so shall I finde the same extent to reach from 30 gr. in the tangents, to 93 parts in the line of numbers, for the distance of the second houre, and from 15 gr. in the tangents to 43 parts for the distance of the first houre from the meridian. Or if this extent from 45 gr. backward to 1.61 be too large for the compasses, I may extend forward from the tangent of 5 gr. 43 m. to 1.61 parts in the line of numbers, and the same extent shall reach from 15 gr. in the tangents, to 43 parts in the line of numbers, for the distance of the first houre; and from 30 gr. to 93 parts, for the distance of the second houre, as before.
Hauing found the length of the tangent lines in inches and parts of inches, and pricked them in the equator on both sides of the meridian, from the center C; if wee draw right lines through each of those points, crossing the equa∣tor at right angles, they shall be the houre-lines required; and if we set a style ouer the meridian, so as the edge of it be parallell to the plane, and the height of it be as much a∣boue the meridian as the distance be∣tween the meridian and the houre-points of 3 or 9, it shall represent the axis of the world, and be truly placed for the casting of the shadow vpon the houre-lines in a polar plane. Horae Ang. Po Tang Gr. M. In. Pa 6 0 0   3 45 165   7 30 1 32   11 15 1 99 7 15 0 2 68   18 45 3 39   22 30 4 14   26 15 4 93 8 30 0 5 77   33 45 6 68   37 30 7 67   41 15 8 77 9 45 0 10 00   48 45 11 40   52 30 13 03   56 15 14 97 10 60 0 17 32   63 45 20 28   67 30 24 14   71 15 29 46 11 75 0 37 32   78 45 50 27   82 30 75 96   86 15 152 57 12 90 0 Infin. CHAP. III. To draw the houre-lines in a meridian plane. A Meridian plane is that which is pa∣rallell to the meridian circle here re∣presented by SZN; it hath two faces, one to the East, and the other to the West; in each of them the style will be parallell to the plane, and the houre-lines parallell one to the other, as in a polar plane, the difference being onely in the placing of the equator & in numbring of the houres. For in these meridian planes hauing drawn an occult verticall line CZ, and an occult horizontall line CN, crossing one the other at right angles in the point C, the equator AC wil cut the verticall with an angle ZCA, equall to the latitude of the place: then may we crosse the equa∣tor at right angles with the line CB for the houre of 6, and from this set off the
geometric illustration houre-points in the equator as in the former Prop. For supposing the length of the style CB to be ten in∣ches, the length of the tangent line belonging to the first houre wil be 2 in. 68 p. the length of the second 5 in. 77 p. as in the Table. Then the tangent of 15 gr. being prickt downe in the equator on both sides from 6, shal serue for the houres of 5 and 7, and the tangent of 30 gr. for the houres of 4 and 8, and so in the rest. This done, if we draw right lines through each of these points, crossing the equator at right angles, they shall be the houre-lines required: and if we set a style ouer the houre of 6, so as the edge of it may be parallell to the plane, and the height of it may be equall to the distance be∣tweene the houres of 6 and 9 in the equator, it shall represent the axis of the world, and be truly placed for the casting of the shadow vpon the houre-lines in a meridian plane.
CHAP. IIII. To draw the houre-lines in an horizontall plane. AN horizontall plane is that which is parallell to the horizon, here repre∣sented by the outward circle ESWN, in which the diameter SN drawne from the South to the North, may go both for the meridian line and the meridian circle, Z for the zenith, P for the pole of the world, and the circles drawne through P for the houre-circles of 1.2.3.4. &c. as they are nū∣bred from the meridian. These houre-cir∣cles considered with the meridian & the horizon, do make diuers triangles, PN 1, PN 2, PN 3, in which we haue knowne first the right angle at N, the North inter∣section of the meridian and the horizon; secondly the side PN, the arke of the me∣ridian between the pole and the horizon, which is alwayes equall to the latitude of the place; thirdly the angles at the pole, made by the meridian and the houre-circles, the angle NP 1 being 15 gr. NP 2 30 gr. each houre 15 gr. more then other, each halfe houre 7 gr. 30 m. each quarter 3. gr. 45. m. And these three being known, we may finde the arks of the horizon be∣tween the meridian and the houre-cir∣cles N 1, N 2, N 3, &c. For As the sine of 90 gr. is to the sine of the latitude: So the tangent of the houre to the tangent of the houre-line from the meridian. Ho. Ang. Po Arc. Pla Gr. M. Gr. M. 12 0 0 0 0   3 45 2 56   7 30 5 52   11 15 8 51 1 15 0 11 50   18 45 14 52   22 30 17 57   26 15 21 6 2 30 0 24 20   33 45 27 36   37 30 31 0   41 15 34 28 3 45 0 38 3   48 45 41 45   52 30 45 34   56 15 49 30 4 60 0 53 35   63 45 57 47   67 30 62 6   71 15 66 33 5 75 0 71 6   78 45 75 45   82 30 80 25   86 15 85 13 6 90 0 90 0
geometric illustration Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the latitude, so the same extent shall reach from the tangent of the houre, to the tangent of the houre-line from the me∣ridian. Thus the latitude being 51 gr. 30 m. I extend the com∣passes from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of 51 gr. 30 m. & find the same extent to reach from the tangent of 3 gr. 45 m. vnto the tangent of 2 gr. 56 m. for the distance of the first quarter from the meridian; and from the tangent of 7 gr. 30 m. vnto the tangent of 5 gr. 52 m. for the halfe houre; and from the tangent of 11 gr. 15 m. to the tangent of 8 gr. 51 m. for the third quarter; and from the tangent of 15 gr. 0 m. vnto 11 gr. 50 m. for the first houre: and so in the rest. Only when I come to set one foote of the compasses to
geometric illustration 48 gr. 45 m. for the finding of a quarter past 3, the other foote will fall out of the line, and then I may either take out so much as is out of the line beyond 45 gr. and turne it backe into the line, and it will reach from 45 gr. to 41 gr. 45 m: or I may vse crosse worke, extending the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. to the tangent of 48 gr. 45 m. so the same extent wil reach from the sine of 51 gr. 30 m. to the tangent of 41 gr. 45 m. And such is the distance of the line of 3 ho. ¼ from the meridian, as in this table of the Arks of the plane. This done, I come to the Plane, and there according as the lines do fall in the fundamentall diagram, 1 I draw a right line SN seruing for the meridian, the
houre of 12 and the substylar. 2 In this meridian I make choice of a center at C, and there describe an occult circle representing the horizon. 3 I find a chord of 11 gr. 50 m. and inscribe it into this circle on either side of the meridian for the houres of 11 & 1; in like maner a chord of 24 gr. 20 m. for the houres of 10 and 2; and a chord of 38 gr. 3 m. for the houres of 9 and 3; and so for the rest of the houres, their halues and quarters. 4 I draw right lines through the center and the termes of these chords, and these lines so drawne are the houre-lines required. Lastly I set vp the style ouer the meridian, so as it may cut the plane in the center, and there make an angle with the meridian equall to the latitude of the place, so it shall repre∣sent the axis of the world, and be truly placed for casting of the shadow vpon the houre-lines in an horizontall plane. CHAP. V. To draw the houre-lines in a verticall plane. A Verticall plane is that which is parallel to the prime ver∣ticall circle here represented by EZW. It hath two fa∣ces, one to the North, the other to the South; in each of them the substylar will be the same with the meridian line, and the angle of the style aboue the plane will be equall to ZP the complement of the latitude. The triangles here considered are made by the verticall, the meridian, and the houre-circles, in which we know the side ZP, the angles at the pole, and the right angle at the ze∣nith, and therefore may find the arks of the verticall, between the meridian and the houre-circles after this maner: As the sine of 90 gr. is to the cosine of the latitude: So the tangent of the houre to the tangent of the houre-line from the meri∣dian.
Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the complement of the latitude, so the same extent shall reach from the tangent of the houre, to the tangent of the houre-line from the meridian. Thus in the latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. I extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of 38 gr. 30 m. and find the same extent to reach from the tangent of 15 gr. to the tan∣gent of 9 gr. 28 m for the distance of the first houre from the meridian: and from the tangent of 75 gr. vnto the tangent of 66 gr. 42 m. for the fift houre; and so in the rest as in the Ta∣ble following. geometric illustration These arks being knowne, I may come to the plane, and there by help of a thread and plummet draw a verticall line
seruing both for the meridian and the houre of 12, and the substylar; then may I draw an occult verticall circle, and therein inscribe the chords of those former arks, and draw the houre-lines, and set vp the style, as be∣fore in the horizontall plane. Ho. Ang. Po Arc. Pla Gr. M. Gr. M. 12 0 0 0 0   3 45 2 20   7 30 4 41   11 15 7 3 1 15 0 9 28   18 45 11 56   22 30 14 27   26 15 17 4 2 30 0 19 46   33 45 22 35   37 30 25 32   41 15 28 38 3 45 0 31 54   48 45 35 22   52 30 39 3   56 15 42 58 4 60 0 47 9   63 45 51 36   67 30 56 20   71 15 61 23 5 75 0 66 42   78 45 72 17   82 30 78 3   86 15 84 0 6 90 0 90 0 If it be the South face of the plane, the center will be vpward, and the style must point downward; if the North face, the center must be in the lower part of the meridian line, and the style-point vp∣ward in all such places as are to the North∣ward of the equinoctiall line, as it may ap∣peare by considering how the lines do fall in the fundamentall Diagram. CHAP. VI. To draw the houre-lines in a ver∣ticall inclining plane. ALl those Planes that haue their hori∣zontall line lying East and West, are in that respect said to be verticall; if they be also vpright and passe through the ze∣nih, they are direct verticals; if they in∣cline to the pole-they are direct polars: if to the equinoctiall, they are properly cal∣led equinoctiall planes, and are described before: if to none of these three points, they are then called by the generall name of inclining verticals. These may incline either to the North part of the horizon, or to the South; and each of them hath two faces, one to the zenith, the other to the nadir, in which we are first to cōsider the height of the pole aboue the plane, by comparing the
inclination of the plane to the horizon, with the latitude of the place. As in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. if the inclination of the plane EIW shall be 13 gr. Northward, that is, if IN the ark of the meridian between the plane and the North part of the horizon shall be 13 gr. we may take these 13 gr. out of PN 51 gr. 30 m. the eleuation of the pole aboue the horizon, and there wil remain PI 38 gr. 30 m. for the eleuatiō of the North pole aboue the vpper face of the plane, and therefore 38 gr. 30 m. for the height of the South pole aboue the lower face of the plane. Or if the inclination of the plane shall be found to be 62 gr. to the Southward, we may number them in the meridian from S the Southpart of the horizon vnto L, and there draw the arke ELW representing this plane; so the arke of the me∣ridian PL shall giue the height of the North pole aboue the vpper face of this plane to be 66 gr. 30 m. and therefore the height of the South pole aboue the lower face of the plane is also 66 gr. 30 m. In like maner if the inclination of the plane EYW shall be 15 gr. Southward, that is, if SY the arke of the meridian be∣tween the South part of the horizon and the plane, shall be 15 gr. The height of the North pole aboue the vpper face of the plane, and the height of the South pole aboue the lower face of the plane, will be also found to be 66 gr. 30 m. But if the plane shall fall betweene the zenith and the North pole, then will the North pole be eleuated aboue the lower face, and the South pole aboue the vpward face of the plane, as may appeare by the proiection of the sphere in the fundamentall Diagram. Then in the triangles made by the plane, the meridian, and the houre-circles, we haue the side which is the height of the pole aboue the plane, together with the angles at the pole, and the right angle at the intersection of the meridian with the plane, by which we may find the arks of the plane betweene the meridian and the houre-circles, after this ma∣ner:
As the sine of 90 gr. is to the sine of the pole aboue the plane: So the tangent of the houre to the tangent of the houre-line from the meridian. Thus in the former example, where PI the height of the pole aboue the plane was found to be 38 gr. 30 m. if you shall extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of 38 gr. 30 m. the same extent wil reach from the tangent of 15 gr. vnto the tangent of 9 gr. 28 m. for the distance of the first houre from the meridian, and from 30 gr. vnto 19 gr. 46 m. for the second houre, and so forward as in the direct vertical. And for the two last examples, you may extend the com∣passes from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the sine of 66 gr. 30 m: so the same extent shal reach in the line of tangents from 15 gr. vnto 13 gr. 48 m. for the first houre, from 75 gr. vnto 73 gr. 43 m. for the fift houre, from 30 gr. vnto 27 gr. 54 m. for the second houre, from 60 gr. vnto 57 gr. 48 m. for the fourth houre, and from 45 gr. vnto 42 gr. 31 m. for the third houre from the meridian. These arks being knowne, you may first draw the hori∣zontall line, and crosse it in the middle with a perpendicular that may serue both for the meridian and the houre of 12, and the substylar; then knowing which pole is eleuated a∣boue the plane, you may accordingly make choice of a fit point in the meridian for the center of your houre-lines, and thence describe an occult arke of a circle, inscribe the chords of those former arks, and draw the houre lines, and set vp the style, as I shewed before in the horizontall plane. CHAP. VII. To draw the houre-lines in an verticall declining Plane. ALl vpright planes whereon a man may draw a verticall line, are in this respect said to be verticall; if they shall
also stand directly East and West, they are direct verticals; if directly North and South, they are properly called meridian planes, and are described before: if they behold none of these foure principall parts of the world, but shall stand between the prime verticall and the meridian, they are then called by the generall name of declining verticals. These haue two faces, one to the South, the other to the Northward, which may be distinguished in these Northerne parts of the world after this maner. If the Sunne coming to the meridian shall shine vpon the plane, it is the South face; if not, it is the North face of that plane. Againe, if the Sunne shall shine vpon the plane at high noone, and yet longer in the forenoone then in the afternoon, it is the Southeast face; if longer in the afternoone then in the forenoone, it is the Southwest face of the plane. But how much the declination cometh to, is best found as before. When the declination is found, there be foure things more to be considered before we can come to the drawing of the houre-lines, and all foure represented in the funda∣mentall Diagram. 1 The meridian of the plane and his inclination to the meridian of the place. Let the arke EZW represent the prime verticall, and BZD a declining verticall, according to the angle of decli∣nation EZB, the meridian of the place is represented by PZS, crossing the verticall EZW at right angles at the ze∣nith in the point Z: but the proper meridian of the plane wil be PR, which is a perpendicular let downe from the pole vnto the declining verticall, and crossing it with right angles in the point R, so the angle RPZ shall shew the inclina∣tion of the two meridians, and may thus be found. In the triangle PRZ we know the angle at R to be a right angle, and the angle at Z, for it is the complement of the declination, and the base PZ, for it is the complement of the latitude. And therefore
geometric illustration As the sine of the latitude is to the sine of 90 gr. So the tangent of the declination to the tangent of the inclination required. 2 The height of the style aboue the plane. This is here represented by the perpendicular arke PR, and may be found by that which we haue knowne in the for∣mer triangle PRZ. For
As the sine of 90 gr. to the cosine of the latitude: So the cosine of the declination to the sine of the height of the style. Or if you please to make vse, of the angle of the inclina∣tion of the two meridians, the proportion will hold. As the sine of 90 gr. to the cosine of the inclination of meridians: So the cotangent of the latitude to the tangent of the height of the style. 3 The distance of the substylar from the meridian. This is here represented by the arke ZR, and may be found by that which we haue knowne in the former triangle PRZ. As the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the declination: So the cotangent of the latitude to the tangent of the substylar from the meridian. 4 The distance of each houre-line from the substylar. The distances of the houre-lines from the substylar, are here represented by those arks of the declining verticall be∣longing to the plane, which are intercepted betweene the proper meridian of the plane and the houre-circles. To this purpose we haue diuers triangles made by the declining plane, together with his proper meridian and the houre-circles. In these we haue knowne, first the right angle at the intersection of the proper meridian with ye plane; then the side which is the height of the pole aboue the plane; and thirdly the angles at the pole. For knowing the angle of in∣clination betweene the meridian of the plane and the meri∣dian of the place, which is alwayes the houre of 12, we may finde the angle betweene the meridian of the plane and the houre of 1, by allowing in 15 gr. and the angle betweene
the meridian of the plane and the houre of 2, by allowing in 30 gr. and so for the rest, which being knowne, we may find the arks of the plane from the substylar to the houre-circles, in this maner. As the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the height of the pole aboue the plane: So the tangent of the houre from the proper meridian, to the tangent of the houre-line from the substylar. Thus in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. if the declination of an vpright plane shall be found to be 24 gr. 20 m. from the prime verticall, the one face open to the Southwest, the o∣ther to the Northwest, I may number these 24 gr. 20 m. in the horizon of the fundamentall Diagram, from E vnto B, according to the situation of the plane, and there draw the verticall BZD, which shall represent the plane proposed. Then taking the compasses into my hand, 1 I may extend them from the sine of the latitude 51 gr. 30 m. vnto the sine of 90 gr. the same extent will reach in the line of tangents from 24 gr. 20 m. the declination giuen, to about 30 gr. and such is ZPR the angle of inclination be∣tween the meridiā of the place & the meridian of the plane; and therefore the meridian of the plane will here fall vpon the circle of the second houre frō the meridian of the place, (as it may also appeare by opening the compasses to the nea∣rest extent, between the pole and the plane) and there I place the letter R to make this rectangle triangle PRZ. 2 I extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the sine of 38 gr. 30 m. the complement of the latitude, and the same extent will reach from the sine of 65 gr. 40 m. the com∣plement of the declination, vnto the sine of 34 gr. 33 m. Or I may extend them from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the sine of 60 gr. the complement of the inclination of the meridi∣ans, and the same extent wil reach from the tangent of 38 gr. 30 m. the complement of the latitude, vnto the tangent of 34 gr. 33 m. and such is the arke PR, the height of the pole aboue the plane.
3 I may extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. vn∣to the sine of 24 gr. 20 m. the declination giuen, and the same extent will reach from the tangent of 38 gr. 30 m. the com∣plement of the latitude, vnto the tangent of 38 gr. 8 m. and such is the arke ZR, the distance of the substylar from the meridian. 4 That I may finde the distance of each houre-line from the substylar, I consider the angle of inclination of the meridians RPZ, and there see how that PZ the meridian of the place, which is the houre of 12, being 30 gr. distance from PR the meridian of the plane, and that one face of the plane being open to the Southwest, and the other to the North∣east, this meridian of the plane falleth to be the same with the houre of 2, (otherwise with the houre of 10:) therefore allowing 15 gr. for an houre, the houre of 1, RPO will be 15 gr. and RFX the houre of 11, 45 gr. distant from PR the proper meridian of the plane: and so I gather the inclination of the rest of the houre-circles toward this meridian, accor∣ding to their angles at the pole, as in this Table. Then taking my compasses in my hand, I extend them from the sine of 90 gr. vn∣to the sine of 34 gr. 33 m. the height of the pole aboue the plane, and finde them to reach in the line of tangents from 15 gr. the inclination of the houre of 1, to 8 gr. 38 m. for the arke of 1, from the substy∣lar, and from 30 gr. vnto 18 gr. 8 m. for the houre of 12, agreeable to the third Prop. and from 45 gr. vnto 29 gr. 33 m. for the houre of 11, and so the rest, which I also set downe in a Table. Hor. Ang. Po Ar. Pla. Gr. M. Gr. M. 8 90 0 90 0 9 75 0 64 42 10 60 0 44 30 11 45 0 29 33 12 30 0 18 8 1 15 0 8 38 2 Merid substyl 3 15 0 8 38 4 30 0 18 8 5 45 0 29 33 6 60 0 44 30 7 75 0 64 42 8 90 0 90 0 These arks being thus found, wil serue for the drawing of the houre-lines, both on the Southwest face, and the Northwest face of the plane. For coming to the plane, 1 By the help of a thread and plummet I draw a verticall
line, seruing both for the meridian of the place and the houre of 12. 2 In this meridian line I make choice of a center at C, in the vpper part of the line, if it be the South face, as here we sup∣pose it, that the style may haue roome to point downward; but in the lower part of the line, if it be the North face of the plane; for there the style must point vpward: and vpon this center I describe an occult circle, representing the declining verticall belonging to the plane. 3 I find a chord of 18 gr. 8 m. the distance of the substylar from the meridian of the place, and inscribe it into this cir∣cle, geometric illustration
from the meridian vnto A toward the right hand, be∣cause in this example the meridian of the plane falls a∣mong the houres after noone, (for otherwise it must haue been inscribed toward the left hand) and there I draw the line C A seruing for the substylar. 4 According to the Table of the arkes of the plane from the substylar, I find a chord of 8 gr. 38 m. and inscribe it into this circle, from the substylar toward the meridian, for the houre of 1. In like maner a chord of 29 gr. 23 m. for the houre of 11, and a chord of 44 gr. 30 m. for the houre of 10, and so for the rest of the houres, their halues and quar∣ters. 5 I draw right lines through the center and the termes of these chords, and these lines so drawne are the houre-lines required. Lastly, I set vp the style ouer the substylar, so as it may cut the plane in the center, and there make an angle with the substylar of 34 gr. 33 m. according to the height of the pole aboue the plane; so it shall represent the axis of the world, and be truly placed for casting of the shadow vpon the houre-lines in this declining plane. A second example. After the like maner if in our latitude an vpright plane shall decline 85 gr. from the prime verticall, the one face of it being open to the Northwest, and the other to the South∣east, we may in some sort represent it by the verticall QZH, and then working as before. 1 The angle ZPT, the inclination of the two meridians will be found to be 86 gr. 5 m. so that PT the meridian of this plane, will here fall between the houre-circles of 6 and 7 from the meridian. 2 The arke PT the height of the pole aboue the plane will be onely 3 gr. 6 m. 3 The arke ZT the distance of the substylar from the meridian 38 gr. 23 m.
4 The Table of the angles at the pole will be also gathered, by compa∣ring the meridian of the plane with the rest of the houre-circles. For the an∣gle TPZ betweene PT the meridian of the plane, PZ the meridian of the place, and the houre of 12, being 86 gr. 5 m. allowing 15 gr. for an houre, the houre of 11 ½ wil be 78 gr. 35 m. and the houre of 11 71 gr. 5 m. distant from the meridian of the plane; & so the rest of the houres, as in the second columne of this Table. Hor. Ang. Po Ar. Pla. C F C G Gr. M. Gr. M. In. Par. In. Par. 12 86 5 38 23 91 08 79 21   78 35 15 3 30 92 26 89 11 71 5 9 6 18 42 16 02   63 35 6 13 12 52 10 89 10 56 5 4 36 9 25 8 05 9 41 5 2 42 5 43 4 72 8 26 5 1 31 3 05 2 65 7 11 5 0 36 1 20 1 05   Merid. Substyl 0 0 0 0 6 3 55 0 13 0 44 0 38 5 18 55 1 4 2 15 1 86 4 33 55 2 5 4 18 3 64 3 48 55 3 33 7 13 6 20 2 63 55 6 20 12 77 11 10   71 25 9 10 18 56 16 14 1 78 55 15 28 31 82 27 67   86 25 40 55 99 67 86 68 Then hauing the height of the pole aboue the plane, and these angles at the pole; the arkes of the plane, betweene the substylar and the houre-circles, will be found as in the third columne. These arks being found, will serue for the drawing of the houre-lines on either face of this plane. 1 By the help of a thread and plummet I draw ZC a ver∣ticall plane, seruing both for the meridian of the place and the houre of 12. 2 In this meridian line I make choice of a center in the vpper part of the line, if it had been the Southerne face of the plane, but here in C the lower part of the line, because we supposed it to be the Northwest face of the plane, and the style must point vpward; and vpon this center I describe an occult circle representing the declining verticall belonging to this plane. 3 I finde a chord of 38 gr. 23 m. the distance of the sub∣stylar
geometric illustration from the meridian of the place, and inscribe it into this circle, from Z in the meridian, vnto T toward the left hand, acording as the proper meridian PT falls in the fun∣damentall Diagram; and here I draw the line CT seruing for the substylar. 4 The substylar being drawne, I may inscribe the chords of the arks of the plane from the substylar, and draw the houre-lines, and set vp the style as in the former plane. Or the arks of the plane from the substylar being found as before, we may draw the houre-lines vpon the plane o∣therwise then by chords. For hauing drawne the houre-lines as in the last figure, vpon paper or paist-boord, we shall find
the most part of them, in this and such like planes that haue greater declination, to fall so close together, that they can hardly be discerned: wherefore to draw them at large to the best aduantage of the plane, I leaue out the center, and draw them by tangents, as in the polar plane. 1 I consider the length and bredth of the plane where∣on I am to draw the houre-lines, which I suppose to be a square, whose side is 36 inches, and find that the little square ABDE wil contain both the substylar and all those houre-lines which are required in the great square AZCQ. 2 I draw two parallell lines FN, GM, crossing the sub∣stylar at right angles in the points F & G, so as they may best crosse all the houre-lines, and yet the one be distant from the other as far as the plane will giue me leaue; and I find by the sight of the figure that if AB the side of the lesser square shall be 36 inches, the line CF will be about 115 inches, and the line CG about 100 inches, and therefore FG 15 inches. Againe, that the point F will fall about 6 inches below the vpper horizontall side AB, and about 12 inches from the next verticall side BD; for I need not here stand vpon parts. 3 Because these two parallell lines are tangent lines in respect of circles drawne vpon the semidiameters CF, CG, and such tangents as belong to the arkes of the plane, be∣tweene the substylar and the houre-lines, the proportion will hold, As the tangent of 45 gr. to the tangent of the arke of the plane: So the length of the semidiameter to the length of the tangent line. As for example, the arke of the plane betweene the sub∣stylar and the houre of 1, is 15 gr. 28 m. in the former Table, the semidiameter CF 115 inches, and the semidiameter CG 100 inches: wherefore I extend the compasses from the tan∣gent of 45 gr. vnto the tangent of 15 gr. 28 m. the same ex∣tent will reach from 115 in the line of numbers vnto 31, 82, which shewes the length of the tangent line betweene F in the substylar and the houre-line of 1, to be 31 inches, 82 cent.
or parts of 100. Againe, the same extent will reach from 100 vnto 27, 67; and such is the length of the lesser tangent from G to the houre of 1. The like reason holds for the length of the other tangents from the substylar to the rest of the houres, as in the Table; as also for the height of the style aboue these tangent lines; and so the angle of the style aboue the plane being 3 gr. 6 m. the height FK will be found to be 6 inches 23 cent. and the height GL 5 inches 42 cent. Where the Reader may obserue, that if the extent from the tangent of 45 gr. to the tangent of 3 gr. 6 m. or to 115 in the line of numbers, be too large for his compasses, he may vse the tangent of 5 gr. 43 m. in stead of the tangent of 45 gr. as I noted before Pag. 100. 4 Hauing found these lengths and heights, and set them downe in a Table, I come to the plane here resembled by the lesser square ABDE, where I begin with an occult ver∣ticall FH, about 12 inches from the side BD, and vpon the center F, about 6 inches below the side AB describe an oc∣cult arke of a circle. 5 Into this arke I first inscribe a chord of 38 gr. 23 m. the distance of the substylar from the meridian, to make the an∣gle HFG equall to the ZCT; so the line FG shall be the substylar: and then another chord of 51 gr. 37 m. the comple∣ment of this distance, to make vp the right angle GFN; so the line FN shall be the greater of the two tangent lines be∣fore mentioned. 6 I set off 15 inches from F vnto G, toward the center, and through G draw the lesser tangent line GM parallell to the former. 7 These two occult tangent lines being thus drawne, I looke vnto the former Table for the houre of 1, and there finde the arke of the plane betweene the substylar and the houre of 1, to be 15 gr. 28 m. and the length belonging to it in the greater tangent line to be 31 inches 82 cent. in the lesser tangent line 27 inches 67 cent: wherefore I take out 31 inches 82 parts, and pricke them downe in the greater
tangent from F to N, and then 27 inches 67 parts, and prick them downe in the lesser tangent from G to M, and draw the MN for the houre of 1, which if it were produced would crosse the substylar FG in the center C, and there make the angle FCN 15 gr. 28 m. The like reason holdeth for the drawing of all the rest of the houre-lines. Lastly I set vp the style right ouer the substylar, so as the height FK may be 6 inches 23 cent. and the height GL 5 in∣ches 42 cent. then shall KL represent the axis of the world, and if it were produced would crosse the substylar FG in the center C, and there make the angle FCK to be 3 gr. 6 m. and so be truly placed for casting of the shadow vpon the houre-lines in this declining plane. CHAP. VIII. To draw the houre-lines in a meridian inclining plane. ALl those planes wherein the horizontall line is the same with the meridian line, are therefore called meridian planes: if they be right to the horizon, they are called by the generall name of meridian planes without farther addition, and are described before: if they leane to the horizon, they are then called meridian incliners. These may incline either to the East part of the horizon, or to the West, and each of them hath two faces, the vpper toward the zenith, the lower toward the Nadir, wherein knowing the latitude of the place, and the inclination of the plane to the horizon, we are to consider. 1 The inclination of the meridian of the plane to the meridian of the place. 2 The height of the pole aboue the plane. 3 The distance of the substylar from the meridian. 4 The distance of each houre-line from the substylar. And all these foure are represented in the fundamentall
Diagram, as in this example. In our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. a meridian plane inclineth Eastward 50 gr; these 50 gr. I number in the verticall circle from E vnto G, according to the inclination of the plane, and there draw the arke SGN representing the plane pro∣posed. Then I let downe a perpendicular arke PV from the pole to the plane, seruing for the meridian of the plane, so haue I a rectangle triangle PVN, wherein the base PN is the height of the pole aboue the North part of the horizon, and the angle PNV the complement of the inclination to the horizon; and these being knowne, 1 I may finde the angle NPV of inclination of the two meridians. For As the cosine of the latitude is to the sine of 90 gr. So the tangent of inclination to the horizon, to the tangent of inclination of meridians. Extend the compasses from the sine of 38 gr. 30 m. the complement of the latitude, vnto the sine of 90 gr. the same extent will reach from the tangent of 50 gr. 0 m. the inclina∣tion of the plane to the horizon, vnto the tangent of 62 gr. 25 m. and such is the inclination of the meridian of the plane to the meridian of the place; which being resolued into time, doth giue about 4 houres and 10 m. from the meridian, for the place of the substylar among the houre-lines. 2 The height of the pole aboue the plane is here repre∣sented by the quantitie of the arke of the proper meridian PV, betweene the pole and the plane, and may be knowne by that which we haue giuen in the former triangle PVN. For As the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the latitude: So the cosine of the inclination to the horizon, to the sine of the height of the pole aboue the plane. Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. vnto 51 gr. 30 m. the sine of the latitude, the same extent wil reach from
the sine of 40 gr. the complement of the inclination of the plane to the horizon, vnto the sine of 30 gr. 12 m. Or as the sine of 90 gr. to the cosine of inclination of meridians: So the tangent of the latitude to the tangent of the height of the pole aboue the plane. Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the tan∣gent of 51 gr. 30 m. the latitude of the place, the same ex∣tent will reach from the sine of 27 gr. 35 m. the complement of the inclination of the two meridians, vnto the tangent of 30 gr. 12 m. And such is PV the height of the pole aboue the plane, and such must be the height of the style aboue the substylar. 3 The distance of the substylar from the meridian is here represented by NV the arke of the plane betweene the two meridians, and may be found by that which we haue giuen at the first in the former triangle PVN. For As the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the inclination to the horizon: So the tangent of the latitude to the tangent of the substylar from the meridian. Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the tan∣gent of 51 gr. 30 m. the latitude of the place, the same extent will reach from the sine of 50 gr. the inclination of the plane to the horizon, vnto 43 gr. 55 m. And such is the arke NV the distance of the substylar from the meridian. 4 The distances of the houre-lines from the substylar, are here also represented by those arkes of the plane, which are here intercepted betweene the proper meridian and the houre-circles, and may be found by that which we haue gi∣uen in the triangles made by the plane, with his proper me∣ridian and the houre-circles. For the angle at V, betweene the plane and the proper meridian, is well knowne to be a right angle, and the side PV is the height of the pole aboue the plane, and the angles at the pole betweene the proper meridian and the houre-circles are easily gathered into a Ta∣ble.
The angle VPN betweene VP the proper meridian of the plane, and PN the generall meridian of the place being 62 gr. 25 m. the angle between the proper meridian and the circle of the houre of 11, will be 77 gr. 25 m. and the angle belonging to the houre of 1, 47 gr. 25 m, and so the rest of the angles at the pole. Then As the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the pole aboue ye plane: So the tangent of the angle at the pole, to the tangent of the houre-line from the substylar. Hor. Ang. Po. Arc. Pla. Gr. M. Gr. M. 11 77 25 66 4 12 62 25 43 55 1 47 25 28 41 2 32 25 17 43 3 17 25 8 58 4 2 25 1 13   Merid Substyl 5 12 35 6 26 6 27 35 14 44 7 42 35 24 48 8 57 35 38 23 9 72 35 58 3 10 87 35 85 12 Wherefore I extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the sine of 30 gr. 12 m. the height of the pole a∣boue the plane, and I finde the same extent to reach in the line of tangents from 77 gr 25 m. vnto 66 gr. 4 m. for the distance belonging to the houre of 11; and from the tangent of 62 gr. 25 m. to 43 gr. 55 m. for the houre of 12. as when I found the distance of the substylar from the meridian. And so for the rest of the arks of plane betweene the substylar and the houre-circles, as in the Table. These arks being thus found, wil serue to draw the houre-lines on either side of this plane: but supposing it to be the vpper side, 1 I draw the horizontall line CN, seruing for the me∣ridian and houre of 12. 2 In this line I make choice of a center at C, and thence describe an occult arke of a circle representing the plane proposed. 3 I find a chord of 43 gr. 55 m. the distance of the sub∣stylar from the meridian, and inscribe it into this circle from N vnto A, according as I finde the proper meridian PV to fall in the fundamental diagram, and there I draw the line CA seruing for the substylar.
geometric illustration 4 The substylar being drawne, I may inscribe the chords of the arkes of the plane from the substylar, and draw the houre-lines, and set vp the style, as in the former planes. CHAP. IX. To draw the houre-lines in a polar declining Plane. THose planes wherein a line may be drawne parallell to the axis of the world, are called polar planes, because
that line pointeth vnto the poles, and these planes are always parallell to some one of the houre-circles. If they be parallell to the houre of 6, they are called direct polar planes; if to the houre of 12, they are called meridian planes; and both these are described before: if to any other of the houre-circles, they are then called by the name of polar declining planes, because of their inclining to the pole, and declining from the verticall. These kind of planes may be knowne in this sort: First consider the inclination of the plane to the horizon, which in these parts of the world must alwayes be Northward, and more then the latitude of the place. Then find the declina∣tion from the verticall. These two being knowne, if the pro∣portion hold, As the sine of 90 gr. to the cosine of the declination: So the tangent of the inclination to the tangent of the latitude; it is then a polar declining plane, otherwise not. For example, in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. a plane is pro∣posed declining from the verticall 65 gr. 40 m. and inclining Northward 71 gr. 51 m. the vpper face being open to the Southeast, and the lower to the Northwest. If I number those 65 gr. 40 m. in the horizon of the fundamental diagram from E vnto Q, and draw the line HCQ, it shall represent the horizontall line of the plane; then crossing it at right angles with the plane BZD drawne through the zenith, I number 71 gr. 51 m. for the inclination from D vnto R, and there draw the circle HRQ, this circle so drawne shall re∣present the plane proposed; and because it also passeth through the pole, it is therefore a polar plane. But for far∣ther triall I extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of 24 gr. 20 m. the complement of the declination, and I find the same extent to reach from the tangent of 71 gr. 51 m. the inclination proposed, vnto the tangent of 51 gr. 30 m. which is the true latitude of the place, and therefore it is a polar plane.
Here then the style will be parallell to the plane, and the houre-lines parallell one to the other, as in the meridian and direct polar planes. But that we may know how to draw the houre-lines, and where to place the style, we are to consider 1 The arke of the plane betweene the horizon and the houre-lines. In a meridian plane the arke betweene the horizon and the hourelines, is alwayes equall to the latitude of the place; in a direct polar it is an arke of 90 gr; in these declining po∣lars it is greater then the latitude, and yet lesse then 90 gr. and may be knowne in this maner. As the sine of 90 gr. to the cosine of the latitude: So the sine of the declination to the cosine of the arke betweene the horizon and the houre-lines. Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the sine of 38 gr. 30 m. the complement of the latitude, the same ex∣tent will reach from the sine of 65 gr. 40 m. the declination proposed, vnto the sine of 34 gr. 34 m. whose complement 55 gr. 26 m. the arke of the plane betweene the horizon and the substylar, to which all the houre-lines must be parallel. 2 The inclination of the meridian of the plane to the meridian of the place. The substylar in a direct polar plane is alwayes the same with the houre of 12: in a meridian plane it is the same with the houre-line of 6: in these declining polars it must be pla∣ced betweene 12 and 6, according to the inclination of the meridian of the plane to the meridian of the place, which is thus knowne. As the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the latitude:
So the tangent of the declination of the plane, to the tangent of the inclination of meridians. Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of 51 gr. 30 m. the latitude of the place, the same extent will reach from the tangent of 65 gr. 40 m. the declination propo∣sed, vnto the tangent of 60 gr. and such is the angle of incli∣nation betweene the meridian of the place and the proper meridian of the plane, which resolued into time doth make foure houres; and so the substylar must here be placed vpon the houre of 8 in the morning. This angle being knowne, the rest of the angles at the pole are easily gathered. For if the houre of 12 be 60 gr. di∣stant from the meridian of the plane, the houre of 1 will be 75 gr. and the houre of 11, will be 45 gr. distant, and the rest of the houres, as in the Table following. Then com∣ming to the plane, 1 I draw an occult horizontall line HQ, wherein I make choice of a center H, and describe an occult circle for the horizon of the plane. 2 I find a chord of 55 gr. 26 m. and inscribe it into this cir∣cle, from Q vnto B, according to the situation of the plane; so the line HB shall be the meridian of the plane: and there∣fore the substylar and the line AC crossing it at right angles, shall be the equator. 3 I consider the length of the plane, and how many houres I am to draw vpon it, that so I may proportion the height of the style; and I finde by the fundamentall diagram and the former table, that it will containe all the houres from Sun rising vntill 1 afternoone: and therefore the meridian of the plane falling on the houre of 8 in the morning, there will be foure houres on the one side, and fiue on the other side of the substylar. But in all polar planes the height of the style aboue the substylar must be equall to the distance of the third houre from the substylar, or about 4/7 of the fourth houre, or little more then ¼ of the fift houre, and thereupon I allow the height of this style to be equall to CB, which you may suppose to be ten inches.
geometric illustration 4 Because the equator AC is a tangent line in respect of the Radius BC, and the parts thereof are such as belong to the angles betweene the meridian of the plane and the hourelines, which angles are set downe in the table follow∣ing, I may finde the length of each seuerall tangent in this maner. As the tangent of 45 gr. is to the tangent of the houre: So the parts of the Radius, to the parts of the tangent line. The angle ABC betweene the meridian of the plane and the houre of 12, the meridian of the place is 60 gr. in
the former table, and the Radius BC is supposed to be ten inches; whereupon I extend the compasses from the tan∣gent of 45 gr. vnto the tangent of 60 gr. the same extent will reach from 10 in the line of numbers, vnto 17. 32, which shewes the length of the tangent AC betweene the substylar and the houre of 12, to be 17. 32 cent. The like reason holds for the rest of the houres. Hor. An. Po. Tangent Gr. M. In. Par. 4 60 0 17 32 5 45 0 10 00 6 30 0 5 77 7 15 0 2 68 8 Merid Substyl   3 45 65   7 30 1 32   11 15 1 99 9 15 0 2 68   18 45 3 39   22 30 4 14   26 15 4 93 10 30 0 5 77   33 45 6 68   37 30 7 67   41 15 8 77 11 45 0 10 00   48 45 11 40   52 30 13 03   56 15 14 97 12 60 0 17 32   63 45 20 28   67 30 24 14   71 15 29 46 1 75 0 37 32   78 45 50 27   82 30 75 96   86 15 152 57 2 90 0 Infinit 5 These lengths being thus found and set downe in the table, I take out 17 inches 32 cent. and prick them in the equator from C vnto A for the houre of 12, and 37 inches 32 cent. and prick them downe for the houre of 1. And so the rest of the houre-points. 6 This done, if I draw right lines through each of these points, crossing the equator at right angles, they shall be the houre-lines required: and if I set the style ouer the substylar, so as the edge of it may be parallell to the plane, and the height of it be ten inches equall to the former Radius BC, it shall repre∣sent the axis of the world, and be truly placed for casting of the shadow vpon the houre-lines in this declining polar plane.
CHAP. X. To draw the houre-lines in a declining inclining plane. IF a plane shall decline from the prime verticall, and incline to the horizon, and yet not lie euen with the poles of the world, it is then called a declining inclining plane. Of these there are seuerall sorts; for the inclination being Northward, the plane may fall between the horizon and the pole, as the circle BMD in the fundamentall Diagram; or betweene the zenith and the pole, as BFD: or the inclina∣tion may be Southward, and so be represented by BKD, it may also fall either below the intersection of the meridian and the equator, or aboue it; and each of these haue two fa∣ces, the vpper toward the zenith, and the lower toward the nadir; wherein hauing the latitude of the place with the declination and inclination of the plane, we are farther to consider, 1 The arke of the meridian betweene the pole and the plane. 2 The inclination of the plane to the meridian. 3 The arke of the plane between the horizon and the meridian. 4 The angle of inclination betweene both meridians. 5 The height of the pole aboue the plane. 6 The distance of the substylar from the meridian. 7 The distances of each houre-line from the substylar. And all these seuen may be represented in the fundamen∣tall diagram, as in this example. In our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. a plane is proposed, decli∣ning from the verticall 24 gr. 20 m. and inclinig Northward 36 gr. the vpper face lying open to the Southwest, the lower to the Northeast. If I number these 24 gr. 20 m. in the hori∣zon from E to B, and there draw the line BCD, it shall repre∣sent
the horizontall line of the plane: then crossing it at right angles with the plane HZQ drawne through the ze∣nith, I number 36 gr. for the inclination from Q vnto M, and there draw the circle BMD, crossing the meridian in the point a; this circle so drawne shall represent the plane proposed; and because it doth not passe through the pole, is therfore no polar, but an ordinary declining inclining plane. 1 The arke of the meridian of the place between the pole and the plane, is here represented by Pa, and may be found by resoluing the triangle DNa, wherein the angle at N is knowne to be a right angle, the angle at D is the angle of inclination, the side D N the complement of the declinati∣on, which being knowne, As the sine of 90 gr. to the cosine of declination: So the tangent of inclination to the horizon, to the tangent of the meridian betweene the horizon and the plane. Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the sine of 65 gr. 40 m. the complement of the declination, the same extent will reach from the tangent of 36 gr. the inclination proposed, vnto the tangent of 33 gr. 30 m. and such is the ark of the meridian Na between the horizon and the plane. This arke Na being compared with the arke NP, which is the eleuation of the pole aboue the horizon, and is here sup∣posed to be 51 gr. 30 m. the difference N a cometh to 18 gr. and such is the arke of the meridian required betweene the pole and the plane. 2 The inclination of the plane to the meridian is here re∣presented by the angle NaD, and may be found by that which we haue giuen in the former triangle DNa. For As the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the declination from the verticall: So the sine of inclination to the horizon, to the cosine of the inclination to the meridian. Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the sine
of 24 gr. 20 m. the declination of the plane, the same extent will reach from the sine of 36 gr. the inclination giuen, vnto the cosine of 76 gr. And such is NaD the angle of inclina∣tion betweene the plane Da, and Na the meridian of the place. Or As the sine of the arke of the meridian betweene the horizon and the plane, is to the sine of 90 gr. So the cotangent of the declination to the tangent of the inclination to the meridian. Extend the compasses from the sine of 33 gr. 30 m. the ark of the meridian betweene the horizon and the plane, vnto the sine of 90 gr. the same extent will reach from the tangent of 65 gr. 40 m. the complement of the declination vnto the tangent of 76 gr. And such is the inclination of the plane to the meridian, the same as before. 3 The arke of the plane betweene the horizon and the meridian, is here represented by D a, and may also be found by that which we haue giuen in the former triangle DNa. As the sine of 90 gr. to the cosine of inclination to the horizon: So the cotangent of the declination to the tangent of the plane required. Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the sine of 54 gr. the complement of the inclination of the plane to the horizon, the same extent will reach from the tangent of 65 gr. 40 m. the complement of the declination, vnto the tan∣gent of 69 gr. 54 m. And such is D a the arke of the plane, betweene the horizon and the meridian of the place. 4 The inclination of meridians is here represented by the angle aPb. For if I let downe a perpendicular Pb from the pole vnto the plane, this perpendicular shall be the me∣ridian of the plane; and we shall haue another triangle abP, wherein the angle at b is a right angle, because of the per∣pendicular, the angle at a is the inclination of the plane to the meridian of the place, and the side P a is the arke of the
meridian betweene the pole and the plane, which being knowne, As the cosine of the arke of the meridian betweene the pole and the plane is to the sine of 90 gr. So the cotangent of the inclination to the meridian, to the tangent of inclination of the meridian of the plane to the meridian of the place. Extend the compasses from the sine of 72 gr. the comple∣ment of the arke Pa, betweene the pole and the plane, vnto the sine of 90 gr. the same extent wil reach from the tangent of 14 gr. the complement of the inclination of the plane to the meridian, vnto the tangent of 14 gr. 41 m. And such is the angle aPb of inclination betweene the meridian of the place and the proper meridian of the plane, which resolued into time, doth make about 59 minutes, and so the substylar must here be placed neare the houre of 1 after noone. 5 The height of the pole aboue the plane is here repre∣sented by Pb, the arke of the proper meridian between the pole and the plane, and may be found by that which wee haue giuen in the triangle abP. For As the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the meridian of the place betweene the pole and the plane: So the sine of the inclination to the meridian, to the sine of the height of the pole aboue the plane. Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the sine of 18 gr. the arke Pa of the meridian of the place from the pole to the plane, the same extent wil reach from the sine of baP the inclination of the plane to the meridian of the place, vnto the sine of 17 gr. 26 m. Or As the sine of 90 gr. to the cosine of inclination of meridians:
So the tangent of the meridian of the place betweene the pole and the plane, to the tangent of the height of the pole aboue the plane, Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the sine of 75 gr. 19 m. the complement of aPb the inclination of the two meridians, the same extent will reach from the tan∣gent of 18 gr. the arke Pa of the generall meridian between the pole and the plane, vnto the tangent of 17 gr. 26 m. And such is Pb the height of the pole aboue the plane; and such must be the height of the style aboue the substylar. 6 This distance of the substylar from the meridian of the place, is here represented by ab the arke of the plane be∣tween the two meridians, and may be found by that which we had giuen at the first in the former triangle abP. For As the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the inclination to the meridian: So the tangent of the meridian of the place betweene the pole and the plane, vnto the tangent of the substylar from the meridian of the place. Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the sine of 14 gr. the com∣plement of baP, the inclination of the plane to the meridian, the same extent will reach from the tangent of 18 gr. the arke of the generall meridian betweene the pole and the plane, vnto the tan∣gent of 4 gr. 30 m. And such is the arke of the plane betweene the two meridi∣ans; and such must be the distance from the houre of 12 to the substylar. Hor. Ang. Po. Arc. Pla. Gr. M. Gr. M. 7 89 41 88 57 8 74 41 47 35 9 59 41 27 9 10 44 41 16 31 11 29 41 9 41 12 14 41 4 30   Mrid. Substyl 1 0 19 0 6 2 15 19 4 42 3 30 19 9 56 4 45 19 16 52 5 60 19 27 45 6 75 19 48 51 7 The distances of the houre-lines from the substylar, are here also repre∣sented by those arks of the plane, which
are intercepted between the proper meridian and the houre-circles. For in these triangles the angle at b betweene the plane and the proper meridian is a right angle, the side Pb is the height of the pole aboue the plane, and then the angles at the pole between the proper meridian and the houre-circles being gathered into a table. As the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the pole aboue the plane: So the tangent of the angle at the pole, to the tangent of the houre-line from the substylar. Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the sine of 17 gr. 26 m. the height of the pole aboue the plane, the geometric illustration
same extent will reach from the tangent of 14 gr. 41 m. the angle at the pole belonging to the houre of 12, vnto the tangent of 4 gr. 30 m. for the arke of the plane betweene the substylar and the houre of 12; and frō the tangent of 29 gr. 41 m. vnto the tangent of 9 gr. 41 m. for the houre of 11, and so for the rest of the arks of the plane between the substylar and the houre-lines, as in the former table. These arkes being thus found, will serue for the drawing of the houre-lines on either side of the plane: but supposing it to be the vpper side, I consider how the lines doe fall in the fundamentall diagram, and accordingly 1 I draw an occult horizontall line DD, wherein I make choice of the center C, and thence draw an occult circle for the horizon of the plane. 2 I finde a chord of 69 gr. 54 m. the arke of the plane be∣tweene the horizon and the meridian, and inscribe it into this circle from D vnto a, and there draw the line Ca for the houre of 12. 3 I finde a chord of 4 gr. 30 m. the arke of the plane be∣tweene the two meridians, and inscribe it into this circle from a vnto b, and there draw the line Cb for the sub∣stylar. 4 The substylar being drawne, I may inscribe the chords of the arkes of the plane from the substylar, and draw the houre-lines, and set vp the style as in the former planes. A second example of a Plane falling betweene the pole and the zenith. In like maner if in our latitude a plane be proposed decli∣ning from the verticall 24 gr. 20 m. as before, but inclining to the horizon 75 gr. 40 m. Northward, the vpper face being opē to the Southwest, the lower to the Northeast, this plane shall be here represented by the circle BFD, crossing the meridian in the point d, between the pole and the zenith, and the pro∣per meridian of this plane, by the peendicular arke Pe. Then in this triangle DNd knwing the side DN the
complement of the declination, with the angle of inclina∣nation to the horizon at D, and the right angle at N, these former Canons will giue Nd the arke of the meridian be∣tween the horizon and the plane to be 74 gr. 20 m; and ther∣fore Pd the arke of the meridian betweene the pole and the plane will be 22 gr. 50 m. the angle DdN of the inclination of the plane to the meridian, will be found to be 66 gr. 29 m. and Dd the arke of the plane between the horizon and the meridian 83 gr. 36 m. Againe, in the triangle Ped knowing the side Pd the arke of the meridian betweene the pole and the plane, with the angle of inclination to the meridian at d, and the right at e, the angle dPe of the inclination of the two meridians will be found to be 25 gr. 17 m. and Pe the height of the pole aboue the plane to be 20 gr. 50 m. and de the distance of the substylar from the meridian a∣bout 9 gr. 32 m. Declinatiō 24 20 Inclinatiō 75 40 Diff. meri. 83 36 dist. substy 9 32 Alti. Styl. 20 50 Hor. Ang. Po. Arc. Pla. Gr. M. Gr. M. 8 85 17 76 56 9 70 17 44 47 10 55 17 27 11 11 40 17 16 43 12 25 17 9 32 1 10 17 3 41   Merid Substyl 2 4 43 1 40 3 19 43 7 16 4 34 43 13 50 5 49 43 22 46 6 64 43 37 0 7 79 43 62 58 Lastly, hauing found the height of the pole aboue the plane, and gathered the angles at the pole, the arks of the plane from the substylar to the houre-lines will be as in this table. This done, if we consider how the lines doe fall in the fundamentall dia∣gram, we may there see how the North pole is eleuated aboue the lower face, & the South pole aboue the vpper face of the plane, and accordingly make choice of a center, draw the horizontall, ye meridian, the substylar, & the houre-lines, and set vp the style as in the other planes. A third example of a Plane inclining to the Southward. If in our latitude a plane were pro∣posed
declining from the verticall 24 gr. 20 m. as before, but inclining to the horizon 14 gr. 20 m. Southward, the vpper face being open to the Northeast, the lower to the South-west, this plane shall be here represented by the circle BKD crossing the meridian in the point f betweene the equator and the horizon, and the proper meridian of this plane by the perpendicular arke Pg let downe from the pole to the plane, neare the houre of 11, at the North part of the hori∣zon, as may partly appeare by the nearest extent of the com∣passes. Then in the triangle BSf, knowing the side BS the cōple∣ment of the declination, with the angle of inclination to the horizon at B, and the right angle at S, we may find Sf the ark of the meridian betweene the horizon and the plane to be 13 gr. 6 m. And therefore Pf the arke of the meridian be∣tweene the pole and the plane to the Southward 115 gr. 24 m. but 64 gr. 36 m. to the Northward, the angle BfS or DfN of the inclination of the plane to the meridian, will be found 84 gr. 9 m; & Bf or Df the arke of the plane between the horizon & the meridian 66 gr. 20 m. Declinatiō 24 20 Inclinatiō 14 20 diff. merid 13 27 dist. substy 12 8 Alt. Styl. 64 0 Hor. Ang. Po Arc. Pla. Gr. M. Gr. M. 6 76 33 75 6 7 61 33 58 56 8 46 33 43 30 9 31 33 28 55 10 16 33 14 58 11 1 33 1 25   Merid Substyl 12 13 27 12 8 1 28 27 25 57 2 43 27 40 23 3 58 27 55 38 4 73 27 71 41 5 88 27 88 15 Again, in the triangle Pgf knowing the side Pf the arke of the meridian be∣tweene the pole and the plane, with the angle of inclinatiō to the meridian at f, and the right angle at g, the angle fPg of the inclination of the two meridians wil be found to be 13 gr. 27 m. and Pg the height of the pole aboue the plane, a∣bout 64 gr. and fg the distance of the substylar from the meridian 12 gr. 8 m. Hauing found the height of the pole aboue the plane, and gathered the an∣gles at the pole, the arkes of the plane from the substylar to the houre-lines will be found as in this table.
This done, if we consider how the lines do fall in the funda∣mentall diagram, we may there see how the North pole is ele∣uated aboue the vpper face, and the South pole aboue the lower face of this plane, and accordingly make choice of the center, draw the horizontall, the meridian, the substylar, and the houre-lines, and set vp the style as in the former planes. CHAP. XI. To describe the Tropiques and other circles of de∣clination in an equinoctiall Plane. SVch circles as are parallell to the equinoctiall, and yet fall within the tropiques, may be described on any plane by help of these lines of proportion, but after a different maner, according as the style shall be either perpendicular, or parallel to the plane, or cut the plane with oblique angles. In an equinoctiall plane where the style is perpendicular to the plane, the tropiques and other circles of declination will be perfect circles: wherefore consider the length of the style in inches and parts, and the declination of the circle which you intend to describe in degrees and minutes, the proportion will hold, As the tangent of 45 gr. to the length of the style: So the cotangent of the parallell, to the semidiameter of his circle. Suppose the length of the style aboue the plane to be 10 inches, and that it were required to finde the semidiame∣ter of the tropique, whose declination is knowne to be 23 gr. 30 m: extend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. vnto the tangent of 66 gr. 30 m. the same extent will reach in the line of numbers from 10 vnto 23, which shewes the semi∣diameter of the tropique to be 23 inches. So if the declina∣tion be 20 gr. the semidiameter will be 27 inches 47. cent; if
geometric illustration 15 gr. then 37.32; if 10 gr. then 56.71; if 5 gr. then 114.30; and so in the rest. Or if it were required to proportion the style to the plane, As the tangent of 45 gr. to the tangent of the declination: So the semidiameter of the plane, to the length of the style. As if the semidiameter of the greatest parallell vpon the plane were but six inches, and that parallell should be the fift degree of declination: extend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. vnto the tangent of 5 gr. the same extent wil reach in the line of numbers from 6.00 vnto about 0.53,
which shewes that the length of the style must be 53 parts of an inch diuided into 100; then the length of the style being knowne, the semidiameter of the other circles will be found as before. I begin here with the fift parallell, and thence proceed vnto the tropique, because the shadow of the rest neare the equinoctial, would be ouerlong, and the equinoctiall it selfe cannot be described. The parallels of North declination are to be set on the North face, and the parallels of South de∣clination on the South face of the plane. Neither need these parallels to be drawne in full circles, but onely to the hori∣zontall line, which shall be described in Cap. xviij. Hauing by these meanes set vp the style to his true height, and drawne the circles of declination, if we shall place the plane so as it shall make an angle with the horizon equall to the cōplement of the latitude, and then turne it vntil the top of the style cast the shadow vpon the parallell of declination belonging to ye time, the meridian of the plane will shew the meridian of the place, and the shadow of the style the houre of the day, without the help of a magneticall needle. CHAP. XII. To describe the Tropiques and other circles of de∣clination in a polar plane. IN all polar planes, whether the be parallel to the meridian or to the circle of the houre of 6, or otherwise declining, the equinoctiall will be a right line, but the tropiques and other circles of declination wil be sections hyperbolicall, and be thus described. Consider the length of the style, the declination of the parallell, and the angle at the pole betweene the substylar and the houre-line, whereon you meane to describe the pa∣rallell.
If you would find where the parallels doe crosse the sub∣stylar; As the tangent of 45 gr. to the tangent of declination: So is the length of the style, to the distance of the parallell from the equinoctiall. geometric illustration As in the example of the polar plane, where the length of the style BC was found to be 1 inch 61 cent. if you de∣sire to know the distance betweene the equinoctiall and the tropique vpon the substylar line: extend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. vnto the tangent of 23 gr. 30 m. the same extent will reach in the line of numbers from 1.61 vnto 0.70; and therefore the distance required is 70 parts of an inch diuided into 100. The like reason holdeth for all other parallels of declination crossing the substylar. But if you would finde where the parallels doe crosse any other of the houre-lines, first find the distance betweene the axis of the style and the houre-line, then the distance betweene the equinoctiall and the parallell, both these may be represented in this maner. On the center B and any semidiameter BD describe an occult arke of a circle, and therein describe a chord of 23 gr.
30 m. from D vnto T, with such other intermediate de∣clinations as you intend to describe on the plane, so the line BD shall be the equa∣tor, and BT the tropique, and the other intermediate lines the lines of declina∣tion. geometric illustration That done, consider your plane, which for example may be either the meridian or ye declining polar plane, wherein hauing drawne both the equator, and the houre-lines as before, first take out the height of the style, and prick that downe in this equator from B vnto C; then take out all the di∣stances, betweene B the top of the style and the seuerall points wherein the houre-lines doe crosse the equator, transfer them into this equator BD from the center B, and at the termes of these distances erect lines perpendicular to the equator, crossing the lines of declination, and note them with the number of the houre from whence they were ta∣ken: so these perpendiculars shal represent those houre-lines, and the seuerall distances between the equator and the lines of declination, shall giue the like distances between the equa∣tor and the parallels of declination vpon your plane. Vpon this ground it followeth,
To find the distance betweene the axis and the houre-lines. As the cosine of the houre from the substylar, is to the sine of 90 gr. So the length of the style, to the distance between the axis and the houre-line. geometric illustration As if in the former example of the meridian plane, where BC the height of the style is supposed to be 10 inches, it were required to find the distance between B the top of the style and the point wherein the houre of 11 in the morning doth crosse the equator, which is here represented by B 5, be∣cause it is the fift houre from the substylar, whose angle at
the pole is 75 gr. Extend the compasses from the sine of 15 gr. the complement of the fift houre from the substylar, vnto the sine of 90 gr. the same extent wil reach from 10.00 in the line of numbers vnto 38.64; and therefore the distance B 5 between the axis and the houre-line, is 38 inches & 64 cent. and may be called the secant of the houre. Then in the re∣ctangle B 5 T, hauing the side B 5, and the angle of declina∣tion at B. To finde the distance betweene the equinoctiall and the parallell. As the tangent of 45 gr. to the tangent of the declination: So the distance betweene the axis and the houre-line, to the distance between the equinoctiall and the parallell. Extend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. vnto the tangent of 23 gr. 30 m. the declinatiō of the tropique, so the same extent will reach in the line of numbers from 38.64, the distance between the axis and the fift houre-line vnto 16.80; and therefore the distance is 16 inches and 80 cent. The like reason holdeth for all the rest, which may be gathered and set downe in such a Table as this which followeth. Wherein I haue set downe these distances for seuerall de∣clinations, for 11 gr. 30 m. for 16 gr. 55 m. for 20 gr 12 m. for 21 gr 41 m. and for the declination of the Tropique 23 gr. 30 m. which may be applied to the like declinations in all meridian and direct polar planes. As in the former example of the polar plane, where BC the height of the style is found to be 1 inch 61 cent. if it were required to find the distance betweene B the top of the style and the points wherein the houre-lines of 7 in the morning or 5 after noon, do crosse the equator (which distances, I cal∣led the secants of those houres.) either you may extend the compasses from the sine of 15 gr. the complement of the houre from the substylar vnto the sine of 90 gr. so the same
Hor. Ang. Po Tangent Secant. 11 30 16 55 20 12 21 41 23 30 Gr. M. In. Pat. In. Pa. In. Pa. In. Pa. In. Pa In. Pa. In. Pa 0 0 0 0 0 10 0 2 3 3 4 3 68 3 98 4 35   3 45 0 65 10 02 2 04 3 05 3 69 3 99 4 36   7 30 1 32 10 09 2 05 3 07 3 71 4 01 4 39   11 15 1 99 10 20 2 07 3 10 3 75 4 05 4 43 1 15 0 2 68 10 35 2 10 3 15 3 81 4 12 4 50   18 45 3 39 10 56 2 15 3 21 3 89 4 20 4 59   22 30 4 14 10 82 2 20 3 29 3 99 4 30 4 70   26 15 4 93 11 15 2 26 3 39 4 10 4 43 4 85 2 30 0 5 77 11 55 2 34 3 51 4 24 4 60 5 02   33 45 6 68 12 03 2 44 3 66 4 42 4 78 5 23   37 30 7 67 12 60 2 56 3 83 4 64 5 02 5 48   41 15 8 77 13 30 2 70 4 05 4 89 5 29 5 78 3 45 0 10 00 14 14 2 87 4 30 5 20 5 63 6 15   48 45 11 40 15 17 3 08 4 62 5 58 6 03 6 00   52 30 13 03 16 43 3 34 5 00 6 04 6 54 7 14   56 15 14 97 18 00 3 66 5 48 6 62 7 00 7 83 4 60 0 17 32 20 00 4 07 6 08 7 36 7 95 8 70   63 45 20 28 22 61 4 60 6 88 8 32 9 00 9 83   67 30 24 14 26 13 5 31 7 95 9 61 10 39 11 36   71 15 29 46 31 11 6 33 9 47 11 45 12 37 13 53 5 75 0 37 32 38 64 7 86 11 74 14 20 15 36 16 80   78 45 50 27 51 26 10 43 15 60 18 89 20 38 22 28   82 30 75 96 76 61 15 58 23 32 28 19 30 47 33 31   86 15 152 57 152 90 31 10 46 54 56 26 60 81 66 48 6 90 0 Infin. Infin. Infin. Infin. Infin. Infin. Infin. extent wil reach in the line of numbers from 1.61 the length of the style, vnto 6.21, according to the former Canon. Or else you may make vse of the former Table, extending the compasses in the line of numbers from 10.00 the length of the style in the Table, vnto 1.61 the length of the style be∣longing to your plane, so the same extent shall reach from from 38.64 the secant in the Table, vnto 6.21, and such is your secant required, the distance betweene the top of the
style and the point of intersection, wherein the fift houre line from the substylar doth crosse the equator. Again, the same extent will reach from 16.80 the distance in the Table belonging to the fift houre-line betweene the equator and the parallell of 23 gr. 30 m. declination, vnto 2.70 for the like distance vpon your plane; and so for the rest, which may be gathered and set downe in a Table. Hor. An. Po Tang Secant Trop. Gr. M. In. P. In. P. In P. 12 0 0 0 0 1 61 0 70 11 1 15 0 0 43 1 63 0 72 10 2 30 0 0 93 1 85 0 80 9 3 45 0 1 61 2 27 0 99 8 4 60 0 2 79 3 22 1 40 7 5 75 0 6 00 6 21 2 70 That done, and the equa∣tor drawne as before, if you would draw the tropiques in the polar plane, looke into the Table, and take 70 cent. out of the line of inches, and pricke them downe in the substylar on either side of the equator, and so 72 cent. on the first houre, and 80 on the second houre, and 2 inches 70 cent. on the fift houre from the substylar, and the rest of these distances on their seuerall houre-lines, and then draw a crooked line through all these points, so as it makes no angles, the line so drawne shall be the Tropique required. In like maner you may draw any other parallell of declination. CHAP. XIII. To describe the Tropiques and other circles of declination in such a Plane as is neither equinoctiall nor polar. IN Planes neither equinoctiall nor polar, the equator will be a right line, the tropiques and other parallels of decli∣nation will be conicall sections, some of them parabolicall, some ellipticall, but the most of them hyperbolicall. To finde the points of intersection of these parallels with the houre-lines, wee are to consider, first the length of the
axis of the style in inches and parts of inches; secondly the height of the style aboue the plan; hirdly the angles at the pole betweene the proper meridian and the houre-circles. These being knowne, will help vs to find, first the angle be∣tweene the axis and the houre-lines on the plane; and then the distance between the center and the parallels: both these may be represented in this maner. geometric illustration Let the triangle ABC be made equal to the style belonging to your plane, AC the substylar, BC the axis of the style, AB the length of the style perpendicular to the plane. Then ha∣uing drawn the line BD perpēdicular to the axis on the cēter B, & any semidiameter BD describe an occult ark of a circle, and therein inscribe a chord of 23 gr. 30 m. from D vnto T, on either side of the line, with such other intermediate declina∣tions as you intend to describe on the plane, so the perpen∣dicular
BD shall be the equator, and BT the tropiques, and the other intermediate lines the parallels of declination. Wherefore you may take out the distance C ♈ from the cen∣ter to the equator, and pricke it downe on the substylar of your plane from the center at C vnto ♈, so the line drawne through ♈ perpendicular to your substylar, shal be the equa∣tor of your plane. That done, take the distance of each houre-line betweene the center and the equator of your plane, and pricke them downe in the equator of this figure, from the center at C, no∣ting the place, where they crosse the equator, with the num∣ber belonging to the houre, and drawing the houre-lines from C through the lines of declinaion. Or hauing the Sector you may draw an occult line CE perpendicular to the axis BC, and therein pricke downe the tangent of the height of the style aboue the plane, from C vnto E. Then draw the line EF parallell to the axis, crossing the substylar produced in the point F, this line EF will be the line of sines vpon the Sector, and therein you may pricke downe the sines of the complement of the angles at the pole from E toward F, and draw the houre-lines by those points through the lines of declination, so the angles at C between the axis BC and those houre-lines, shall be the angles be∣tweene the axis of your style and the houre-lines on your plane, and the seuerall distances betweene the point C and the lines of declination, shall giue you the like distances be∣tweene the center, and the parallels of declination vpon the houre-lines in your plane. Vpon this ground it followeth, 1 To proportion the style vnto the plane. Consider the height of the style aboue the plane, and the length of the substylar betweene the center and the place which you intend for the tropique. If it be the tropique which is farthest from the center, adde 113 gr. 30 m: if the nea∣rer tropique, adde 66 gr. 30 m. vnto the height of the style, the remainder vnto 180 gr. shall giue you the altitude of the Sun
aboue the plane when he commeth to that tropique. As in our latitude the height of the style aboue an horizontall plane is 51 gr. 30 m. adde vnto this 113 gr. 30 m. the summe is 165 gr. which being taken out of 180 gr. the remainder wil be 15 gr. and such is the altitude of the Sun aboue this plane when he commeth to be in the Winter tropique: but if you adde 66 gr. 30 m. vnto 51 gr. 30 m. the remainder to 180 gr. will be 62 gr. And such is the altitude of the Sunne in the Summer Tropique. Then As the sine of 66 gr. 30 m. to the sine of the Sunnes altitude: So the length of the substylar line, to the length of the axis of the style. geometric illustration
As in the first example of the declining verticall, where the height of the style was found to be 34 gr. 33 m. and is here represented before pag. 150. by the angle BC ♋; adde to this height 113 gr. 30 m. for the angle CB ♋, the sum wil be 148 gr. 3 m. and the remainder to 180 gr. wil be 31 gr. 57 m. and such is the angle B ♋ C of the altitude of the Sun aboue the plane, when he cometh to be in the tropique of ♋, which is here the farthest tropique from the center. Then supposing the length of the substylar line between the center and the place which is fit for the farthest tropique to be about 21 inches, extend the compasses from the sine of 66 gr. 30 m. vnto the sine of 31 gr. 57 m. the same extent will reach in the line of numbers from 21 vnto 12.11, and so the length of the axis of the style should be 12 inch. 11 cent. Or it may suffice to make it iust 12 inches, as a more easie ground for the rest of the worke. But if it were required to proportion the style vnto the plane, so as it may cast the shadow to the ful lēgth of the sub∣stylar line at all times of the yeare, you may then consider the Sunne in the tropique, which is to be set nearest vnto the center, and adde 66 gr. 30 m. vnto 34 gr. 33 m. so the re∣mainder vnto 180 gr. will be 78 gr. 57 m. And if you extend the compasses from the sine of 66 gr. 30 m. vnto the sine of 78 gr. 57 m. the same extent will reach in the line of numbers from 21 vnto 22.47 for the length of the axis of the style. 2 Hauing the length of the axis, and the height of the style aboue the plane, to find the length of the sides of the style. The style of a plane neither equinoctiall nor polar, may be either a small rod of iron set parallell to the axis of the world, or perpendicular to the plane, or else a thin plate of iron or brasse made in forme of a rectangle triangle BAC, with the base BC parallell to the axis of the world, the side AB perpendicular to the plane, & the side AC the same with the substylar line, wherein knowing BC, and the angle BAC,
As the sine of 90 gr. to the length of the axis: So the sine of the height of the style, to the length of the perpendicular side: And so the cosine of the height of the style, to the length of the substylar side. Thus in the former example, the length of the axis being supposed to be 12 inches, and the height of the style 34 gr. 33 m. Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. (or else from the sine of 5 gr. 45 m.) vnto 12 in the line of numbers, the same extent will reach from the sine of 34 gr. 33 m. vnto 6.80 in the line of numbers for the length of the perpendi∣cular side, and from the sine of 55 gr. 27 m. vnto 9.88 for the length of the substylar side. 3 To find the distance between the center and the equator vpon the substylar line. This is here represented by C ♈, and may be found by re∣soluing the rectangle triangle CB ♈. As the cosine of the height of the style, is to the sine of 90 gr. So the length of the axis, to the distance of the equator from the center. Extend the compasses from the sine of 55 gr. 27 m. vnto the sine of 90 gr. the same extent will reach in the line of numbers from 12 vnto 14.57. Wherefore if you take 14 inch. 57 cent. and pricking them down on your substylar line frō C vnto ♈, draw a line through ♈, crossing the substylar at right angles, the line so drawne shall be the equator. 4 To find the angles contained between the equator and the houre-lines vpon your plane. These angles made by B ♈ and the houre-lines, are com∣plements
of those which are at C, betweene BC the axis and those seuerall houre-lines, and depend vpon the angles at the pole, between the proper meridian and the houre-circles. As the sine of 90 gr. to the cosine of the angle at the pole: So the cotangent of the height of the style, to the tangent of the angle between the equator and the houreline. In our example the height of the style is 34 gr. 33 m. and the proper meridian falleth to be the same with the circle of the second houre after noone, whereupon the angle at the pole, betweene this proper meridian, and the circles of the houre of 1 on the one side, and 3 on the other side, wil be 15 gr; so between this meridian and the houre-circles of 12 and 4, the angle will be 30 gr. &c. as in the Table. Ho. An. Po Arc. Pla. An. Equ C ♈ C ♋ C ♑ Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr. M. In. P. In. P. In. P. substy 0 0 0 0 55 27 14 57 20 80 11 21 1 3 15 0 8 38 54 30 14 74 21 36 11 25 12 4 30 0 18 8 51 30 15 33 23 44 11 40 11 5 45 0 29 33 45 45 16 75 29 06 11 76 10 6 60 0 44 30 36 0 20 00 50 84 12 77 9 7 75 0 64 42 20 36 34 10 Infin. 15 82 8 8 90 0 90 0 0 0 Infinit   27 60 If then it be required to find the angle, which the houre-line of 4 after noone doth make with the plane of the equa∣tor, that is the angle C 4 B contained betweene the houre-line C 4 and the line B 4, drawne from the top of the style vnto the intersectiō of the houre-line of 4 with the equator. Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the sine of 60 gr. the complement of the angle at the pole, the same extent wil reach from the tangent of 55 gr. 27 m. the comple∣ment of the height of the pole, vnto the tangēt of 51 gr. 30 m.
and such is the angle C 4 B in the diagram Pag. 150. Or in crosse-worke, if it were required to finde the angle C 9 B, looke into the Table for the houre of 9, and there you shall find the angle at the pole. to be 75 gr; and if you ex∣tend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the tangent of 55 gr. 27 m. the same extent will reach from the sine of 15 gr. the complement of 75 gr. vnto the tangent of 20 gr. 36 m. and such is the angle C 9 B, made at the equator betweene the line B 9 drawne from the top of the style, and the houre-line C 9 drawne from the center. The like reason holdeth for the rest, which may be found and set downe in a table: then may you either draw these angles at C in the former fi∣gure more perfectly, and thence finish your worke, or else proceed 5 To find the distance betweene the center and the paral∣lels of declination. The distances betweene the center and the parallels of de∣clination, may be found by resoluing the triangles made by the axis BC, the lines of declination, and the houre-lines. For hauing the angles at the equator, and knowing the declina∣tion of the parallell, if the parallell shall fall betweene the e∣quator and the center, adde the declination vnto the angle at the equator; or if it shall fall without the equator, take the declination out of the angle at the equator, so shall you haue the angle at the parallell. Then As the sine of the angle at the parallell, to the cosine of the declination: So the length of the axis of the style, to the distance between the center and the parallell. Thus in our example, the angle at the equator belonging to the houre of 4 after noone, was found before to be 51 gr. 30 m: if you would find the distance between the center and the equator, extend the compasses frō the sine of 51 gr. 30 m.
vnto the sine of 90 gr. the complement of the declination, the same extent will reach in the line of numbers, from 12 vnto 15.33, and such is the distance vpon the houre-line of 4 between the center and the equator. If you would finde the distance vpon this houre-line, be∣tween the center and the inner tropique, whose declination is knowne to be 23 gr. 30 m. adde the declination to the an∣gle at the equator, so the angle at the parallell wil be 75 gr. wherefore extend the compasses from the sine of 75 gr. vnto the sine of 66 gr. 30 m. the complement of the declination, the same extent will reach in the line of numbers, from 12 vnto 11.40, and such is the length of the houre-line of 4 betweene the center and the tropique of ♑. If you would finde the distance vpon this houre-line be∣tween this center and the tropique of ♋, which is here the farthest from the center, take the declination out of the angle at the equator, so the angle at the parallell will be 28 gr. vnto wherefore extend the compasses from the sine of 28 gr. vnto the sine of 66 gr. 30 m. the same extent will reach in the line of numbers, from 12 vnto 23.44, and such is the distance be∣tweene the center and the tropique of ♋ vpon this houre-line of 4. The like reason holdeth for all the rest, which may be gathered and set downe in a table. That done and the equator drawne as before, if you would draw the tropique of ♋, looke into the table, and there fin∣ding vnder the title C ♋ the distance of the substylar be∣tween the center and the parallel of ♋ to be 20 inch. 80 cent. take 20 inch. 80 cent. out of the line of inches, and prick them downe in the substylar of your plane from C vnto ♋. Or if either the center fall without your plane, or the ex∣tent be too large for your compasses, you may pricke downe the difference betweene C ♈ and C ♋. As here the distance C ♈ between the center & the equator is 14.57, the distance C ♋ 20.80, the differēce 6.23, therfore taking 6 inch. 23 cent. pricke them downe on the substylar from ♈ vnto ♋, and you shall haue the same intersection of the tropique and the sub∣stylar, as before; & the like reason holdeth for pricking down
of the rest of these distances on their seuerall houre-lines. Then hauing the points of intersection betweene the houre-lines and the parallell, you may ioyne them all in a crooked line without making of any angles, the line so drawne shall be the tropique required. And after this maner may you draw any other parallell of declination, whereof you haue examples in the most of the former Diagrams. CHAP. XIIII. To describe the parallels of the Signes in any of the former Planes. THe equator and the tropiques before described, do shew the Suns entrance into 4 of the Signes, the equator into ♈ and ♎, the one tropique into ♋, and the other into ♑, the rest of the intermediate Signes will be described in the same maner as the tropiques, if first we know their declination. The maner of finding the declination not onely of the beginning of the Signes, but of all other points of the eclip∣tique, is before set downe in 2. Prop. Astronomicall, pag. 52. by which you may finde the declination of the beginning of ♉, ♍, ♏, and ♓ to be 11 gr. 30 m. and of ♊, ♌, ♐ and ♒ to be 20 gr. 12 m. If then you inscribe the chords of 11 gr. 30 m. and of 20 gr. 12 m. into the former figure BDT Pag. 145. from D toward T, the lines drawne from B through the termes of those chords shall be the Signes required. And with these declinations, the height of the style, and the length of the axis, you may finde the angles at the parallell, and then the distances between the center and the parallell, which being pricked downe vpon their seuerall houre-lines shall giue you the points of intersection, by which you may draw the parallels of the Signes, as in the figures belonging to the polar planes.
CHAP. XV. To describe the parallels of the length of the day in any of the former Planes. THe length of the day will alwayes be 12 houres long when the Sunne cometh to be in the equator, and this holdeth in all latitudes; but at other times of the yeare the same place of the Sunne, wil not giue the same length of the day in another latitude; wherefore the latitude being known, we are first To find the declination of the Sunne agreeing to the length of the day. Consider the difference betweene the length of an equi∣noctiall day and the day proposed, and turne the time into degrees and minutes. As the sine of 90 gr. is to the sine of halfe the difference: So the cotangent of the latitude, to the tangent of the declination. As if the length of the day proposed were 15 houres, the difference betweene this and an equinoctiall day (whose length is alwayes 12 houres) would be three houres, which make 45 gr. and the halfe difference is 22 gr. 30 m: wherefore extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the tan∣gent of 38 gr. 30 m. the complement of the latitude, the same extent wil reach from the sine of 22 gr. 30 m. vnto the tangent of 16 gr. 55 m. for the declination of the Sunne at such time as the length of the day is either 9 or 15 houres; and from the sine of 30 gr. vnto the tangent of 21 gr. 40 m. for the de∣clination belonging to 8 or 16 houres, and from the sine of
geometric illustration 15 gr. vnto the tangent of 11 gr. 38 m. for the declination be∣longing to 10 or 14 houres, and from the sine of 7 gr. 30 m. vnto the tangent of 5 gr. 56 m. for the declination of the Sun when the length of the day is either 11 or 13 houres. If then you inscribe the chords of these arks into the for∣mer figure BDT, the lines drawne from B through the termes of these arks, shall be the lines belonging to the diur∣nall arkes, and the seuerall distances betweene them and the point C giue the like distances betweene the center and the parallels of the length of the day vpon the houre-lines in your plane. Or comparing these angles of declination with the angles at the equator, you may haue the angles at the parallell, and then find the distances between the center and the parallell, which being pricked downe vpon the seuerall houre-lines,
geometric illustration shall giue you the points of intersection, by which you may draw the parallels of the length of the day, whereof you haue another example in the diagram belonging to an horizontal plane, pag. 105. And by the same reason you may draw the parallels of those circles to which the Sunne is verticall, the parallels of the principall feasts, or what else depends on the declination of the Sunne.
CHAP. XVI. To draw the old vnequall houres in the former Planes. IT was the maner of the Ancients to divide the day into twelue equall houres, and the night into twelue other e∣qual houres, and so the whole day and night into 24 houres. Of these 24, those which belonged vnto the day, were either longer or shorter (excepting the two equinoctial dayes) then those which belonged vnto the night; and the Summer houres alwayes longer then the houres in the Winter, accor∣ding to the lengthening of the dayes, whereupon they are called the old vnequall (and by some the Planetary) houres. geometric illustration
To expresse these in the former Planes: first draw the common houre-lines, the equator, and the tropiques, as be∣fore: then describe two occult parallels of the length of the day, one for 9 houres, the other for 15 houres; for so you may draw a streight line for the first vnequall houre through 5 ho. 45 m. in the parallell of 15, and through 8 ho. 15 m. in the pa∣rallel of 9. This streight line shal passe directly through 7 ho. 0 m. in the equator, and so cut off a twelfth part of the arks aboue the horizon, both from these two parallels and the e∣quator: and being continued vnto the tropiques, it shall also cut off about a twelfth part from them, and all the rest of the parallels of declination, without any sensible error. In like maner may you draw the second vnequall houre through 7 ho. in the parallell of 15, through 8 ho. in the equa∣tor, and through 9 ho. in the parallell of 9, and so in the rest, as in this Table. Horae 15 Aeq 9 Ho. M. Ho Ho. M. 0 4 30 6 7 30 1 5 45 7 8 15 2 7 0 8 9 0 3 8 15 9 9 45 4 9 30 10 10 30 5 10 45 11 11 15 6 12 0 12 12 0 7 1 15 1 0 45 8 2 30 2 1 30 9 3 45 3 2 15 10 5 0 4 3 0 11 6 15 5 3 45 12 7 30 6 4 30 And of these vnequall houres you haue a farther example in the diagram belonging to the polar declining plane, Pag. 130.
CHAP. XVII. To draw the houres from Sun rising and sun setting in the former Planes. TO know how many houres are past since the Sun rising, or how many remaine to the Sun setting; first draw the common houre-lines, the equator, and the tropiques, as be∣fore: then describe two occult parallels of the length of the day, one for 8 houres, and the other for 16 houres. For so you geometric illustration
may draw the first houre from the Sun rising through the common houres of 5 in the parallell of 16, of 7 in the equa∣tor, and of 9 in the parallell of 8. In like maner the second houre from Sun rising through the common houres of 6 in the parallell of 16, of 8 in the equator, and of 10 in the pa∣rallell of 8. And so the rest in their order. The first houre before Sun setting, or the 23 houre from the last Sun setting, may be drawne in like sort through the common houres of 3 after noone in the parallell of 8, of 5 in the equator, and of 7 in the parallell of 16. The second houre before Sun setting, or the 22 houre after the last Sun setting through the common houres of 2 in the parallell of 8, of 4 in the equator, and of 6 in the parallell of 16. And so the rest in the like order, whereof you haue another example in the Diagram belonging to the declining verticall, Pag. 116. CHAP. XVIII. To draw the horizontall line in the former planes. THe common houre-lines do commonly depend on the shadow of the axis, but the parallels of the Signes, and of the length of the day, the houre-lines from Sun rising and Sun setting, with many others, depend on the shadow of the top of the style, or some one point in the axis, which here signifieth the center of the world, and is represented by the point B. And these lines so depending, are then only vseful when they fall betweene the two tropiques, and within the horizon. There may be seuerall horizontall lines drawne vpon e∣uery plane, as I shewed before in finding the inclination of a plane; but the proper horizontall line which is here meant, must always be in the same plane with B the top of the style; so that in an horizontall plane there can be no such hori∣zontall
line, but in all other planes it may be found by ap∣plying the horizontall leg of the Sector vnto the top of the style, and then working as before; and the intersection of this line with the meridian or substylar line, may be found by proportion. 1 To find the intersection of the horizon with the meridian, in an equinoctiall plane. As the tangent of 45 gr. to the tangent of the latitude: So is the height of the style, to the distance between the style and the horizontal line. As in the example of the former equinoctiall plane, Pag. 142. extend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. vnto 51 gr. 30 m. the tangent of the latitude, the same extent will reach in the line of numbers, from 52 the length of the style vnto 66, and such is the distance betweene the style and the horizontall line; wherefore I take 66 parts out of a line of in∣ches, and pricke them downe in the meridian line from C vnto H aboue the style in the vpper face, but below the style in the lower face of the plane, so a right line drawne through H, parallell to the houre of 6, shall be the horizontall line. 2 To find the intersection of the horizon with the meridian, in a direct polar plane. As the tangent of 45 gr. to the cotangent of the latitude: So the length of the style, to the distance between the style & the horizontal line. As in the example of the former polar plane, Pag. 144. ex∣tend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. vnto tangent of 38 gr. 30 m. the complement of the latitude, the same ex∣tent will reach in the line of numbers, from 1.61 the length
of the style, vnto 1.28, and such is the distance vpon the me∣ridian betweene the style and the horizontall line. In all vpright planes, whether they be direct verticall, or declining, or meridian planes, the horizontall line must al∣wayes be drawne through A the foot of the style, as may ap∣peare in the examples before, Pag. 102.107.116. And generally in all planes whatsoeuer, the horizontal line must be drawne through the intersection of the equator with the houre of 6. Or if that intersection fall without the plane, yet if any arks of the length of the day be drawne on the plane, the horizontall line may be drawne through their intersections, with the houres of the Suns rising or setting. CHAP. XIX. To describe the verticall circles in the former Planes. THe vertical circles commonly called Azimuths, are great circles drawne through the zenith, by which we may know in what part of the heauen the Sunne is, how far from the East or West, and how neare vnto the meridian. In all vpright planes, whether they be direct verticals, or declining, or meridian planes, the semidiameter of the ho∣rizon wil be the same with AB the perpendicular side of the style, and these Azimuths will be parallels one to the other, and the distance of each Azimuth, from the foote of the style vpon the horizontall line, may be found in this man∣ner. Consider the length of the style in inches and parts of in∣ches, and the distance of each Azimuth from the style, accor∣ding to the angle at the zenith in degrees and minutes. As the tangent of 45 gr. to the tangent of the azimuth:
So the length of the style, to the length of the horizontall line between the style and the azimuth. geometric illustration As if it were required to draw the common azimuths on the South face of the verticall plane before described, where AB the length of the style may be supposed to be 10 inches. Here the plane hauing no declination, the style is in the plane of the meridian, and so pointeth directly into the South. The point of SbE is 11 gr. 15 m. distant from the style, and SSE 22 gr. 30 m. and the rest in their order: wherefore extend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. vnto 10 in the line of numbers, the same extent will reach from the
tangent of 11 gr. 15 m. vnto 1.99 in the line of numbers for the length of the tangent line, betweene the style and the point SbE, and from the tangent of 22 gr. 30 m. vnto 4.14 for SSE, and so for the rest, as in this Table. Azi∣muths. An. Zen. Tangen Gr. M. In. Pa. South 0 0 0 0 SbE 11 15 1 99 SSE 22 30 4 14 SEbS 33 45 6 68 SE 45 0 10 00 SEbb 56 15 14 97 ESE 67 30 24 14 EbS 78 45 50 27 East 90 0 Infin. In like maner in the first example of the declining plane, where the style standeth according to the de∣clination 24 gr. 20 m. distant from the South toward the West. The next point of SbW is but 13 gr. 5 m. distant from the style; and the second of SSW onely 1 gr. 50 m. and the third of SWbS is againe 9 gr. 25 m. and the rest in their order. Where∣fore hauing before found the length of the style to be 6 inches 80 parts, extend the compasses from the tan∣gent of 45 gr. vnto 6.80 parts in the line of numbers, the same extent wil reach from the tangent of 24 gr. 20 m. vnto 3.07 in the line of num∣bers for the length of the tangent line between the style & the South, and from the tangent of 13 gr. 5 m. vnto 1.58 for the point of SbW; and so for the rest, as in this Table. Azi∣muths. An. Zen. Tangen Gr. M In. Pa. SEbE 80 35 41 00 SE 69 20 18 03 SEbS 58 5 10 91 SSE 46 50 7 25 SbE 35 35 4 86 South 24 20 3 07 SbW 13 5 1 58 SSW 1 50 0 22 The foote of the styl SWbS 9 25 1 13 SW 20 40 2 57 SWbW 31 55 4 24 WSW 43 10 6 37 WbS 54 25 9 50 West 65 40 15 02 WbN 76 55 29 26 WNW 88 10 212 45 That done, if you take these parts out of a line of inches, and pricke them downe in the horizontall line on either side of the style, drawing right lines perpendicular to the ho∣rizon through these intersections, but so as they may be contained betweene the horizontall and the tropiques, the lines so drawne shall be the azimuths required.
In an horizontall plane these azimuths are drawne more easily. For here the perpendicular side of the style is the same with the axis of the horizon, and the foote of the style is the verticall point, in which all the azimuth lines doe meete as their circles do in the zenith: wherefore let any circle descri∣bed on the center A, at the foote of the style, be diuided first into foure parts, beginning at the meridian, and then each quarter subdiuided either into eight equall parts, accor∣ding to the points of the Mariners compasse, or into 90 gr. ac∣cording to the Astronomical diuision; if you draw right lines through the center and these diuisions, the lines so drawne shall be the azimuths required. In all other planes inclining to the horizon, these vertical circles will meete in a point, but that verticall point being more or lesse distant from the foote of the style, the angles at this point will be vnequall. 1 To find the distance between the foote of the style and the verticall point. The verticall point wherein all the verticall lines do meet, will be alwayes in the meridian, directly vnder or ouer the top of the style; and the angle betweene the perpendicular side of the style and the verticall line, will be equall to the in∣clination of the plane to the horizon. Wherefore As the tangent of 45 gr. to the tangent of the inclination of the plane: So is the length of the style, to the distance betweene the foote of the style and the verticall point. Thus in the first exāple of the declining inclining planes, where the vpper face of the plane looking Southwest, the declination was 24 gr. 20 m. the inclination 36 gr; and you may suppose AB the length of the style to be 6 inches: if you extend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. vnto
geometric illustration the tangent of 36 gr. the same extent will reach in the line of numbers from 6.00 vnto 4.36, for the distance AV be∣tweene A the foote of the style and V the verticall point. 2 To find the distance between the foote of the style and the horizontall line. As the tangent of the inclination of the plane, is to the tangent of 45 gr. So the length of the style, to the distance betweene the foote of the style and the horizontall line. So the same extent of the compasses as before, wil reach in the line of numbers from 6.00 vnto 8.26 for the distance AH
betweene the foote of the style and the horizontall line. Then may you take 4 inches 36 cent. and pricking them downe from A the foot of the style vnto V the verticall point in the meridian, draw the line VA, which being produced shall cut the horizon in the point H with right angles, and be that particular azimuth which is perpendicular to the plane. Or you may take 8 inches 26 cent. and pricke them downe in the former line VA produced from A vnto H, and so draw the horizontall line through H perpendicular vnto VH, which horizontall line being produced wil crosse the equa∣tor in the same point wherein the equator crosseth the houre-line of 6, vnlesse there be some former error. 3 To find the angles made by the azimuth lines at the verticall point. The angles at the zenith depend on the declination of the plane, as in our example, where the style standeth according to the declination 24 gr. 20 m. distant from the South toward the West, the azimuth of 10 gr. from the meridian Eastward will be 34 gr. 20 m. the azimuth of 10 gr. Westward will be onely 14 gr. 20 m. distant from the style, and so the rest in their order. Or if you would rather describe the common azimuths, the point of SbE wil be 35 gr. 35 m. the point of SbW 13 gr. 5 m. distant from the style, and so the rest in their order. Then As the sine of 90 gr. to the cosine of the inclination of the plane: So the tangent of the angle at the zenith, to the tangent of the angle at the verticall point be∣tween the line drawne through the foot of the style and the azimuth required. Wherefore the inclination of the plane in our example being 36 gr. extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. vn∣to
the sine of 54 gr. the same extent shall reach in the line of tangents, from 24 gr. 20 m. vnto 20 gr. 5 m. for the angle HVa at ye vertical point, be∣tween the line VH drawne through A the foote of the style & the South. Againe, the same extent will reach from the tangent of 13 gr. 5 m. vnto 10 gr. 38 m. for the angle belonging to SbW; and so for the rest, as in this table. Azi∣muths. Ang. Ze. Ang. Ve. Gr. M. Gr. M. SEbE 80 35 78 25 SE 69 20 65 0 SEbS 58 5 52 25 SSE 46 50 40 46 SbE 35 35 30 3 South 24 20 20 5 SbW 13 5 10 39 SSW 1 50 1 29   Style. 0 0 SWbS 9 25 7 38 SW 20 40 16 58 SWbW 31 55 26 45 WSW 43 10 37 11 WbS 54 25 48 30 West 65 40 60 48 WbN 76 55 73 58 WNW 88 10 87 44 These angles being knowne, if on the center V, at the verticall point, you describe an occult circle, and therein inscribe the chords of these angles from the line VH, and then draw right lines through the verti∣call point, and the termes of those chords, the lines so drawne shall be the azimuths required. The like reason holdeth for the drawing of the azimuths vpon all other inclining planes, wheof you haue another ex∣ample in the Diagram belonging to the meridian incliner, Pag. 126. Or for further satisfaction you may finde where each azi∣muth line shall crosse the equator. As the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the latitude: So the tangent of the azimuth from the meridian, to the tangent of the equator from the meridian. Extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the line of our latitude 51 gr. 30 m. the same extent will reach in the line of tangents from 10 gr. vnto 7. gr. 50. m. for the interse∣ction of the equator with the azimuth of 10 gr. from the meridian. Againe, the same extent will reach from 20 gr.
vnto 15 gr. 54 m. for the azimuth of 20 gr. And so the rest, as in these tables. Azim. Equat. Gr. M. Gr. M. 10 0 7 50 20 0 15 54 30 0 24 20 40 0 43 18 50 0 13 0 60 0 53 35 70 0 65 3 80 0 77 18 90 0 90 0 Azim. Equat. Gr. M. Gr. M. 11 15 8 51 22 30 17 58 33 45 27 36 45 0 38 2 56 15 49 30 67 30 62 6 78 45 75 44 90 0 90 0 By which you may see that the azimuth 90 gr. distant from the meridian, which is the line of East and West, will crosse the equator at 90 gr. from the meridian in the same point, with the horizontall line and the houre of 6. And that the a∣zimuth of 45 gr. will crosse the equator at 38 gr. 2 m. from the meridian, that is, the line of SE will crosse the equator at the houre of 9 and 28 m. in the morning, and the line of SW at 2 ho. 32 min. in the afternoone; and so for the rest, whereby you may examine your former worke. CHAP. XX. To describe the parallels of the horizon in the former planes. THe parallels of the horizon, commonly called Almican∣ters, or parallels of altitude (whereby we may know the altitude of the Sunne aboue the horizon) haue such respect vnto the horizon, as the parallels of declination vnto the e∣quator, and so may be described in like maner.
In an horizontall plane, these parallels will be perfect cir∣cles; wherefore knowing the length of the style in inches and parts, and the distance of the parallell from the horizon in degrees and minutes. As the tangent of 45 gr. is to the length of the style: So the cotangent of the parallell, to the semidiameter of his circle. Thus in the example of the horizontall plane, Pag. 164. if AB the length of the style shall be 5 inches, and that it were required to finde the semidiameter of the parallell of 62 gr. extend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. vnto 5.00 in the line of numbers, the same extent will reach from the tangent of 28 gr. the complement of the parallell vnto 2.65, and if you describe a circle on the center A to the semi∣diameter of 2 inches 65 cent. it shall be the parallell requi∣red. In all vpright planes, whether they be direct verticals, or declining, or meridian planes, these parallels will be conicall sections, and may be drawne through their points of inter∣section, with the azimuth lines, in the same maner as the parallels of declination, through their points of intersection with the houre-lines. To this end you may first finde the distance betweene the top of the style and the azimuth; and then the distance betweene the horizon and the parallell, both which may be represented in this maner. On the center B and any semidiameter BH, describe an occult arke of a circle, and therein inscribe the chords of such parallels of altitude as you intend to draw on the plane, (I haue here put them for 15. 30. 45 and 60 gr.) then draw right lines through the center and the termes of those chords, so the line BH shall be the horizon, and the rest the lines of altitude, according to their distance from the ho∣rizon.
geometric illustration That done, consider your plane (which here for example is the South face of our vertical plane, p. 168) wherein hauing drawne both the horizontall & verticall lines, as I shewed be∣fore, first take out AB the length of the style, & pricke that downe in this horizontall line from B vnto A; then take out all the distances between B the top of the style and the seue∣rall points wherein the verticall lines do crosse the horizon∣tal, transfer them into this horizontal line BH, from the cen∣ter B, and at the terms of these distances erect lines perpendi∣cular to the horizon, noting them with the number or let∣ter of the azimuth from whence they were taken, so these perpendiculars shall represent those azimuths, and the seue∣rall distances betweene the horizon and the lines of altitude shall giue the like distances, betweene the horizontall and the parallels of altitude vpon the azimuths in your plane. Vpon this ground it followeth,
1 To find the distance between the top of the style, and the seuerall points wherein the azimuths do crosse the horizontall line. Hauing drawne the horizontall and azimuth lines as be∣fore, looke into the table by which you drew them, and there you shall haue the angles at the zenith. Then As the cosine of the angle at the zenith, is to the sine of 90 gr. So the length of the style, to the distance required. geometric illustration
Azi∣muths. Ang Ze Tangent Secant Par. 15. Par. 30. Gr. M Inch P. Inch P. Inch. P. Inch. P. South. 0 0 0 0 10 00 2 68 5 77 SbE 11 15 1 99 10 20 2 73 5 90 SSE 22 30 4 14 10 82 2 90 6 24 SEbS 33 45 6 68 12 03 3 23 6 94 SE 45 0 10 00 14 14 3 80 8 16 SEbE 56 15 14 97 18 00 4 82 10 40 ESE 67 30 24 14 26 13 7 02 15 08 EbS 78 45 50 27 51 26 13 73 29 60 East. 90 0 Infinit Infinit Infinit Infinit As in our example of the verticall plane, where AB the length of the style was supposed to be 10 inches, extend the compasses from the sine of 78 gr. 45 m. (the complement of 11 gr. 15 m. the angle at the zenith, belonging to SbE and SbW) vnto the sine of 90 gr. the same extent wil reach from 10.00 the length of the style, vnto 10.20 for the distance be∣tweene the top of the style and the intersection of the azi∣muth SbE with the horizontall line, which distance may be called the secant of the azimuth, and may serue for the draw∣ing of the parallell of 45 gr. from the horizon. The like reason holdeth for the rest of these distances here represented in the line BH. 2 To finde the distance betweene the horizon and the parallels. As the tangent of 45 gr. to the tangent of the parallell: So the secant of the azimuth, to the distance required. As if it were required to draw the parallell of 15 gr. from the horizon, vpon this verticall plane; extend the compasses from the tangent of 45 gr. vnto the tangent of 15 gr. the same extent will reach in the line of numbers from 10. 00 the se∣cant
of the South azimuth vnto 2.68, and therefore the di∣stance betweene the horizon and the parallell of 15 gr. is 2 inches 68 cent. vpon the South azimuth. Againe, the same extent will reach from 10.20 the secant of SbE vnto 2.73 for the like distance belonging to SbE and SbW; and so for the rest, which may be gathered and set downe in the ta∣ble. That done, and the horizon and azimuths being drawne, pricke downe 10 inches from the horizontall line vpon the South azimuth, & 10 inches 20 cent. on the azimuths of SbE and SbW, and 10 inches 82 cent. on the azimuths of SSE and SSW, and 12 inches 3 cent. on the azimuth of SEbS and SWbS, and so the rest of these distances on their seuerall a∣zimuths: then if you draw a crooked line through all these points, that may make no angles, the line so drawne shall be the parallell of 45 gr. from the horizon. In like maner may you draw the parallell of 15 gr. or any other parallell of alti∣tude vpon any verticall plane. If the plane incline to the horizon, after we haue found the verticall point, and drawne the horizontall line, we are farther to finde the length of the axis of the horizon, then the angles betwixt this axis and the azimuth lines, and so the seuerall distances betweene the parallels and the ver∣ticall point, all which may be represented in this man∣ner. On the center B, and any semidiameter, describe an oc∣cult quadrant of a circle, and therein inscribe the chords of such parallels of altitude as you intend to draw on the plane, drawing right lines through the center and the termes of these chords, so the line BH shall be the horizon, and his perpendicular BV the axis of the horizon, and the rest the lines of altitude, according to their distance from the ho∣rizon. That done, consider your plane, which here for example is the first of our three declining inclining planes, wherein hauing drawne both the horizontall and verticall lines as I shewed before, first take out the axis of the horizon, which
geometric illustration is the line between B the top of the style and V the verticall point, and pricke that downe in this figure from B vnto V; then take out both the line VH and all the rest of the distan∣ces between V the verticall point and the seuerall points wherein the verticall lines doe crosse the horizontall line of this figure, from the point V, noting the place where they crosse the horizontall line with the number or letter of the azimuth from whence they were taken, and drawing the azi∣muth lines from V through the lines of altitude. Or hauing the Sector you may draw an occult line VE per∣pendicular to the axis VB, and therein prick downe the tan∣gent of the complement of the inclination of the plane from V vnto E: then draw the line EF parallell to the axis, crossing the line VH produced in the point F, so this line EF will be as the line of sines vpon the Sector, and therein you may pricke downe the sines of the complement of the angles at the zenith from E towards F, and draw the verticall lines by those points through the lines of altitude, so the angles at V, betweene the axis VB and those azimuth lines, shall be the angles betweene the axis of the horizon and the
azimuth lines on your plane, and the seuerall distances be∣tween the point V and the lines of altitude, shall giue the like distances betweene the verticall point and the parallels of altitude vpon the azimuths in your plane. Vpon this ground it followeth, 1 To find the length of the axis of the horizon. The verticall point is alwayes either directly ouer or vn∣der the top of the style, and the distance betweene them is that which I call the axis of the horizon, which may thus be found, As the cosine of the inclination, to the sine of 90 gr. So the length of the style, to the length of the axis of the horizon. For example in the first of the three declining inclining planes, the inclination to the horizon is 36 gr. the length of the style AB six inches, extend the compasses from the sine of 54 gr. the complement of the inclination vnto the sine of 90 gr. the same extent wil reach in the line of numbers from 6.00 vnto 7.42, & such is VB the length of the axis required. 2 To find the angles contained between the horizon and the verticall lines vpon your plane. The angles at the vertical point betweene the axis of the horizon and the azimuth lines vpon your plane are repre∣sented in this figure by those at V, betweee VB and the azimuths. The angles betweene the horizon and the azi∣muth lines being complements to the former, are represen∣ted either by those which are made by VE or by BH, and the azimuth lines which are drawne from V. That you may find them, looke into the Table, by which you drew the azimuth lines, there shall you finde the angles at the zenith. Then
geometric illustration As the sine of 90 gr. to the cosine of the angle at the zenith: So the tangent of the inclination to the horizon, to the tangent of the angle betweene the horizon and the verticall line. In our example where the inclination to the horizon is 36 gr. and the angle at the zenith betweene the azimuth at the style and the meridian, is according to the declination 24 gr. 20 m. extend the compasses from the sine of 90 gr. vnto the tangent of 36 gr. the same extent wil reach from the sine of 65 gr. 40 m. the complement of the angle at the zenith, vn∣to the tangent of 33 gr. 30 m. for the angle contained be∣tween
the horizon and the South part of the meridian line. Again, the same extent wil reach frō the cosine of 35 gr. 35 m. the angle at the zenith belonging to SbE vnto the tangent of 30 gr. 3 m. for the angle betweene the horizon and the azimuth line of SbE. The like reason holdeth for the rest, which may be found and set downe in the Table. Azi∣muths. Ang. Ze. Ang. V. Ang. Ho Horizon 11 18 26 34 45 0 Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr. M. Inch. P. Inch. P Inch. P. Inch. P. East. 114 25 119 12 16 40 In∣fi∣nite.   38 60 11 05 EbS 103 5 106 2 19 20 210 24 22 40 9 00 ESE 91 50 92 16 1 20 41 98 15 57 7 60 SEbE 80 35 78 25 6 47 62 82 23 44 12 07 6 68 SE 69 20 65 0 14 23 29 87 16 79 10 12 6 00 SEbS 58 5 52 25 21 0 20 70 13 61 8 99 5 79 SSE 46 50 40 46 26 25 16 68 11 90 8 31 5 53 SbE 35 35 30 3 30 35 14 58 10 90 7 90 5 42 South 24 20 20 5 33 30 13 44 10 32 7 66 5 35 SbW 13 5 10 39 35 17 12 84 10 02 7 55 5 33 SSW 1 50 1 29 35 59 12 62 9 90 7 47 5 31   Style. 0 0 36 0 12 62 9 90 7 47 5 31 SWbS 9 25 7 38 35 37 12 74 9 96 7 50 5 32 SW 20 40 16 58 34 12 13 20 10 20 7 59 5 34 SWbW 31 55 26 45 31 40 14 13 10 67 7 81 5 39 WSW 43 10 37 11 27 55 15 85 11 50 8 15 5 49 WbS 54 25 48 30 22 55 19 05 12 94 8 73 5 66 West 65 40 60 48 16 40 25 87 15 51 9 60 5 96 WbN 76 55 73 58 9 20 45 75 20 64 11 32 6 46 WNW 88 10 87 44 1 20 318 88 33 27 14 18 7 25 NWbW 99 25 101 35 6 47 Infi∣nit. 92 40 19 60 8 48 NW 110 40 115 0 14 23   31 44 10 30 Then may you either draw these angles at V in the former figure more perfectly, and thence finish your worke, or else proceed.
3 To find the distance between the verticall point and the parallels of the horizon. These distances may be found by resoluing the triangles in the last figure made by the axis, the lines of altitude, and the azimuth lines. For hauing the length of the axis and the angles at the horizon, if you adde the distance of the parallel from the horizon vnto the angle at the horizon, you shall haue the angle at the parallell. Then As the sine of the angle at the parallell, to the cosine of the altitude: So the length of the axis, to the distance betweene the verticall point and the parallell. Thus in our example if it were required to finde the di∣stance vpon the stylar azimuth VH, betweene the verticall point and the horizon, you haue the rectangle triangle VBH, wherein the angle at the horizon here represented by BHV is (equall to the inclination of the plane) 36 gr. and BV the axis of the horizon betweene the plane and the top of the style, is 7 inches 42 cent. Wherefore extend the compasses from the sine of 36 gr. vnto the sine of 90 gr. the complement of the altitude, the same extent will reach in the line of num∣bers from 7.42 vnto 12 62, and such is the distance of the pependicular azimuth line VH between the verticall point and the horizon. In like maner if you would find the distance vpon the me∣ridian between the verticall point and the horizon, extend the compasses from the sine of 33 gr. 30 m. the angle at the horizon, to the sine of 90 gr. the same extent will reach in the line of numbers from 7.42 vnto 13.44, and such is Va the distance betweene the verticall point and the horizon vpon the line of the South aimuth, that is, vpon the meridian line.
But if you would find the distance vpon the meridian be∣tweene the verticall point and any other parallell of the ho∣rizon, as vpon the parallell of 26 gr. 34 m. then adde these 26 gr. 34 m. vnto 33 gr. 30 m. the angle at the horizon, so shall you haue 60 gr. 4 m. for BDV the angle at the parallell. And if you extend the compasses from the sine of 60 gr. 4 m. vnto the sine of 63 gr. 26 m. the complement of the parallell from the horizon, the same extent will reach in the line of num∣bers from 7.42 the length of the axis, vnto 7.66, and such is the distance VD between the verticall point and the parallel of 26 gr. 34 m. vpō the meridian line. The like reason holdeth for all the rest, which may be gathered & set down in ye table. That done, and the horizon drawne as before, if you would draw the parallel of 26 gr. 34 m. from the horizon, looke into the table, and there finding vnder the title of the parallel of 26.34, the distance on ye South azimuth line to be 7.66, take 7 inches 66 cent. out of a line of inches, and prick them down on the meridian of your plane, from the verticall point at V. Or if either the verticall point fall without your plane, or the extent at any time be too large for your compasses, you may pricke downe the distance betweene the horizon and the parallel. As here the distance betweene the vertical point and the parallell is 7.66, betweene the verticall point and the horizon 13.44, the difference between them 5.78 is the distance frō the horizon to the parallel, which being pricked downe vpon the meridian, shall giue the same intersection as before. And the like reason, holdeth for the pricking down the rest of these distances on their seuerall azimuths. Hauing the points of intersection betweene the azimuths and the parallell, you may ioyne them all in a crooked line without making of angles, the line so drawne shall be the pa∣rallell required. And vpon this ground it followeth, To describe such parallels on the former planes, as may shew the proportion of the shadow vnto the gnomon. The proportion of a mans shadow vnto his height, or o∣ther
shadow to his gnomon set perpendicular to the hori∣zon, may be shewed by parallels to the horizon, if they be drawne to a due altitude, which may thus be found: As the length of the shadow, to the length of the gnomon: So the tangent of 45 gr. to the tangent of the altitude. As if it were required to finde the altitude of the Sunne when the shadow of a man shall be decuple to his height, ex∣tend the compasses from 10 vnto 1 in the line of numbers, the same extent will reach in the tangent of 45 gr. vnto the tangent of 5 gr. 42 m; which shewes that when the Sun com∣meth to the altitude of 5 gr. 42 m. your shadow, vpon a leuell ground, will be ten times as much as your height. In the same maner you may finde that at 7 gr. 7 m. of altitude your shadow wil be octuple, at 9 gr. 27 m. sextuple, at 11 gr. 18 m. quintuple, at 14 gr. 2 m. quadruple, at 18 gr. 26 m. triple, at 26 gr. 34 m. double to your height, at 33 gr. 41 m. as 3 vnto 2, at 36 gr. 52 m. as 4 vnto 3, at 38 gr. 40 m. as 5 vnto 4, at 45 gr. equall, at 51 gr. 20 m. as 4 vnto 5, at 53 gr. 7 m. as 3 vnto 4, at 56 gr. 19 m. as 2 vnto 3, at 59 gr. 2 m. as 3 vnto 5, at 63 gr. 26 m. as 1 vnto 2, &c. If then you draw a parallell to the horizon at 5 gr. 42 m. another at 7 gr. 7 m. and so the rest, when he shadow o the style falleth on the parallell, you haue the proportion, and thereby may you know the shadow by the height, and the height by the shadow, whereof you haue examples Pag. 126. and 137. I might here proceed to shew the description of th ∣cles of position, the Signes of the Zodiacke in the meridn, the Signes ascending and descending, with such oer gnomonicall conclusions; but these would proue superflu∣ous to such as vnderstand the doctrine of the Sphere; and for others, that which is deliuered may suffise for ordinary vse, it being my intention not so much to explane the full vse of shadowes (whereof I haue lately giuen a large example in an other place) as the vse of these lines of proportion, that were not extant heretofore.
An Appendix concerning The description and vse of a small portable Quadrant, for the more easie finding of the houre and Azimuth. CHAP. I. Of the description of the Quadrant. HAuing described these standing planes, I will now shew the most of these conclusions by a small Quadrant. This might be done generally for all latitudes, by a quarter of the generall Astrolabe, described before in the vse of the Sector, pag. 58; and particularly for any one latitude, by a quarter of the particular Astrolabe, there also described, pag. 63. which if it be a foote semidiameter, may shew the azimuth vnto a degree, and the time of the day vnto a minute; but for ordi∣nary vse this smaller Quadrant may suffice, which may be made portable in this maner. 1 Vpon the center A, and semidiameter AB, describe the arke BC: the same semidiameter will set of 60 gr. and the halfe of that will be 30 gr. which being added to the former 60 gr. will make the arke BC to be 90 gr. the fourth part of the whole circle, and thence comes the name of a Qua∣drant. 2 Leauing some little space for the inscription of the moneths and dayes, on the same center A, and semidiame∣ter AT, describe the arke TD, which shall serue for either tropique. 3 Diuide the line AT in the point E, in such propor∣tion, as that AT being 10000, AE may be 6556, and there draw another arke EF, which shall serue for the Equa∣tor. 4 Diuide AF the semidiameter of the equator in the point G, so as AF being 10000, the line AG may be 4343,
geometric illustration and on the center G and semidiameter GD describe the arke ED, which shall serue for a fourth part of the ecliptique. 5 This part of the ecliptique may be diuided into three
Signes, and each Signe into 30 A Table of right Ascensions. Gr. ♈ ♉ ♊ Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr. M. 0 0 0 27 54 57 48 5 4 35 32 42 63 3 10 9 11 37 35 68 21 15 13 48 42 31 73 43 20 18 27 47 33 79 7 25 23 9 52 38 84 32 30 27 54 57 48 90 0 gr. by a table of right ascensions, made as before pag. 60. As the right ascension of the first point of ♉ being 27 gr. 54 m. you may lay a ruler to the center A & 27 gr. 54 m. in the Quadrant BC, the point where the ruler crosseth the Ecliptique, shall be the first point of ♉. In like maner the right ascension of the first point of ♊ being 57 gr. 48 m. if you lay a ruler to the Gr. Parts. 1 176 2 355 3 537 4 723 5 913 6 1106 7 1302 8 1503 9 1708 10 1917 11 2130 12 2348 13 2571 14 2799 15 3032 16 3270 17 3514 18 3763 19 4019 20 4281 21 4550 22 4825 23 5108 Tro 5252 center A, and 57 gr. 48 m. in the quadrant, the point where the ruler crosseth the ecliptique, shalbe the first point of ♊. And so for the rest: but the lines of distinction between Signe & Signe, may be best drawne from the center G. 6 The line ET betweene the equator and the tropique, which I call the line of declination, may be diuided into 23 gr. ½ out of this Table. For let AE the semidiameter of the equator be 10000, the distance betweene the equator and 10 gr. of declination may be 1917 more; be∣tween the equator and 20 gr. 4281; the distance of the tropique from the equator 5252. 7 You may put in the most of the principall starres betweene the equator and the tropique of ♋, by their declination from the equator, and right ascention from the next equinoctial point. As the declination of the wing of Pegasus, being 13 gr. 7 m. the right ascension 358 gr. 34 m. from the first point of ♈, or 1 gr. 26 m. short of it. If you draw an occult parallell through 13 gr. 7 m. of de∣clination, and then lay the ruler to the center A, and 1 gr. 26 m. in the quadrant BC, the point where the ruler crosseth the parallell shall be the place for the wing of Pegasus, to which you may
set the name and the time when he cometh to the South, in this maner, W. Peg. * 23 Ho. 54 M. and so for the rest of these fiue, or any other starres.   Ho. M. R. Ascen Decl. M Pegasus wing * 23 54 1 26 13 7 Arcturus * 13 58 29 37 21 10 Lions heart * 9 48 32 58 13 45 Buls eye * 4 15 63 33 15 42 Vultures heart * 19 33 66 56 7 58 8 There being space sufficient between the equator and the center, you may there describe the quadrat, and diuide each of the two sides farthest frō the center A into 100 parts, so shall the Quadrant be prepared generally for any latitude. But before you draw the particular lines, you are to fit foure tables vnto your latitude. First a table of meridian altitudes for diuision of the circle of dayes and moneths, which may be thus made: Consider the latitude of the place and the declination of the Sun for each day of the yeare. If the latitude and declination be alike both North or both South, ad the declinatiō to the comple∣ment of the latitude; if they be vnlike, one North, and the o∣ther South, substract the declination from the complement of the latitude, the remainder will be the meridian altitude belonging vnto the day. Thus in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. Northward, whose complement is 38 gr. 30 m. the declination vpon the tenth day of Iune will be 23 gr. 30 m. Northward, wherefore I adde 23 gr. 30 m. vnto 38 gr. 30 m. the summe of both is 62 gr. for the meridian altitude at the tenth of Iune. The declina∣tion vpon the tenth of December will be 23 gr. 30 m. South∣ward, wherefore I take these 23 gr. 30 m. out of 38 gr. 30 m. there wil remain 15 gr. for the meridian altitude at the tenth of December; and in this maner you may find the meridian altitude for each day of the yeare, and set them downe in a table.
Dies. 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 Mo Gr. M Gr. M. Gr. M Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr. M Gr. M. Ianuary 16 31 17 24 18 26 19 37 20 57 22 24 23 58 February 24 17 25 59 27 45 29 35 31 29 33 25   March 34 35 36 33 38 32 40 30 42 27 44 22 46 15 April 46 37 48 26 50 11 51 50 53 25 54 53 56 15 May 56 15 57 29 58 35 59 33 60 22 61 2 61 31 Iune 61 36 61 54 62 0 61 58 61 45 61 22 60 49 Iuly 60 49 60 6 59 14 58 13 57 4 55 48 54 24 August 54 7 52 36 50 59 49 17 47 31 45 41 43 49 September 43 26 41 30 39 33 37 36 35 38 33 41 31 46 October 31 46 29 53 28 3 26 16 24 35 22 59 21 29 Nouember 21 12 19 51 18 39 17 36 16 43 16 0 15 28 December 15 28 15 7 15 0 15 2 15 17 15 44 16 22 The Table being made, you may inscribe the moneths, and dayes of each moneth into your quadrant, in the space left below the tropique. For lay the ruler vnto the center A, and 16 gr. 31 m. in the quadrant BC, there may you draw a line for the end of December and beginning of Ianuary; then laying your ruler to the center A, and 24 gr. 17 m. in the quadrant, there draw the end of Ianuary and beginning of February, and so the rest, which may be noted with I, F, M, A, M, I, &c. the first letters of each moneth, and wil here fall betweene 15 gr. and 62 gr. The second Table which you are to fit, may serue for the drawing and diuiding of the horizon. For drawing of the horizon. As the cotangent of the latitude, to the tangent of the greatest declination: So the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of intersection, where the horizon shall crosse the tropiques. So in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. we shall find the horizon to cut the tropique in 33 gr. 9 m: wherefore if you lay the ru∣ler
to the center A, and 33 gr. 9 m. in the quadrant, the point where the ruler crosseth the tropique shall be the point where the horizon crosseth the tropique. And if you finde a point at H, in the line AC, whereon setting the compasses, you may bring the point at E, and this point in the tropique both into a circle, the point H shall be the center, and the ark so drawne shall be the horizon. Then for the diuision of this horizon. As the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the latitude: So the tangent of the horizon, to the tangent of the arke in the quadrant, which shall diuide the horizon. So in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. we shall finde 7 gr. 52 m. belonging to 10 gr. in the horizon, and 15 gr. 54 m. belong∣ing to 20 gr. And so the rest, as in this Table. Ho Gr. M Ho Gr. M Ho Gr. M. Ho Gr. M. Ho Gr. M. Ho Gr. M. 0 0 0 15 11 51 30 24 19 45 38 2 60 53 35 75 71 5   0 47   12 39   25 11   39 1   54 41   72 19   1 34   13 27   26 4   40 0   55 48   73 33   2 21   14 16   26 57   41 0   56 56   74 48   3 8   15 4   27 50   42 0   58 4   76 3 5 3 55 20 15 54 35 28 43 50 43 0 65 59 13 80 77 18   4 42   16 43   29 37   44 1   60 22   78 33   5 29   17 33   30 32   45 3   61 31   79 49   6 17   18 22   31 27   46 5   62 41   81 5   7 4   19 12   32 22   47 8   62 52   82 21 10 7 52 25 20 2 40 33 18 55 48 11 70 65 3 85 83 37   8 39   20 53   34 14   49 14   66 15   84 53   9 27   21 44   35 10   50 19   67 27   86 10   10 14   22 36   36 7   51 24   68 39   87 26   11 2   23 27   37 4   52 29   69 52   88 43 15 11 51 30 24 19 45 38 2 60 53 35 75 71 5 90 90 0
Wherefore you may lay the ruler to the center A, and 7 gr. 52 m. in the quadrant BC, the point where the ruler crosseth the horizon shall be 10 gr. in the horizon; and so for the rest: but the lines of distinction between each fift de∣gree, will be best drawne from the center H. The third Table for drawing of the houre-lines, must be a Table of the altitude of the Sunne aboue the horizon at e∣uery houre, especially when he cometh to the equator, the tropiques, and some other intermediate declinations. If the Sunne be in the equator, and so haue no declination. As the sine of 90 gr. to the cosine of the latitude: So the cosine of the houre from the meridian, to the sine of the altitude. Thus in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. at six houres from the meridian the Sunne wil haue no altitude, at fiue the altitude will be 9 gr. 17 m; at foure 18 gr. 8 m; at three 26 gr. 7 m; at two 32 gr. 37 m. at one 36 gr. 58 m; at noone it will be 38 gr. 30 m. equall to the complement of the latitude. If the Sunne haue declination, the meridian altitude wil be found as before, for the Table of dayes and moneths. If the houre proposed be six in the morning or six at night. As the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the latitude: So the sine of the declination, to the sine of the altitude. Thus in our latitude the declination of the Sunne being 23 gr. 30 m. the altitude will be found to be 18 gr. 11 m: the declination being 11 gr. 30 m. the altitude will be 9 gr. If the houre proposed be neither twelue nor six. As the cosine of the houre from the meridian, to the sine of 90 gr.
So the tangent of the latitude, to the tangent of a fourth arke. So in our latitude and one houre from the meridian, this fourth ark will be found to be 52 gr. 28 m. at two 55 gr. 26 m. at three 60 gr. 39 m. at foure 68 gr. 22 m. and at fiue houres from the meridian 78 gr. 22 m. Then consider the declination of the Sunne and the houre proposed; if the latitude and declination be both alike, as with vs in North latitude, North declination, and the houre fall between noone and six, take the declination out of the fourth arke, the remainer shall be your fift arke. But if either the houre fall between six and midnight, or the latitude and declination shall be vnlike, adde the decli∣nation vnto the fourth arke, and the summe of both shall be your fifth arke: or if the summe shall exceed 90 gr. you may take the complement vnto 180 gr. This fifth arke being knowne: As the sine of the fourth arke, to the sine of the latitude: So the cosine of the fift arke, to the sine of the altitude. Thus in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. Northward, the Sunne hauing 23 gr. 30 m. of North declination, if it shall be requi∣red to finde the altitude of the Sunne for seuen in the mor∣ning; here because the latitude and declination are both a∣like to the Northward, and the houre proposed falleth be∣tweene noone and six, you may take 23 gr. 30 m. the arke of the declination out of 78 gr. 22 m. the fourth arke belonging to the fift houre from the meridian, so there will remaine 54 gr. 52 m. for your fift arke. Then working according to the Canon, you shall find, As the sine of 78 gr. 22 m. your fourth arke, to the sine of 51 gr. 30 m. for the latitude:
So the sine of 35 gr. 8 m. the cōplement of your fift ark, to the sine of 27 gr. 17 m. the altitude required. If in the same latitude and declination, it were required to finde the altitude for fiue in the morning, here the houre falling betweene six and midnight; if you adde 23 gr. 30 m. vnto 78 gr. 22 m. the summe will be 101 gr. 52 m. and the complement to 180 gr. will be 78 gr. 8 m. for your fifth arke. Wherefore As the sine of 78 gr. 22 m. to the sine of 51 gr. 30 m. So the cosine of 78 gr. 8 m. to the sine of 9 gr. 32 m. for the altitude required. If in the same latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. Northward, the Sunne hauing 23 gr. 30 m. of South declination, it were re∣quired the altitude for nine in the morning; here because the latitude and declination are vnlike, the one North, and the other South, you may adde 23 gr. 30 m. the arke of decli∣nation, vnto 60 gr. 39 m. the fourth arke belonging to the third houre from the meridian, so shall you haue 84 gr. 9 m. for your fift arke. Wherefore As the sine of 60 gr. 39 m. to the sine of 51 gr. 30 m. So the cosine of 84 gr. 9 m. to the sine of 5 gr. 15 m. for the altitude required. And so by one or other of these meanes you may finde the altitude of the Sunne for any point of the ecliptique at all houres of the day, and set them downe in such a Table as this.
A Table for the altitude of the Sunne in the beginning of each Signe at all houres of the day, calcula∣ted for 51 gr. 30 m. of North latitude. Ho. ♋ ♊ ♌ ♉ ♍ ♈ ♎ ♓ ♏ ♒ ♐ ♑ Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr. M. Gr. M. 12 62 0 58 42 50 0 38 30 27 0 18 18 15 0 11 1 59 43 56 34 48 12 36 58 25 40 17 6 13 52 10 2 53 45 50 55 43 12 32 37 21 51 13 38 10 30 9 3 45 42 43 6 36 0 26 7 15 58 8 12 5 15 8 4 36 41 34 13 27 31 18 8 8 33 1 15   7 5 27 17 24 56 18 18 9 17 0 6     6 6 18 11 15 40 9 0 0 0       5 7 9 32 6 50         11 37 4 8 1 32           21 40 Lastly, you may finde what declination the Sunne hath when he riseth or setteth at any houre. As the sine of 90 gr. to the sine of the houre from six: So the cotangent of the latitude, to the tangent of the declination. And so in the latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. you shall finde that when the Sun riseth, either at fiue in the Summer, or seuen in the Winter, his declination is 11 gr. 37 m: when he riseth at foure in the Summer, or eight in the Winter, his declina∣tion is 21 gr. 40 m. which may be also set downe in the Table. That done, you may there see that in this latitude the me∣ridian altitude of the Sunne in the beginning of ♋ is 62 gr. in ♊ 58 gr. 42 m. in ♉ 50 gr. in ♈ 38 gr. 30 m. &c. But the beginning of ♋ and ♑ is represented by the tropiques TD, drawne at 23 gr. 30 m. of declination, and the beginning of ♈ and ♎, by the equator EF. If you draw an occult parallell betweene the equator and the tropique, at 11 gr. 30 m. of de∣clination,
it shall represent the beginning of ♉, ♍, ♏, and ♓; if you draw another occult parallell though 20 gr. 12 m. of declination, it shall represent the beginning of ♊, ♌, ♐, and ♒. Then you may lay a ruler to the center A, and 62 gr. in the quadrant BC, and note the point where it crosseth the tro∣pique of ♋ then moue the ruler to 58 gr. 52 m. and note where it crosseth the parallell of ♊; then to 50 gr. and note where it crosseth the parallell of ♉; and againe to 38 gr. 30 m. noting where it crosseth the equator; so the line drawne through these points shall shew the houre of 12 in the Sum∣mer, while the Sunne is in ♈, ♉, ♊, ♋, ♌, or ♍. In like maner if you lay the ruler to the center A, and 27 gr. in the qua∣drant, and note the point where it crosseth the parallel of ♓, then moue it to 18 gr. 18 m. and note where it crosseth the parallell of ♒; and againe to 15 gr. noting where it crosseth the tropique of ♑; the line drawne through these points shall shew the houre of 12 in the Winter, while the Sunne is in ♎, ♏, ♐, ♑, ♒ & ♓, and so may you draw the rest of these houre-lines: onely that of 7 from the meridian in the Sum∣mer, and 5 in the Winter, will crosse the line of declination at 11 gr. 37 m. and that of 8 in the Summer, and 4 in the Winter at 21 gr. 40 m. The fourth table for drawing of the azimuth lines, must likewise be fitted for the altitude of the Sunne aboue the ho∣rizon at euery azimuth, especially when he cometh to the e∣quator, the tropiques, and some other intermediat declina∣tions. If the Sunne be in the equator, and so haue no declina∣tion: As the sine of 90 gr. to the cosine of the azimuth from the meridian: So the cotangent of the latitude, to the tangent of the altitude at the equator. Thus in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. at 90 gr. from the me∣ridian, the Sunne will haue no altitude; at 80 gr. the altitude
will be 7 gr. 52 m; at 70 gr. it will be 15 gr. 30 m; at 60 gr. it will be 21 gr. 41 m. If the Sunne haue declination, the meridian altitude will be easily found as before, for the table for dayes and moneths. And for all other azimuths. As the sine of the latitude, to the sine of the declination: So the cosine of the altitude at the equator, to the sine of a fourth arke. When the latitude and declination are both alike in all a∣zimuths from the prime verticall vnto the meridian, adde this fourth arke vnto the arke of altitude at the equator. When the latitude and declination are both alike, and the azimuth more then 90 gr. distant from the meridian, take the altitude at the equator out of this fourth arke. When the latitude and declination are vnlike, take this fourth arke out of the arke of altitude at the equator, so shall you haue the altitude of the Sunne belonging to the azi∣muth. Thus in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. Northward, if it were required to finde the altitude of the Sunne in the azimuth of 60 gr. from the meridian, when the declination is 23 gr. 30 m. Nothward, you may finde the altitude at the equator belonging to this azimuth to be 21 gr. 41 m. by the former Canon, and by this last Canon you may finde the fourth arke to be 28 gr. 15 m. Then because the latitude and declination are both alike to the Northward, if you adde them both together, you shall haue 49 gr. 56 m. for the altitude requi∣red. If the declination had been 23 gr. 30 m. to the Southward, you should then haue taken this fourth ark out of the ark at the equator, which because it cannot here be done, it is a signe that the Sunne is not then aboue the horizon. But if you take the arke at the equator out of this fourth arke, you shall haue 6 gr. 34 m. for the altitude of the Sunne when he is
in the azimuth of 60 gr. from the North, and 120 gr. from the South part of the meridian. The like reason holdeth for the rest of these altitudes, which may be gathered and set down in a table. Lastly when the Sun riseth or setteth vpon any azimuth, to find his declination. As the sine of 90 gr. to the cosine of the latitude: So the cosine of the azimuth from the meridian, to the sine of the declination. And thus in our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. when the azimuth is 80 gr. from the meridian, the declination will be found to be 6 gr. 12 m; if the azimuth be 70 gr. the declination will be found 12 gr. 18 m; if 60 gr. then 18 gr. 8 m. And so for the rest, which may be also set downe in the Table. A Table for the altitude of the Sunne in the beginning of each Signe for euery tenth azimuth, in 51 gr. 30 m. of North latitude. Az. ♋ ♊ ♌ ♉ ♍ ♈ ♎ ♓ ♏ ♒ ♐ ♑ Gr. M Gr. M Gr. M. Gr. M Gr. M Gr. M. Gr. M. 0 62 0 58 42 50 0 38 30 27 0 18 18 15 0 10 61 43 58 24 49 38 38 4 26 30 17 45 14 25 20 60 51 57 28 48 33 36 46 25 0 16 5 12 41 30 59 52 55 52 46 40 34 34 22 27 13 15 9 45 40 57 10 53 29 43 55 31 21 18 48 9 14 6 34 50 54 3 50 12 40 11 27 5 13 58 3 57 0 6 60 49 56 45 53 35 23 21 41 8 0     70 44 40 40 25 29 27 15 13 1 0     80 38 11 33 46 21 29 7 52       90 30 38 26 10 14 45 0 0       100 22 27 18 2 6 45       6 12 110 14 14 9 58         12 18 120 6 34 2 30         18 8
That done, if you would draw the line of East or West, which is 90 gr. from the meridian, lay the ruler to the center A, and 30 gr. 38 m. numbred in the quadrant from C toward B, and note the point where it crosseth the tropique of ♋; then moue the ruler to 26 gr. 10 m. and note where it crosseth the parallell of ♊ then to 14 gr. 45 m. and note where it crosseth the parallell of ♉ then to 0 gr. 0 m. and you shall finde it to crosse the equator in the point F; so a line drawne through these points, shall shew the azimuth belonging to East and West. The like reason holdeth for all the rest. These lines being thus drawne, if you set two sights vp∣on the line AC, and hang a thread and plummet on the center A, with a bead vpō the thread, the foreside of the qua∣drant shall be fully finished. Or in stead of the fiue starres before mentioned, you may place the Nocturnall (described before in the vse of the Se∣ctor, pag. 60.) on the backside of the Quadrant, and so also it will be fitted both for day and night.
CHAP. II. Of the vse of the Quadrant in taking the altitude of the Sunne, Moone, and Starres. THe Quadrant is the fourth part of a circle, diuided e∣qually into 90 gr. and here numbred by 10.20.30. &c. vnto 90 gr. each degree being subdiuided into 4. Lift vp the center of the Quadrant, so as the thread with the plummet may play easily by the side of it, and the Sunne beames may passe through both the sights; so shall the de∣grees cut by the thread, shew what is the altitude at the time of obseruation, as may appeare by this example. Vpon the 14 day of April, about noone, the Sun-beames passing through both the sights, the thread fell vpon 51 gr. 20 m. and this was the true meridian altitude of the Sun for that day in this our latitude of 51 gr. 30 m. for which this Quadrant was made. Againe, towards three of the clocke in the afternoone, the thread fell vpon 38 gr. 40 m. and such was the Sunnes alti∣tude at that time. CHAP. III. Of the Ecliptique. 1 The place of the Sunne being giuen to finde his right ascension. THe Ecliptique is here represented by the arke, figured with the characters of the twelue Signes, ♈, ♉, ♊, &c. each Signe being diuided vnequally into 30 gr. and they are to be reckoned from the character of the Signe. Let the thread be laid on the place of the Sunne in the Ecliptique, and the degrees which it cutteth in the Qua∣drant shall be the right ascension required.
As if the place of the Sunne giuen be the fourth degree of ♊, the thread laid on this degree shall cut 62 degrees in the Quadrant, which is the right ascension required. But if the place of the Sunne giuen be more then 90 gr. from the beginning of ♈, there must be more then 90 gr. al∣lowed to the right ascension; for this instrument is but a qua∣drant: and so if the Sunne be in 26 gr. of ♋, you shall finde the thread to fall in the same place, and yet the right ascen∣sion to be 118 gr. 2 The right ascension of the Sunne being giuen, to find his place in the Ecliptique. Let the thread be laid on the right ascension in the Qua∣drant, and it shall crosse the place of the Sunne in the Eclip∣tique, as may appeare in the former example. CHAP. IIII. Of the line of declination. 1 The place of the Sunne being giuen to find his declination. THe line of declination is here drawne from the center to the beginning of the Quadrant, and diuided from the beginning of ♈ downward into 23 gr. 30 m. Let the thread be laid, and the beade set on the place of Sunne in the ecliptique; then moue the thread to the line of declination, and there the bead shal fall vpon the degrees of the declination required. As if the place of the Sunne giuen be the fourth degree of ♊, the beade first set to this place, and then moued to the line of declination, shall there shew the declination of the Sunne at that time to be 21 gr. from the equator.
2 The declination of the Sunne being giuen, to find his place in the Ecliptique. Let the thread and beade be first laid to the declination, and then moued to the Ecliptique. As if the declination be 21 gr. the beade first set to this de∣clination, and then moued to the ecliptique, shall there shew the fourth of ♊, the fourth of ♐, the 26 of ♋, and the 26 of ♑; and which of these foure is the place of the Sunne, may ap∣peare by the quarter of the yeare. CHAP. V. Of the circle of Moneths and Dayes. THis circle is here represented by the arke, figured with these letters, I, F, M, A, M, &c. signifying the moneths Ianuary, February, March, April, &c. each moneth being di∣uided vnequally, according to the number of the dayes that are therein. 1 The day of the moneth being giuen, to find the alti∣tude of the Sunne at noone. Let the thread be laid to the day of the moneth, and the degrees which it cutteth in the Quadrant shall be the meri∣dian altitude required. As if the day giuen be the 15 of May, the thread laid on this day shall cut 59 gr. 30 m. in the quadrant, which is the meridian altitude required. 2 The meridian altitude being giuen, to finde the day of the moneth. The thread being set to the meridian altitude, doth also fall on the day of the moneth.
As if the altitude at noone be 59 gr. 30 m. the thread be∣ing set to this altitude, doth fal on the 15 day of May and the 9 of Iuly; and which of these two is the true day, may be knowne by the quarter of the yeare, or by another dayes ob∣seruation. For if the altitude proue greater, the thread wil fall on the 16 day of May and the 8 of Iuly: or if it proue lesser, the thread will fall on the 14 of May and the 10 of Iuly; whereby the question is fully answered. CHAP. VI. Of the Houre-lines. THat arke which is drawne vpon the center of the qua∣drant by the beginning of declination, doth here repre∣sent the equator: that arke which is drawne by 23 gr. 30 m. of declination, and is next aboue the circle of moneths and dayes, representeth the tropiques: those lines which are be∣tweene the equator and the tropiques, being vndiuided and numbred at the equator by 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. at the tropique by 1. 2. 3. 4. &c. do represent the houre-circles: that which is drawne from 12 in the equator to the middle of Iune, repre∣senteth the houre of 12 at noone in the Summer; and those which are drawn with it to the right hand, are for the houres of the day in the Summer, and the houres of the night in the Winter. That which is drawne from 12 in the equator to the middle of December, representeth the houre of 12 in the Winter; and those which are drawne with it to the left hand, are for the houres of the day in the Winter, and the houres of the night in the Summer; and of both these, that which is drawne from 11 to 1, serues for 11 in the forenoone, and 1 in the afternoon. That which is drawne frō 10 to 2, serues for 10 in the forenoon, & 2 in the afternoon: for the Sun on the same day is about the same height two houres before noon, as two houres after noone. The like reason holdeth for the rest of the houres.
1 The day of the moneth, or the height at noone being knowne, to finde the place of the Sunne in the Ecliptique. The thread being laid to the day of the moneth, or the height at noone, (for one giues the other by the former pro∣position) marke where it crosseth the houre of 12, and set the bead to that intersection; then moue the thread till the bead fall on the ecliptique, and it shall fall on the place of the Sun. As if the day giuen be the 15 of May, or the meridian al∣titude 59 gr. 30 m. lay the thread accordingly, and put the bead to the intersection of the thread with the houre of 12; then moue the thread till the bead fall on the ecliptique, and it shall there shew the fourth of ♊, the fourth of ♐, the 26 of ♋, and the 26 of ♑; and which of these is the place of the Sunne, may appeare by the quarter of the yeare, or another dayes obseruation. 2 The place of the Sun in the Ecliptique being knowne, to finde the day of the moneth, &c. Let the thread and beade be first laid on the place of the Sunne in the Ecliptique, and then moued to the line of 12. As if the place of the Sunne giuen be the fourth of ♊, the bead being laid to this degree, and then moued to the houre of 12, in the Summer, the thread will fall on the 15 day of May, and the 9 of Iuly; or if it be moued to the houre of 12 in the Winter, the thread wil sall on the 6 of Ianuary and the 16 of Nouember; which of these is the day of the moneth re∣quired, may appeare by the quarter of the yeare. In this and the former propositions, you haue two wayes to rectifie the bead, by the place of the Sunne, and by the day of the moneth; the better way is by the place of the Sunne, for in the other the Leap-yeare may breed some small diffe∣rence.
There is yet a third way. For the Sea-men hauing a table for the declination on each day of the yeare, may set the bead thereto in the line of declination. 3 The houre of the day being giuen to find the altitude of the Sunne aboue the horizon. The bead being set for the time by either of the three ways, let the thread be moued from the houre of 12 toward the line of declination, till the bead fall on the houre giuen; and the degrees which it cuts in the Quadrant, shall shew the alti∣tude of the Sunne at that time. As if the time giuen be the tenth of April, the Sunne be∣ing then in the beginning of ♉, the bead being rectified, you shall finde the height at noone 50 gr. 0 m. at 11 in the mor∣ning 48 gr. 12 m. at 10 but 43 gr. 12 m. at 9 but 36 gr. at 8 but 27 gr. 30 m. at 7 but 18 gr. 18 m. at 6 but 9 gr. at 5 it meeteth with the line of declination, and hath no altitude at all, and therefore you may think it did rise much about that houre. Then if you moue the thread again from the line of de∣clination toward the houre of 12, you shal find that the Sun is 8 gr. 33 m. below the horizon at 4 in the morning, & neare 16 gr. at 3, and 21 gr. 51 m. at 2, and 25 gr. 40 m. at 1, and 27 gr. at midnight. 4 The altitude of the Sunne being giuen, to finde the houre of the day. The altitude being obserued as before, let the bead be set for the time, then bring the thread to the altitude, so the bead shall shew the houre of the day. As if the 10 of April hauing set the bead for the time, you shall finde by the quadrant, the altitude to be 36 gr. the bead at the same time will fall vpon the houre-line of 9 and 3: wherefore the houre is 9 in the forenoone, or 3 in the after∣noone. If the altitude be neare 40 gr. you shall find the bead
at the same time to fall halfe way betweene the houre-line of 9 and 3, and the houre-line of 10 and 2: wherefore it must be either halfe an houre past 9 in the morning, or halfe an houre past 2 in the afternoone; and which of these is the true time of the day, may be soone knowne by a second ob∣seruation: for if the Sunne rise higher, it is the forenoone; if it become lower, it is the afternoone. 5 The houre of the night being giuen, to find how much the Sunne is below the horizon. The Sunne is alwayes so much below the horizon at any houre of the night, as his opposite point is aboue the hori∣zon at the like houre of the day; and therefore the beade be∣ing set, if the question be made of any houre of the night in the Summer, then moue it to the like houre of the day in the Winter; if of any houre of the night in Winter, then moue it to the like houre of the day in Summer; so the de∣grees which the thread cutteth in the Quadrant shall shew how much the Sunne is below the horizon at that time. As if it be required to know how much the Sunne is be∣low the horizon the 10 of April at 4 of the clock in the mor∣ning; the bead being set to his place according to the time in the Summer houres, bring it to 4 of the clocke in the af∣ternoone in the Winter houres, and so shall you finde the thread to cut 8 gr. and about 30 m. in the quadrant; and so much is the Sunne below the horizon at that time. 6 The depression of the Sunne supposed, to giue the houre of the night with vs, or the houre of the day to our Antipodes. Here also because the Sun is so much aboue the horizon at all houres of the day, as his opposite point is below the ho∣rizon at the like houre of the night; therefore first set the bead according to the time, then bring the thread to the de∣gree of the Suns depression below the horizon, so shall the
bead fall on the contrary houre-lines, and there shew the houre of the night in regard of vs, which is the like houre of the day to our Antipodes. As if the 10 of April the Sunne being then in the begin∣ning of ♉, and by supposition 8 gr. 30 m. below the horizon in the East, it be required to know what time of the night it is; first set the bead according to the day in the Summer houres, then bring the thread to 8 gr. 30 m. in the quadrant, so shall the bead fall among the Winter houres, on the line of 4 of the clocke in the afternoone: wherefore to our Anti∣podes it is 4 of the clocke in their afternoone, and to vs it is then 4 of the clocke in the morning. 7 The time of the yeare or the place of the Sunne being giuen, to find the beginning of day-breake, and end of twi-light. This proposition differeth little from the former: for the day is said to begin to breake, when ye Sun cometh to be but 18 gr. below our horizon in the East, and twi-light to end when it is gotten 18 gr. below the horizon in the West: wherefore let the bead be set for the time, and then bring the thread to 18 gr. in the quadrant, so shall the bead fall on the contrary houre-lines, and there shew the houre of twi∣light as before. So if it be required to know at what time the day begins to breake on the tenth of April, the Sun being then in the beginning of ♉; first set the bead according to the time in the Summer houres, and then bring the thread to 18 gr. in the quadrant, so shall the bead fall among the Winter houres a little more then a quarter before 3 in the morning; and that is the time when the day begins to break vpon the tenth of April.
CHAP. VII. Of the Horizon. THe Horizon is here represented by the arke drawne, from the beginning of declination towards the end of February, diuided vnequally, and numbred by 10. 20. 30. 40. 1 The day of the moneth, or the place of the Sunne be∣ing knowne, to finde the amplitude of the Sunnes rising and setting. Let the bead rectified for the time, be brought to the ho∣rizon, and there it shall shew the amplitude required. As if the day giuen be the 15 of May, the Sunne being in the fourth degree of ♊, the bead rectified and brought to the horizon, shall there fall on 35 gr. 8 m. such is the amplitude of the Sunnes rising from the East, and of his setting from the West; which amplitude is alwayes Northward when the Sunne is in the Northerne Signes, and when he is in the Southward Signes alwayes Southward. 2 The day of the moneth, or the place of the Sunne being giuen, to finde the ascensio∣nall difference. Let the bead rectified for the time, be brought to the ho∣rizon, so the degrees cut by the thread in the quadrant, shall shew the difference of ascensions. As if the day giuen be the 15 of May, the Sunne being in the fourth degree of ♊, let the bead be rectified and brought to the horizon; so shall the thread in the quadrant shew the ascensionall difference to be 28 gr. and about 50 m. Vpon the ascensionall difference depends this Corollarie.
To find the houre of the rising and setting of the Sun, and thereby the length of the day and night. The time of the Sunnes rising may be guessed at by the 3 of the last Cap. but here by the ascensionall difference it may be better found, and that to a minute of time. For if the ascensionall difference be conuerted into time, allowing an houre for 15 gr. and 4 minutes of an houre for each degree, it sheweth how long the Sunne riseth before six of the clock in the Summer, and after six in the Winter. As if the day giuen be the 15 of May, the Sunne being in the fourth of ♊, and his ascensionall difference found as be∣fore 28 gr. 50 m; this conuerted into time, maketh 1 ho. and somewhat more then 55 m. of an houre: wherefore the Sun at that time, in regard it was Summer, rose 1 ho. and full 55 m. before 6 of the clocke; and so hauing the quantitie of the se∣midiurnall arke, the length of the day and night need not be vnknowne. CHAP. VIII. Of the fiue Starres. I Might haue put in more Starres, but these may suffice for the finding of the houre of the night at all times of the yeare: and first I make choice of Ala Pegasi, a starre in the extremitie of the wing of Pegasus, in regard it wants but 6 mi∣nutes of time of the beginning of ♈; but because it is but of the second magnitude, and not alwayes to be seene, I made choice of foure more, one for each quarter of the Eclip∣tique, as of Oculus ♉ the Buls eye, whose right ascension con∣uerted into time, is 4 ho. 15 m; then of Cor ♌ the Lions heart, whose right ascension is 9 ho. 48 m; next of Arcturus, whose right ascension is 13 H. 58 m; and lastly of Aquila, or the Vultures heart, whose right ascension is 19 H. 33 m. These fiue starres haue all of them Northern declination; and if any others, some of these will be seene at all times of the yeare.
The vse of them is, The altitude of any of these fiue Starres being knowne, to find the houre of the night. First put the beade to the starre which you intend to ob∣serue, take his altitude, and finde how many houres he is from the meridian by the fourth Prop. of the sixt Chap; then out of the right ascension of the starre, take the right ascen∣sion of the Sun conuerted into houres, and marke the diffe∣rence; for this difference being added to the obserued houre of the starre from the meridian, shall shew how many houres the Sunne is gone from the meridian, which is in effect the houre of the night. As if the 15 of May, the Sunne being in the fourth of ♊, I should set the beade to Arcturus, and obseruing his altitude should find him to be in the West about 52 gr. high, and the beade to fall on the houre-line of 2 afternoone, the houre would be 11 bo. 50 m. past noone, or 10 m. short of midnight. For 62 gr. the right ascension of the Sunne, conuerted in∣to time, makes 4 ho. 8 m. which if we take out of 13 ho. 58 m. the right ascension of Arcturus, the difference will be 9 ho. 50 m. and this being added to 2 ho. the obserued distance of Arcturus from the meridian, shewes the houre of the night to be 11 ho. 50 m. Another example wil make all more plaine. If the 9 of Iuly the Sunne being then in 26 gr. of ♋, I should set the beade to Oculus ♉, and obseruing his altitude should find him to be in the East about 12 gr. high, and the bead to fall on the houre-line of 6 before noone, which is 18 ho. past the meridian, the houre of the night would be better then a quarter past 2 of the clocke in the morning. For 118 gr. the right ascension of the Sun, conuerted into time, makes 7 ho. 52 m; this taken out of 4 ho. 15 m. the right ascension of Oculus ♉, adding a whole circle, (for otherwise there could be no substraction) the difference will be 20 ho. 23 m. and this being added to 18 ho. which was the obserued distance of Oculus ♉ from the meridian, shewes that the Sun
(abating 24 ho. for the whole circle) is 14 gr. 23 m. past the me∣ridian, and therefore 23 m. past 2 of the clock in the morning. CHAP. IX. Of the Azimuth lines. THose lines which are drawne betweene the equator and the tropiques, on that side of the quadrant which is nea∣rest vnto the sights, and are numbred by 10. 20. 30. &c. doe represent the azimuths, the vttermost to the left hand repre∣senteth the meridian, that which is numbred with 10 the tenth azimuth from the meridian, and that which is num∣bred with 20 the twentith, and so the rest. Those lines which are drawne from the equator to the left hand, doe shew the azimuth in the Summer; and those other to the right hand, do shew the same in the Winter. The vse of them is, 1 The azimuth whereon the Sunne beareth from vs being knowne, to find the altitude of the Sun aboue the horizon. First let the bead be set for the time, as in the former Chap∣ter, then moue the thread vntill the bead fall on the azi∣muth; so the degrees which the thread cutteth in the qua∣drant, shall shew the altitude of the Sun at that time. Where you are to obserue, that seeing the azimuths are drawne on the right side of the quadrant, you are also to begin to num∣ber the degrees of the Sunnes altitude from the right hand toward the left. As if the sights had been set on the line AB, and you had turned your right hand towards the Sunne in obseruing of his altitude, contrary to our practise in the for∣mer Chapter. As if the time giuen were the 2 of August, when the Sun hath about 15 gr. of North declination, you may set the bead for the time, so you shall find the height at noone when the
Sunne is in the South, to be 53 gr. 30 m. when he is 10 gr. from the South 53 gr. 10 m. when 20 gr. then about 52 gr. 8 m. when 30 gr. then 50 gr. 20 m. when 40 gr. then 47 gr. 48 m. when 50 gr. then 44 gr. 12 m. when 60 gr. then 39 gr. 35 m. when 70 gr. then 33 gr. 50 m. when 80 gr. then 27 gr. when he is in the East or West 90 gr. from the meridian, then is the height neare 19 gr. 20 m; when he comes to be 100 gr. then 11 gr. 15 m. when 110 gr. then 3 gr. 20 m; and before he com∣meth to the azimuth of 120 gr. he hath no altitude. For the Sunne hauing 15 gr. of North declination, will rise and set at 114 gr. 34 m. from the meridian. 2 The altitude of the Sunne being giuen, to find on what azimuth he beareth from vs. Let the beade be set for the time, and the altitude obser∣ued as before; then bring the thread to the complement of that altitude, so the bead shall shew the azimuth required. As if the second of August, hauing set the beade for the time, you shall find the altitude of the Sun to be 19 gr. 20 m. remoue the thread vnto 70 gr. 40 m. the complement of the altitude; or, which is all one, to 19 gr. 20 m. from the right hand toward the left, and the bead will fall on the line of 90 gr. from the meridian. And therefore the point whereon the Sunne beareth from vs, is one of these two, either due East or due West. And which of these is the true point of the compasse, may be soone knowne by a second obseruation: for if the Sun rise higher, it is the forenoone; if it be lower, it is the afternoone. By knowing the azimuth or point of the compasse whereon the Sunne beareth from vs, it is easie to finde, A meridian line; and thereby The coasting of the Countrey. The site of a building. The variation of the Compasse.
As if the second of August in the afternoone, I should find by the height of the Sunne that he beares from me 60 gr. from the meridian toward the West; then there being 90 gr. belonging to each quarter, the West will be 30 gr. to the right hand, the East is opposite to the West, the North and South lie equally betweene them. CHAP. X. Of the Quadrat. THe Quadrat hath two sides diuided, the other two sides next the Center may be supposed to be diuided, each of them into 100 equal parts: of the sides diuided, that which is next the horizontall line containes the parts of right sha∣dow, the other next the sights, the parts of contrary shadow. The vse of the Quadrat is, 1 Any point being giuen, to finde whether it be leuell with the eye. Lift vp the center of the quadrant, so as the thread with the plummet may play easily by the side of it; then looke through the sights to the place giuen: for now if the thread shall fall on AB the horizontall line, then is the place giuen leuel with the eye: but if it shal fal within the said line on any of the diuisions, then it is higher; if without, then it is lower then the leuell of the eye. 2 To find an height aboue the leuell of the eye, or a distance at one obseruation. Looke through the sights to the place, going nearer or farther from it, till the thread fall on 100 parts in the quadrat or 45 gr. in the quadrant, so shall the height of the place a∣boue the leuell of the eye, be equall to the distance between the place and the eye. If the thread fall on 50 parts of a right shadow, the height
geometric illustration measuring shadow cast by a tower is but halfe the distance: if it fall on 25, it is a quarter of the distance: if on 75, it is three quarters of the distance. For as oft as the thread falleth on the parts of right shadow, As 100 to the parts on which the thread falleth: So is the distance to the height required. And on the contrary, As the parts cut by the thread are to 100: So the height vnto the distance. But when the thread shall fall on the parts of contrary sha∣dow: if it fall on 50 parts, the height is double vnto the di∣stance; if on 25, it is foure times as the distance. For as oft as the thread falleth on the parts of contrary shadow, As the parts cut by the thread are vnto 100: So is the distance vnto the height. And on the contrary, As 100 are vnto the parts cut by the thread: So is the height vnto the distance. And what is here said of the height and distance, the same may be vnderstood of the height and shadow. 3 To find a height or a distance at two obseruations. As if the place which is to be measured might not other∣wise
be approched, & yet it were required to find the height BC, and the distance: first if I make choice of a station at A, where the thread may fall on 100 parts in the quadrat, and 45 gr. in the quadrant, the distance AB will be equall to the height BC; then if I go farther in a direct line with the former distance, and make choice of a second station at D, where the thread may fall on 50 parts of right shadow, the distance BD would be double to the height BC: wherefore I may measure the difference betweene the two stations A and D, and this difference AD will be equall both to the di∣stance AB and the height BC. Or if I cannot make choice of such stations, I take such as I may, one at D, where the thread falleth at 50 parts of right shadow; the second at E, where it falleth on 40 parts: and sup∣posing the height BC to be 100, I find that As 50 parts are vnto 100, the side of the quadrat: So 100 the supposed height, vnto 200 the distance BD. And as 40 parts, at the second station, vnto 100: So 100 the supposed height, vnto 250 the distance BE. Wherfore the difference between the stations D & E should seeme to be 50; and then if in measuring of it, I should find it to be either more or lesse, the proportion will hold, as from the supposed difference to the measured difference, so from height to height, and from distance to distance. As if the difference between the two stations D and E be∣ing measured, were found to be 30. As 50 the supposed difference, vnto 30 the true difference: So 100 the supposed height, vnto 60 the true height. And 200 the supposed distance, vnto 120 the true distāce: And 250 at the second station, vnto 150 the distance BE. The like reason holdeth in all other examples of this kind: and if an Index with sights were fitted to turne vpon the Center, it might then serue by the same reason for the find∣ing of all other distances. FINIS.
