23524A S118125 99853334 180870
THE SWEDISH INTELLIGENCER. The Second Part. WHEREIN, OVT OF THE TRVEST and choysest Informations, are the famous Actions of that warlike Prince Historically led along: from the Victory of Leipsich, unto the Con∣quest of Bavaria. The times and places of every Action, being so sufficiently observed and descri∣bed; that the Reader may finde both Truth and Reason in it. LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Nath: Butter and Nicholas Bourne. 1632.
The Preface. TO THE FAVOVRA∣BLE AND IVDICIOVS Reader. THen is a Booke thorowly allowed, when Seene and Allowed: when the Rea∣ders have approoved it, as well as the Licencer. With this favourablenesse (as I thankfully must acknowledge) have my for∣mer Bookes beene entertained: yea, most fa∣vourably, by the most Iudicious. In an hum∣ble hope therefore, of the like acceptance; does my Dedication in the same Style, a∣gaine preferre it selfe to its old Patrones-ge∣nerall, The Favourable and Iudicious Rea∣ders. The King of Sweden (though arm'd
but in Paper) cannot but Conquer. I meane affections. Since then I no waies could pre∣sume, that my Stile or simple performance, should in any degree inveigle your Judge∣ments; this onely became my encourage∣ment, That though this Story should goe out of my hands, poorely enough and weakely endited: yet that the prevailing Fortunes of the King of Sweden, would so potently assist and goe along with it; as that by that time it came into your hands, it would so prevaile with your affections; and so gently in the reading, captivate the attentions of all the favourers of his actions, that their Iudgements (for the time) should become deprived of this part of their due liberties; and forbeare the power, though, not of see∣ing yet of censuring, my errors. The First Part I undertooke, to cheere up the long-exercised expectations of such well-affected English, as desired in their dayes, to see some ease and consolation, to the miserably afflicted Churches of Germany. In that poore Booke, our Nation first read,
That God had begun to send a Deliverer vnto His people. This (me thoughts) in a time of my leasure, was a worke not alto∣gether beneath me: and that to bring Glad tidings, was next unto the Preaching of the Gospel. To the going on with this Second Part, hath the united and repeated desires, of well-disposed people provoked me: I could not take so many expectations of my Betters, for lesse then a Command; and that it was a Duty to satisfie them. My Booke hath many mens Stories: but I have laboured most upon the Kings. In penning of the whole, I had these two ambi∣tions; Truth and Plainenesse. The com∣passing of the First, (besides the chargeable∣nesse of procuring the Jntelligence, out of the Armies and else-where) hath cost mee much more paines, then the bare writing: my care was, to learne out, and get acquain∣ted with such understanding Gentlemen, as had beene personally present in the Actions. To some of these, hath my Margent beene already thankefull: and here, especially, am
I againe, to that Gentleman of curious ob∣servation, whom you shall find named Page 46, in the Margent. I will not bee much displeased, if Gallobelgicus shall any∣where differ from me: this by his former Bookes I perceive, that he hath made use of but few things, which I have not seene before his Mart: and my diligence (I be∣leeve) hath not beene behind his; and my Intelligence, I know to bee farre better. Truth is the pearle, I sought for; which I have still preferred before fauour: and had the Imperialists well beaten the Swedish now and then; I would not have omitted it. Ʋariety, is some ornament to a Booke: part of which mine now wants; as running al∣together upon the victories of the King of Sweden. If then any contrarily-affected shall give out, That I have omitted their victories: besides this answer to them, That they should have done well to have sent me in their Intelligence: I further de∣mand, What victories these were, which suffered the King of Sweden to march up
and downe so many hundred miles in Ger∣many: and that I never read, (in the com∣passe of the time of this Story) of any enter∣prize he undertooke, but he prevailed in it: his fortunes never receiving any remarkeable or considerable checke, but at Ingolstat on∣ly. This truely I beleeve; That all their sup∣posed victories, which they have so often here given out, will hardly (yet) make up a Second Part of the Laurea Austriaca. Er∣rors, I cannot but have: but they are casu∣all, and not affected ones; they are my ig∣norances, not my purposes. And if those that know better, (and be sure they doe so) will adde to, or controll this; I shall thanke them for satisfying my Readers, in what I would have serv'd them; had I either known more Truth, or more Circumstances. As for my second Ambition, Plainnesse; that have I also laboured upon. I affected not to be too concise, or too sententious. My care was, not to hunt for praise; by the cor∣rupting of our noble Language, with fine new phrases, and unhappily coyn'd words:
the presumptions of an over-bold fancy. Some military Termes, may perchance be obscure, because proper: which being their commendation, I would not (in this) des∣cend unto every capacity. In a many of these, may the Reader satisfie himselfe, in my Swe∣dish Discipline: and for understanding of the rest, my Booke must waite the improve∣ment of its Readers industrie. To make all more Plaine, I have noted the places of eve∣ry Action. The King of Sweden cannot flie: therefore have I specified the distances and lyings of the Townes; that you may per∣ceive the orderlinesse and probabilityes of the Kings Proceedings: and that there was no impossibility in his Conquests. I have beene carefull, (if not too curious) in this point: and have taught those Readers that have Mapps, how to turne them. This commo∣dity because all have not; and that in the same Mappe there be many townes of the same names; therefore have I beene so parti∣cular in my Descriptions. This one addition had I purposed to have
made unto my Story: the Iournall, namely, or Diarye of the Actions of the Lower Saxony. And that, betweene the Armies and Generalls of the two adverse Leagues, the Protestants and the Catholikes. That is to say; Betwixt the Lord Marquesse of Hamil∣ton, Duke William of Saxon-Weymar, the Lord Achatius Todt, Sir John Banier, and Bauditz: all Generalls for the King of Swe∣den, the Head of the League. Together with the two Dukes of Mecklenburg, the Dukes of Lunenburg and Saxon-Lawenburg, the Landgrave of Hessen, and the Bishop of Bremen; all Generalls for themselues, and the Protestant-League, respectively: on the one party. And, the Earles of Pappenhaim and Mansfeld, the Barons of Gronsfelt and Vir∣mont; with Reinacher, Boenickhausen, and other Governours and Commanders: for the Imperiall party. But this have I beene for∣ced to leave out, for want of conference with such Gentlemen, as had personally beene em∣ployed in the Actions: an instruction, which I much preferre, before all written Intelli∣gences.
My Preface, was onely to make the Readers understand my purpose; and I hope I have done it. The Readers must be allow∣ed the liberty of their severall verdicts: and though they should differ, yet must all passe for Iudgement. The pleasing of them, must be put to the venture: but if I might not be thought partiall to mine owne; I would freely enough confesse, That having taken treble paines in This, more then in my For∣mer; I had in This given my selfe so much the more satisfaction, then in the Former. With this comfort doe I now part with my Booke; That I have not yet entered upon a foyld Story. God turne the warres to a happy issue: I had much rather write of Peace, then Vi∣ctory.
The Contents and Methode of the whole. I. THE King of Swedens owne Story, till the time he recei∣ved the Newes of Tillies put∣ting Gustavus Horn out of Bam∣berg. II. Gustavus Horns Proceedings, apart: from the time of the Kings lea∣ving him about Wurtsburg; un∣till the former businesse betwixt Him and Tilly.
III. The Generall Tillyes Preparations and Proceedings; from his de∣feate at Leipsich, until his putting of Gustavus Horn out of Bam∣berg. At the end of this, have you the Duke of Bavaria's Story. IIII. The Kings March up into Bavaria against Tilly: with his Conquest of that Dukedome, and finall Overthrow and death of Tilly. To this is added, the Actions of Sir Patrick Ruthven and others, about Vlm. V. The Duke of Bavaria's Manifest in favour of the Catholike Party. VI. The Duke of Saxonyes taking, and losing againe of Bohemia.
VII. The Actions of Albert Walenstein, Duke of Fridland: both against the Duke of Saxony, and the King of Sweden; untill his encamping before Norimberg.
Errata. PAg. 43, line 23 in some copies. for, Scarcely was the King from Hebron, reade, the King gone from Hebron pag. 157. line 24. for, vpon the fourth of April, Reade, vpon the Fourteenth. In stead of pag. 177, reade 167. Literall faults, we desire the Reader to beare withall. pag. 115. Line 5. for Haibron reade Hailbrun. pag. 138. line 24. for Schneidewin, reade Redwin.
THE SWEDISH Intelligencer. The Second Part. From the Ʋictory of Leipsich, unto the Conquest of Bavaria. FROM Ʋictory to Conquest: these are the two Termes of Progression of the King of Swedens (hitherto) fortunate atchieve∣ments. The Ʋictory of Leipsich, we haue for their sakes that are curious, taken paines the second time to describe in our booke of the Swedish Discipline: where that famous action is farre more largely and punctually set downe, then our Intelligence would at first serue vs to doe; at the setting forth of the former part of this Story. The Conquest of Bauaria is the terminating Terme; with which our purpose is to cloaze vp this second Part of our Intelligencer.
Wee left the King of Sweden in our Former part, where even the ablest Generall (especially before the beginning of a∣ny great Action) must not despise now and then to be present: at a Councell of warre, namely; together with his Highnesse the Elector of Saxony. Single advice, ends in double dangers: whereas even the warres themselves receive as much streng∣thening by an Ʋnion of heads, as by an vniting of hands. What the Conclusions of that Military Consultation were; though in expresse termes wee know not; yet by the next Actions of warre may we collect thus much amongst the rest, to haue beene then at Hall agreed upon. guesse at at was a∣ed upon be∣xt the King d the Duke Saxon.1. That the fleeing enemy being so farre already escaped, should at that time be no further pursued. 2. That the chiefe Army of the Catholike Leaguers being now broken, the Lands of the Leaguers themselves that refu∣sed to make their peace, should in the order as they next lay, be also set upon: that so by singly disabling of the Leaguers, the League it selfe might vniversally at length be shaken. 3. To cut out the more worke at once for the Emperor; Saxony, after he had cleared his owne Lusatia, was also to fall into the Kingdome of Bohemia. 4. Care was also had, of the ruinated estate of the Towne and Bishopricke of Magdenburg: in which Diocesse, together with that of Halberstat, the King of Sweden even now appoin∣ted Lodowicke Prince of Anhalt for his Governor; commit∣ting the military command in those parts unto Colonell Schneidewin: a man that both knew the countrey well e∣nough, and that had beene faithfull and forward withall un∣to his former Master, the unfortunate Administrator. Things being thus agreed upon, and the Kings Army by the middle of September come together againe; his Majesty having intelligence of Altringers and Fuggers (two of the Emperors Generals) late being about Erfurt:e King mar∣es into Du∣gen. shapes his first course towards that City, which was the next good towne on that side belonging unto any of the Catholike Leaguers. Di∣recting his march therefore to the South-west, and crossing
the River of Sala; into the Country of Duringen or Thurin∣gia he goes: leading an army of 20000 men (more some write) along with him. Keeping then the River of Ʋn∣strut close upon his right hand, unto the towne of Gross So∣meren, (upon the Easterne banke of the said River) he comes: where for that night, (September 17.) he sets downe with his Armie. From this Towne hee immediately dispatches his letters unto the great City of Erfurt, demanding to haue it forthwith delivered unto him. This towne,Erfurt sumn¦ned. situate upon the River Iera, is for compasse one of the greatest of Germa∣ny; being ennobled with an Vniuersity withall: both at this time belonging unto the Arch-bishop Elector of Mentz (the first spirituall person of the Catholicke Leaguers:) unto whose towne of Mentz, the old Bishopricke of Erfurt, and the tem∣porall dominion withall, had long since beene translated. Backe the next day come the Kings Messengers with this answer of the Cittizens, That they held for the Elector of Mentz, to whom they had taken the oath of fidelity. The King not taking this for satisfaction, presently with his army advances towards it: yet in the meane time were his second Summons sent unto them, either forthwith to yeeld their towne, or to stand to the hazzard of the wars. Out come the towne Depu∣ties to treate; desiring, but 3. daves respit to consider of it. This being denyed them, and they offring to returne into the town; the King sends Duke William of Saxon-Wymar along with them;Fayrely take who with some troopes of horse entering the outter Port, together with the Deputyes; presently makes good the place, by staying his horses and wagons betweene the two Ports. After which, having disarmed the souldiours of the next Courts of guard; and nine other troopes of Swedish horse, having by this time possessed themselves of the other gate also: he with his first companyes rides immediately up into the market place. Causing now the chiefe Burgers to come before him, hee after much arguing to and againe, wrings the towne keyes out of their hands; in steade of which, he in the King of Swedens name tenders them these
twelue Propositions, forthwith to set their hands unto. nd the Con∣tions of it.1. That they should renounce their fealty unto the Bishop of Ments. 2. Take an oath of Fidelity unto the King of Sweden, the Electors, and Dukes of Saxony. 3. Accept of a Swedish garrison of at least 1500. men. 4. And procure that garrison to be maintained, at the com∣mon charges of the Subjects of the Countyes of Schwartzen∣burg and Gleichen. 5. Suffering their City to bee new fortified in places convenient. 6. The charges of which fortifications they laying out, should be againe paide them by the Princes of the House of Saxony. 7. That in case of necessity, the Towne should be still o∣pen for the House of Saxony to retire into. 8. That in stead of the Elector of Mentz his Court of Iu∣stice, the Elector of Saxonyes Chancery should be received into the City: which should be maintained out of the reve∣nues of the Cloysters. 9. That the government of the towne should still be left unto their owne Senate: which might in numbers hereafter be encreased, as necessity required. 10. That the Romane Catholickes should either change their Religin, or forsake the Towne: and that leaving thir estates, they should demand Licence for their depar∣ture. 11. For the better assuring of the Cittizens fidelity, should the Queene of Sweden come to reside among them. 12. hat the charges of fitting the palace of Stotternhem for her Majesties residence, should be levyed out of the goods of the Roman Catholickes that had forsaken the City. Thus became Erfurt accorded with the King, Septem∣ber 18. 1631. without bloodshed. The next day came his Majesties selfe into the Towne, with some 10000. of his men after him: whom he billetted in the Dom Petersberg and
the Iesuits Cloyster. With the Priests and Iesuites did the King vouchsafe some conference, as tis said: to whom he both promised nd proclaimed, that if they would acknow∣ledge him for their Liege Lord, they should no wayes be mo∣lested, either in goods or Conscience. To the Magistrates he promised, that for their quiet and solemne receiving of him, he would continue them their former priviledges, and his owne Royall protection. The Governor which he appoin∣ted to leave with them, was he that so handsomely tooke in the Towne, and their neere neighbour, Duke William of Saxon-Wymar aforesaid: with whom he left for garrison partly, and to begin an army; two Regiments of Foote, and one of Horse. In this Towne the King staid a whole weekes space, taking a view in that time of such places, where it was most necessary to have the City fortified: which worke was thought likely to amount unto two Millions of Dol∣lars. And now is his Majesty determined for an expedition into Franconia.The King moves into Franconia. The two chiefe spirituall members of the Catho∣licke League in that Countrey, are the Bishops of Wurts∣burg and of Bamberg, unto whom either in the while that he staid at Erfurt, or a little after: the King sends his Letters of Invitation, or of Summons, to draw them off from the League, if they pleased; and to free thereby their Countreys from invasion. And this might serve them as a Herald at Armes, either to desire their amity; or if that were refused, to forewarne them of his comming. And that he did thus fayrely deale with them, I find it mentioned in his Majesties owne Declaration published afterwards at Wurtsburg Taking leave of Erfurt therefore, September 26. old stile: and ben∣ding his course due South from thence, and along the westerne shoare of the said River of Iera; towards Arnstat in the little County of Schwartzenburg he marches: lodging the same night in a fayre Castle there, belonging unto Gunther Earle of Schwartzenburg. The next day September 27. unto Ilmenau he comes; a Towne upon the River Ilm, in the
very edge of the Forest of Duringen, or the Duringer Waldt: where he rests his army againe till the next day towards euen∣ing. Hence was the valiant Field-Marshall Gustavus Horn, together with Baudissen Leiftenant-Generall of the Horse, dispatched away. Eight or 10000. men they were said to leade along with them: one part of their designe being repor∣ted to be, to seeke out Altringer and Fugger, with whom one of the Earles of Mansvelt had now also conioyned his forces. These 3.avus Horn abroad. being heard of to be together beyond Isenach upon the frontiers of Hessen, (betwixt the rivers of Nesa and Wer∣ra) in search of them doe the 2. Swedish Generals goe as farre as Waltershausen first, and so onwards unto Isenach, both West∣ward of the city of Erfurt. But Altringer was not to be spoken withall; his men were afraid of the very name or sha∣dow of a Swede: whom they had not so much mind to meete withall, as to conioyne themselues with Tilly: for which pur∣pose they were already marched from Isenach unto Munden, whither shortly after, Tilly had appointed them to come. But Horn and Baudissen, as they made no long stay, so lost they not all their labour; seeing in their returne they tooke in the city of Gota first,es in Gota and e County of neberg. (some 4. leagues to the West of Erfurt:) and that part of the little County of Henneberg, (on the South-west side of the Duringer Waldt) afterwards; which the King had left untouched: conioyning their forces last of all unto the Kings army at Konigshoven; which way we left the King now going. September 28. towards euening he sets forward from Il∣menau againe, euen into the thickest of the Duringer Forest. And for the souldiers better seeing of their way in the night time, were there wisps, and cresset lights made in pans, &c. hung vpon the trees, King passes Duringer∣dt, into nkenland, Franconia. with other such like prouisions. This Forest being in a right line passed thorow, the army arriues at Schleusing in Franconia; whence they directly marched to∣wards Konigshoven: before which (being 4. leagues and an halfe distant) they the next day presented 4. Regiments, when∣as they were there least looked for. This strong towne of
Konigshoven, is the chiefe Fortresse and Store-house of that plentifull countrey; the Seate and Court, (for the most part) of the great Bishop of Wurtsburg; and one of the chiefe keyes, on that side, vnto the Bishopricks of Wurtsburg and of Bamberg. The Swedens giuing summons to the towne in their Kings name, were vouchsafed no other answer, then what was by the report of the Canon returned them: The Sum∣mons being refused, the Seige is laid.Where he b¦seiges Konig∣shoven, The King hauing runne his lynes, and raised his batteries before the towne; beates har∣dest vpon a certaine strong and high tower, from whence the towne Ordnance did mostly annoy him. This being sore shaken, and ready for assault, the King next of all by a trum∣pet sent into the City, gives them faire advice to send away all their women and children: seeing if he must needes be put to take the place by assault, he would giue their houses for pil∣lage vnto his souldiers, put all the people to the sword, beate downe the towne about their cares, and afterwards turne it all into Cinders. The garrison perceiving no succours ready to relieve them from their Bishop (whom it most concerned) fall to capitulate for their lives; presently yeelding up that strong place unto his Maiesty.And takes it. Here were found great store of Ordnance, and a wonderfull plenty of victuals, provisions and Ammunition of all kinds. Entrance being thus happily gained into Franconia in the end of September, the fame of the Kings taking so principall and strong a Fort, strake such a terror into the Country there∣abouts; that the Catholike Commissioners now assembled at the Diet of Frankford on the Maine, with all speede forsake the place; without staying to dispatch any of the Emperors or Ca∣tholike Leaguers businesse, which they came thither for. This Konigshoven being very strong before, does the King (as his custome is to doe, with all conquered places of importance) cause to be more fortified after his own manner: leaving a garrison in it, and the Duke Ernestus of Saxon-Wyma for their Governor. From this place our Conqueror moves toward Schwein∣frt,
a pretty Imperiall City, some 6. leagues to the South of Konigshoven; and seated upon the North-West banke of the river of Mayn before mentioned.weinfurt ta∣. Here (to begin the Moneth of October withall) was he admitted without resistance: the garrison going out thence into Wurtsburg, some two dayes march (or 6. leagues) distant from this Schweinfurt. October the second, the King with som 18. troopes of Hor e comes into the towne, where he hath the Oath of fidelity made him by the Citizens. Observing in his view of the City (where he staied not above an houre in all) how commodiously it was seated for the passage of the Mayn; he giues order to haue it new fortified: leaving 3. Companies of Foote, and two troopes of Dragooners in it for garrison. Sending his forces now severall wayes about at one instant, he hath divers places at once, upon easie termes delivered up unto him in the Bi∣shoprick of Bamberg;e Bishoprick amberg ta∣ in. as Hasfurt, Gemund, Lohr, Volcach, Kitzing, Oxenfurt, Remling and Karlstadt, all situated upon the Mayn: which river his Maiesty was now very desirous to make himselfe Master of. Very well did this wise King per∣ceive, That the methode of Warre was the same (in this point) with the methode of Nature; and how a countrey is by the same meanes and degrees to be conquered, by which it was at first peopled: and that was, by the great and navigable rivers. For besides that the richest and the strongest Cities be ever situated vpon their banks; and that at those Cities, be still the Bridges and Passes over into other countries: by their streames also, up and downe, are the riches and forces of the Kingdome cōveighed; wch wil quickly beate the Land-conque∣ror out of the field,e King kes towards e river of ayn. that is not Master of those waters. These, with other considerations of the excellent advantage of ha∣ving a good river to friend; as the neerenesse of fresh water, both for horse and man; the commodiousnesse of carriages; the naturall fortification to the army on that side, whereby all sudden Camisado'es and fallings on of the enemy are preven∣ted: are some of the maine reasons that no wise warriour ought to thinke himselfe a Conqueror, untill such time as he
hath the commaund of the water, as well as of the land. And therefore hath the King of Sweden (if you marke the order∣linesse of his proceedings) still coasted it along upon the Ri∣vers. Thus whereas He at his first comming into Germanie, sought to land in the mouth of the Oder; he so long pursued the course of that streame, untill it brought him into the river Havel; and that, into the Elb: the banks whereof when he had lately left unto the Duke of Saxonie; then seekes he to the Mayn; as he afterwards did unto the Rhine and Danubie. The same first of Otober that Schweinfurt was yeelded unto the King; his Maiesty (it seemes) sent abroad his letters of generall Summons unto the Countrey.The King summons th country: & wi good successe The Empire devided into 10. Circles: of which this Ci¦cle of Francon is the first. The Date of them is from Madenhausen, a village neere unto Schweinfurt, where his Maiesties head-quarter, perchance, at that time lay. The Direction is, To all the Cities of and about the Circle of Fran∣conia. The Purpose, That whereas the Protestants were every where oppressed by the Papists; and that his comming had principally been for their deliverance: therefore those Pro∣testant townes and others that had any Imperiall or Leaguish garrisons in them, should driue them out and open their gates unto the Swedish forces. Those that so did, he would protect; those that refused, or delayed, he would pursue the Law of Armes upon: protesting himselfe to be innocent, of whatso∣ever evill should betide upon their refusall. Their answer he would expect by the next morning. And now became the King as victorious with his pen, as formerly he had beene with his pike: for upon promise of protection, freedome of conscience, and from garrisons: many townes and Cities at that time committed themselves unto his mercy.The Bishop of Bamberg makes his peace with the King: The great Bishop of Bamberg himselfe, with his Chapter of Dom-herren or Prebendaries of the Church, sent with as much speed as might be, their Ambassadors unto the King, from the strong towne of Forcheim whither they were retyred. The price of their peace, must be their assent unto these 4. Articles. 1. To pay the King 3. tunnes of gold, downe upon the nayle.
2. And forthwith deliver him over their 2. strong For∣tresses, Forcheim and Cronach. 3. And contribute so much a moneth unto his warres, as they had before done unto the Catholike Leaguers. 4. Recalling all their forces out of the Catholike army; ut∣terly renouncing that Confederation. These conditions, though the Bishop was for his peace sake contented to submit unto at the first; yet for all that, so soone as ever himselfe and people had gotten in more forces together,nd breakes his rticles. and made up their fortifications: they brake these Articles againe, causing their Bishop afterwards to goe to invite Tilly into their Country. This became a great hinde∣rance unto the King afterwards; enforcing him to send Gustavus Horn with an army into Bamberg: for whom he might otherwhere have had better employment. The Kings next designe was upon Wurtsburg, which Francis Hatzfeldt the new elected Bishop of the place, and Duke of Franconia (for so his stile is) hearing of; he being a better Orator then a Soldiour: with all speede packes up his best Iewels and Treasure; shifting himselfe unto Franckford on the Maine first, and so into the Rhine at Mentz: and from that place downe the streame towards Bon unto the Elector of Cullen; whence in the name of all the Catholicke-Spirituall-Leaguers, he was in Ianuary following, sent Ambassador to∣wards the French King. The taking of this Wurtsburg, would be well worth the labour of a King of Sweden;The King be∣sieges Wurts∣burg. to this therefore does hee now convert his Armes: his strength being said to be seventeene Regiments of Foote, and 8000 Horse, of which, I beleeve, he had but two third parts His power he first presented be∣fore the City, upon Tuesday, October 4. 1631. by nine a clocke in the morning. The Towne it selfe lyes upon the Ri∣ver of Mayn; the forme of it being a just Semicircle; the River making the Diameter unto it. Within the City is there an Ʋniversity, and two Colledges. Beyond this River, towards the West, and upon a very steepe hill, stands there a
goodly Castle: some buildings and walls being at the foote of it along the Rivers side, facing the Towne as the Bankes-side doth London. The East side of the Towne, is for three parts of it compassed about with a handsome Sub∣urb: and that also walled and indifferently fortified. The middle gate of this Suburb the King finding to be shut against him, makes it flye open with a powder,The Suburb (as they say) by clapping a Petard, in stead of a Key, unto it. The Towne within the walls perceiving the King to have thus boldly knockt and come in, without bidding; send out to desire respit of his Majesty, untill 8 a clocke the next morning. This was but a tricke of the Burgers to gaine time and darkenesse withall; which they that whole day and night made use of, for the con∣veighing of their best men and chiefest treasure up into the Castle. Wednesday morning being come,and town take the Ports are ope∣ned: and the Boores (which the City had for their defence taken in) are put out at the backe doore, as the Swedens are let in at the fore-doore. The King being thus peaceably admitted, not a souldier of his was complained of to have done wrong unto any of the Burgers; nor so much as to have askt or begd any thing; all expecting the courtesie of the townesmens cha∣rity. Heere the King tendering an oath of fidelity unto the Cittizens, is not denyed it: his owne lodging being taken up in the Duke-Bishops Palace behind the Cathedrall. The King thus in possession of the Towne, could not yet thinke himselfe Master of it, so long as the Castle of Marien∣burg (for so is it called) could at pleasure beate it about his eares. This peece is mounted upon so high a hill, as was to be commanded from no other ground: it having the Towne below at its owne feete.The Castle de¦scribed. And as strongly was it fortified by Art, as advantageously situated by nature. The hill is a maine rocke; whereof one side is craggy and barren, and the other covered with vines: the whole top of the little mountaine being crowned with the Castle, and with the ditches and out-works of it. Nor wanted here any inward fortifications; 800 or 1000. fighting men, being there in garrison: and as for vi∣ctuals,
money, and Ammunition, Troy it selfe was not better provided for its ten yeeres siege, then this Fort was. The Ca∣stellan or Governour, was one Keller; esteemed till now a good brave fellow: and knowne generally by this brand, That he mortally hated all Protestants and their Religion. All toge∣ther, finally, made the place appeare so impregnable, that the Kings preparations to attempt upon it were rather scorned then feared, by the garrison: who verily beleeved, that unlesse the Swedes had wings, as well as Armes, they could never get up thither. Those difficulties that serve for bridles to the slug∣gish, become spurres unto the industrious: the more insupe∣rable therefore that the place seemed to be, the more desirous was the King to overcome it. Full well he knew besides, that the consequence would as much availe him, as the conquest: for what should hereafter become unpossible, unto him, that had by fine force taken in the (supposed) impregnable Castle of Wurtsburg? The King being thus resolved, gives order first to have the Castle summoned: which is the onely Complement or Court∣ship, that the warres of course admit of. That being refused, he next prepares for the assault. The garrison that retyred out of the towne into the Castle, had themselues broken downe one or two arches of the bridge over the Mayn, betweene the towne and the Castle,he manner of saulting the astle. leaving a planke onely over the broken place, for their owne leisurely passage. All their boates, had they likewise drawne over to the other shoare of the river: so that this was the first difficulty, how to get over the water, and how to come at the Castle. The King having there a Scottish Gentleman that spake excellent good Dutch, (one Master Robert Ramsye a Leiftenant vnder Sir Iames Ramsyes Regiment) him the King puts upon the businesse: to passe over (as a Dutchman and one of theirs) upon that planke, and to truck with some Boore or souldier, to conveigh over one of those boates unto the King. The Leiftenant performes his charge to the purpose; but being afterwards discovered by his long coate, was apprehended for a spye, and made a prisoner:
whence at the taking of the Castle he was redeemed. The King having thus procured one boate; sends men in that to bring over more: by which at last he set over as many soldi∣ers as he pleased. Keller the Governour was ready at the foot of the hill, to entertaine them: for faine would he haue staved them off there, and have kept the Scottish led by Sir Iames Ramsye and Sir Iohn Hamilton, from comming neerer. Here beganne the first skirmish, which indeed proved but a skir∣mish: the defendants being after a while beaten up the hill unto a great Halfe-Moone they had before the Castle; where the Scottish for that night gaue it over. Keeping that footing, therefore, which they had the first day gotten upon the climbe of the hill; they under favour of that, brought forward their owne trenches neerer still and neerer to the Bulwark. All that night and the two next dayes, did the Ordnance thunder from the Castle; & for as long a time were the garrison kept in con∣tinuall action and Alarmes: a besieged enemy being like an un∣made hawke, to be reclaymd with watching. The Trenches or Lines being finished,The valour  the Scottish ∣tion, in these warres. the King commaunds Sir Iohn Hamilton and Sir Iames Ramsye to fall on with their Regiments: for if a Foit be to be stormed, or any desperate peice of service to be set upon; the Scottish have hitherto had the honour and the danger, to be the first men that are put upon such a businesse. This Halfe-moone therefore upon the vineyards side, right be∣fore the bridge (which was over the moate of the Castle) doe the Scottish now full resolutely fall upon: the defendants like∣wise for two houres together (as 'tis said) as stoutly fight∣ing for their worke. Here was Sir Iames Ramsye shot in the arme: and very many of his, and of Sir Iohn Hamiltons men, slaine and spoyled in the assault: but they by fine force at length prevailing, drave the defendants to the retreat. The King had thought at the same time to have possessed himselfe of the Castle-bridge of stone aforesaid; and of the Port consequent∣ly, that it led unto: commanding other of his men for that purpose into the very Graff or moate it selfe: but from that designe were they for that time put off, by the defendants. By
five a clocke the next morning, (Saturday, October 8.) was there a generall assault attempted: at which time a certaine Lieftenant of Leifland, (borne of Scottish parents) comming in the darke (with onely 7. men at that instant behind him) unto the draw-bridge that entered into the Forehoff or outter-court of the Castle, and being over-heard by those that had the guards on the inside (who were neere upon 200. men) was by one of them demaunded in the forme usuall among souldi∣ers, Was vor volcks? What are you for men? Swedes, cryes the Leiftenant. The enemies hearing this, presently lay hold upon the chaynes to hale up the draw-bridge: which the Leifte∣nant perceiving them about, with a strange courage and reso∣lution leapes lightly upon the bridge and his 7.perate at∣t of a enant. men after him; keeping it downe by that meanes. Those within now verily imagining all the Swedish to be already at the bridge, most base∣ly runne away into the Castle: of which the Swedish by this time having notice, presently enter into the Forehoff, even close unto the Castle. And here (as tis written) does the mer∣cifull King once againe offer faire conditions, unto as many as would lay down armes: but this being refused, and the Cannon all this while thundering against his men; the King causes the Ordnance which he even now found upon the conquered Bul∣warks, to be turned upon the inner gate, which leades into the very Castle it selfe: which hee presently therewithall breakes open. Sir Iohn Hamilton having done so much good service before, is now againe as ready to fall into the Castle: but from this the King cald him off: pretending the preserva∣tion of his men, which had beene so shattered in the former service. But the valiant Colonell made another interpretation of the Kings meaning.e Castle ne. The Swedish now thronging in amaine thorow the broken gate, utterly there overlay the defendants. And now began the execution; and now the conquered begin to cry for Quarter: but the enraged Swedens yet in the heate of blood, bid them looke for no other Quarter, then what the Protestants found at Magdenburg. All that resisted, suffe∣red. Among the dead, were there some skore of lusty sturdy
Fryers found armed: who had their crownes (poore men) new shaven with a sword, in stead of a razor: and receiving here their ultimam tonsuram, had no other complement of Anointing to it, but that of their owne bloods. The sword de∣voureth one, as well as another, said that famous Generall of old: nor had these men dyed amisse, had it bin in defence one∣ly of their Prince and Country; and not upon an erroneous Conscience of their Religion: and an over-bold conceit of Me∣rit and of Martyrdome. Divers of the garrison leaping over the rampiers into the vineyards, mended themselues no better by it then other runne-awayes usually doe; to be kild further off from their fellowes. The Ladyes, Nunnes, and women, were safely sent into the towne. The Governour (as 'tis said) saved his owne life, by begging it at the Kings feete: the ob∣taining of which favour, might perchance make him to love a Protestant the better, ever after. A Rit-master (or Captaine of a troope of Horse) there was, that redeemed his owne life, with a Kings ransome: by shewing, namely, an inestima∣ble masse of treasure, which lay hid in a Cave or cleft of the Rocke. The chiefe of the slaine and prisoners, were rifled and stripped by the conquerors: and the Castle for one houre, permitted to the pillage: where an unvaluable booty was ob∣tained by the souldiers. Here was found about 34.The booty. peices of brasse Ordnance; some of which had the Palsgrave Frede∣rickes Armes upon them. Many a hundred wayne-load of wine there was: with Ammunition, and some kind of victu∣als for the Bishops Court, enough (if it would have kept) for 20. yeeres provision for such a garrison. Some 200. of the Swedish lost their lives upon the service: all the defendants be∣ing either slaine or taken prisoners. The Generall Tilly hearing of this siege, was comming as farre as Fulda to have raised it; (as it was given out:) but hearing it to be taken; he made the more haste to reenforce himselfe by ioyning with the Lorrayners. And thus was this goodly, rich, strong, and pleasant Castle of Wurtsburg taken in, by eight a clocke on Saturday morning, being the eighth
of October: as which, the King yet never came to so rich a breakfast. A Palace it was, for any Prince in Christendome: which having beene something defaced by the Cannon, the King caused to be forthwith repaired; and with new fortifica∣tions to be made much the stronger. The towne redeemed it selfe from pillaging, by the payment of 4. tunne of Gold; or of 300000.Floren, is a∣t 3. shillings glish. Florens, as others reckon it: So that the King and his souldiers, never went so rich away from any place. Here was found a princely stable of goodly horses; with which the King was very much delighted. And here his Maiesty stayed, till the beginning of November: in which time he al∣so caused himselfe to be invested Duke of Franconia; taking an oath of homage and fealty, both of towne and Countrey. In iustification of which proceedings of his, he upon Octob. 26. publishes his Declaration or Manifesto: which for the Readers ease we have here abbreviated. That seeing his owne comming last yeere into the Empire, had beene for the relieving of the oppressed Protestant Prin∣ces of Germany,e Kings Ma∣sto set upon Church-res at rtsburg. and that God had so farre already, beyond his owne power, and all humane expectation, blessed him therein; as that having first of all cleered the two Duchies of Pomeren and Mecklenburg, together with the Electorate of Branden∣burg; and at the earnest request of the Duke of Saxony after∣wards, obtained that memorable victory of Leipsich: he had thought that even the enemies would have acknowledged the hand of God to have beene with him; and that the Catho∣like Princes of the League would have not onely beene desi∣rers, but promoters too of a faire peace, for the good of their owne native Countrey. But whereas he now perceived, that notwithstanding it had in the late Diet of Ratisbone beene ac∣knowledged, how the warre made against him in Germany by the Emperor, was without the knowledge, and against the will of the Princes and Electors; yea quite against the lawes and priviledges of the Empire: yet did the Catholike Leaguers for all this, still goe on in their pernicious Combinations a∣gainst him; yea even after they had by their owne letters,
(oftner then once) avowed themselues to become his firme friends; and that he thereupon had passed his promise vnto the French King, that would they but sit downe as Neuters, he would offer no iniury at all vnto them. And whereas he had pursued the victory of Leipsich with no other purpose, then of bringing the disturbers of the peace vnto equall tearms and Conditions; and had before the bringing of his army into Franconia, both fairely and timely signified that his purpose vnto the two Bishops of Bamberg and Wurtsburg; with de∣sire of a friendly treatment from them againe. Now, when∣as these his offers had beene despised, and his messengers an∣swered from the Bishop of Wurtsburg with the mouth of the Cannon: had he not reason to mend himselfe vpon his Country, and to take his Castle from him? Whereas, againe, he had both opportunity and power put into his hands of serving their subiects as hardly, as the harmelesse Protestants had otherwhere beene used by the Leaguers: yet, his Princely mind much despising all desire of reuenge, had onely disposed it selfe to the meanes of establishing a good peace once againe throughout the Empire. That he at this time found the grea∣test part of the Bishoprick of Wurtsburg and Dukedome of Franconia, not bound by oath vnto any Master;For that the Bishop was but newly elected; and not com∣pletely per∣chance as yet established: and that the Nobility and Gentry of Franconia (very great) acknow∣ledgeth no su∣periors, as be∣ing only subiect to the Empire. and that those subiects that had beene obliged, were now without cause forsaken by Bishop Francis; who had the meanes yet left, of fairely compounding with him. Therefore was he now ready (as necessity required) to take the Country and people into his care, and to re-estate them all againe into as good a Condi∣tion as he could: having for that purpose lately set forth a forme of government for them, and appointed fit Officers over them. Wherefore, his Maiesties expresse pleasure at this time was, That all Officers and Burgers should, upon the first notice given them of this Mandate of his, repaire vnto the place appointed them in it, take oath there, unto that his form of government, and dutifully hereafter to obey it. Vpon hope, therefore, that so they would doe, he would graciously from hence forward take them into his protection, permit
liberty of Conscience vnto them, and by his Iudges appointed for that end, maintaine them in all their severall lawes and pri∣viledges. Those that humbly sued for his help, should graci∣ously have it: and those that neglected or despised, he would execute the law upon. Whilest here at Wurtsburg the King stayes, some forces of his newly levied for him about the Country, were come to Carlstat,illy first ap∣eaes neere he King. the place appointed for their meeting. Tilly then up∣on the wing; feared it might be, that because he was not able to relieve Wurtsburg, yet for that he would not doe nothing, he would have a flight at these rawe souldiers: and newes was brought,ome new for∣es raised for he King. that some of his were even then come as neere Carl∣stat, as the Neustat and Rotenfels (in the Speshart forest on the other side of the Mayn) towards them. Of this the King having notice, towards the end of October goes from Wurts∣burg thitherward, with some 33 Cornets of horse in his at∣tendance. But Tilly came not. Some troopes of his, had before this beene dispatched also towards Werthaim in the little County of the same name, be∣longing vnto the Counts of Lowenstein; bearing due West of Wurtsburg upon another Bowte of the Mayn, where the Tauber falls into it. The towne was kept by the Italian Co∣lonel Piccolomini, who had beene at the battell of Leipsich. He now issuing out of the towne, and making there the best resi∣stance that he could; had all his men that escaped not by flight, either slaine upon the place,Werthaim taken or carryed away prisoners. The King caused 14. Companies of his owne men to be put into the towne; of whom the Generall Tilly having a mind to be revenged, upon Sunday morning, October 16. sends some 3000 horse and foote out of his owne head-quarter (then neere vnto Selingstat and Babenhausen beyond the Mayn) to make an Anslaught or Enterprise upon the place. The King having an Item also of this match, sends against the time ap∣pointed some of his men to lye in waite by the way for these Tillians.3000. of Tillyes men beaten. The Swedes comming to a valley upon the river Tauber called the Tauber-grond, dresse there a double Am∣buscado
for the enemy. The Governour of the towne had likewise his directions to leave the place, and to retreate in good time, if he should perceive the enemies to be too strong for him. But before it came to that, the Tillians were already fallen into the ambush: whence they gate not out, but with the losse of 2700 men, 800 horses, 14 Ensignes and Cornets, 10 Sumpter Mules, and all their baggage: which together with the armes and pillage of the dead, helpt to pay the Swedish for thus beating of them. About October 21. old Style; others of the Kings troopes flye out as farre as Rottenburg; an Imperiall towne neere the head of the river Tauber, some 8 or 9 leagues to the South of Wurtsburg. Hither had the Imperiall Commissary Masen (a great Officer) either fled or retyred from the Swedish: and yet here could he not be long safe from them. The towne and he being both in danger,3. Regiments more of Tilli∣ans defeated, Tilly for their sakes sends out 3 of his Regiments to oppose the Swedish: but the fortune of the warres now altogether unlucky for the Tillians; their 3 whole Regiments are either wholly rowted or slaughtered. The towne garrison perceiving this defeate, fall presently into mu∣tinie against the Commissary, whose office was to pay them their wages: so that he now being for some while behind hand with them for their meanes, Gelt, Gelt, money, money, mo∣ney, they now beginne to cry;and Rottenburg taken. and tearing the Ensignes from off the staves, they immediately set open the gates unto the Swedes; the most of them also entring themselues into the Kings service. Much about this time too, some Swedish for∣ces in another place lighting upon a Partee of 3 troopes of Lorrayners, take away two Cornets,2 Cornets of Lorrayners de∣feated. and bring home a Ser∣geant-Major prisoner with them. How these Lorrayners came there, see the whole progresse of their army, which was new∣ly come into Germany against the King; in our particular Story of them. Now were the Swedish in severall small running Armies, dispersed at once over the Countrey. Some of them for very feare drive the Imperialists out of Nordlingen (an Imperiall
City in Schwaben on the Easterne frontiers of Wirtenberg) in∣to Donawert neere Bavaria.me actions ut the Da∣y. Some report, that the Burgers rose against them for the King of Sweden. Those of Schorn∣dorff upon the smal river of Rems in the Duchy of Wirtenberg, being also frighted at the same time, remoove away 100000 dollars in ready money, which had beene raised out of the Contributions of that Country, and belonged unto Commis∣sary Wolfstein then at Munchen in Bavaria. Now whereas the Convoy of 100 horse and as many muskettiers, were gone a little before the money; the Swedes on the sudden chopping in betweene, seaze upon the treasure, and carry it sheere away with them. This was done within a Dutch mile of the City of Ʋlm upon the Danuby. Those neerer home, after the taking of Rottenburg, surprize Bishofsheim upon the Tauber,shofsheir, and ergentheim, ken. neere the place where it runnes into the Mayn. And Mergentheim or Mergenthall, after that: a towne about the middle of the course of that Tauber; which belonged unto the Master of the Dutch Order, who is a great man in Germany. His Maiesty of Sweden is all this moneth of October in Wurtsburg for the most part, though at Carlstat now and then with the new Army. You may perceive that he sent to take in the townes upon the Mayn; both those that lye upon it Eastward towards Norimberg, and those Westward too, to∣wards Franckford. Both these great Cities were Passes of mighty importance: and the Catholike Leaguers had lands both wayes: the Temporall Princes lay mostly towards No∣rimberg, and the three Spirituall Electors lay all beyond Franckford. So that much deliberation had the King with himselfe,The King in doubt whither to goe next. to which of these two places he should first turne his Armies: both being (upon the point) now equally almost distant from him. The importance of these two Passes very well appeares by Tilly also: who when he supposed the King likely to goe towards Norimberg, then turnes he downe to∣wards Hanaw and Franckford, and sollicites them to take in his garrisons: but when againe he perceived the King making
towards Franckford, then goes he with all speed and blocks up Norimberg. But God now became the Kings Counsellor; He presently helpt him out of this doubt. The Norimbergers having beene sollicited by the King, now send their Ambassa∣dors to accord with him: so that to Norimberg now, he need not goe. But how should he get to Franckford? The mighty strong City of Hanaw lay full in his way, and was the passe to Franckford: yea and Tilly with his whole Army lay now also about Hanaw. There is no leauing of an enemy be∣hind ones backe: so that though Tilly were out of the way, yet must Hanaw first be had, or else no comming at Franck∣ford. And to increase the difficulty of getting of Hanaw time enough to serve his turne; was the great strength of the place first: upon which had the City formerly beene so confident, that having had some differences with the Emperor, it would never (as the proverb is) give him a good word; yea when some 3 yeeres since one of his Leiftenants had blockt it up, he was faine after 17 weekes to rise and goe without it. The se∣cond difficulty was, that the enemy had a party already with∣in the City: 6 companies of Imperiall souldiers (some 1200 in all) and Brandeis that commanded them in chiefe, had even already laid the plot with Tilly, for the sudden surprising of it. The Kings haste and manner of warfaring, is not to lye long at a siege: Hanaw, therefore, which it was thus difficult to conquer by strength, was by private friendship all on the sud∣den made his; and the slow enemy (now standing betwixt wooing and forcing it,) had his nose wypt of it. The Duke of Saxon-Lawenburg, first of all presses the City to take in more forces of the Emperors: and Tilly is earnest to haue 4. Companies (into which he would have put 1000 men) taken into the towne. This being denied, threatnings are added: and because the way of force would of it selfe be too tedious; and in the King of Swedens neerenesse, no lesse dangerous: Brandeis the Captaine is practised withall, to let Tilly by night into the City. Philip Lodowick, Earle of Hanaw (a Protestant) being not ignorant of all this; and even now also angred with Tilly
for taking of the towne and Castle of Babenhausen, (a neigh∣bour towne belonging unto the Earles of Hanaw Buxviller, but empawned vnto him:) privately sends vnto the King of Sweden, That he could be content to have his towne hand∣somely surprized by his Majesty, rather then by Tilly; so that if he would send upon such a night, he should have the Castle gate set open for him. naw descri∣d. d here I rne my Rea∣ of 2 errors all vulgar ps, concer∣g this river That 'tis tten Bintz, tead of tz. 2. That made to fall o the Mayn Hoest: wher∣ does so, d by Stein∣.This faire City of Hanaw being seated upon a levell, (and therefore strong) hath the small river of Kintz running tho∣row it; and the great river Mayn within a quarter of an houres going of it; into which a little from this towne the Kintz falleth. It is devided into the Old, and New townes. In the Old, (in which was the Earles Castle) were there two Companies of Imperiall souldiers; and foure more in the New: in all, some 1200. The Generall Tilly with his whole Army, lay also about Aschaffenburg, Selingstat, and Steinheim, on either side of the Mayn: who by the intelligence held with Brandeis, expected within 3 or 4 nights after, to be let into the towne: or if that plot failed, to have assaulted it without, whilest Brandeis should both by force and stratageme, have exercised and amuzed the Burgers within. All this was by the Earles and the Kings diligence thus defeated. e famous y of the ta∣g of Hanaw.Vpon Munday the last of October, is Christopher Haubald one of the Kings Colonels, (a wise and valiant Gentleman) employed upon the Anslaught. His forces were some 600 chosen horsemen and dragooners, and no more; whatsoever Gallobelgicus writes. With these, he in one day and nights continuall flying march, hastens from Carlstat vnto Hanaw; the 2 townes being full 12 common Germane leagues distant; each league, here and throughout the story, meant to be foure English miles: with these was he by foure or five a clocke upon Tuesday morning, November 1. 1631. gotten to the gates of Hanaw, or ever his enemies dreamt of it. His way to come at the towne, was thorow the wood that is beyond the Kintz: in which wood hewing downe poasts; he by pitch∣ing them on either side the narrow river, and by fastning two
roapes to them, and laying boords and rafters over these roapes; both silently and suddenly passed over the water. Comming to the Castle gate next unto the Kintz, he hath that by the Earles direction (upon the watchword given) immediately opened vnto him, by which he enters into the Old Towne. The first worke he did, was to clap to the gate that led out of the Old towne into the New; by which meanes those of the New towne were barred out, from ayding their neigh∣bours of the Old City. The Swedish foote getting up present∣ly to the top of the wals or Bulwarks, runne immediately two severall wayes at once, to make themselues masters of the o∣ther two gates on either hand of the Castle gate: those three, being all the ports that belong to the Old Towne. The horse∣men at the same time possessing themselues of the market place, hinder thereby the townsmen from gathering to a head: by which meanes was the whole towne (both within and without) in a trice assured vnto them. The two Companies of Imperiall souldiers, being thus taken sleepers, could not so soone get themselues armed: and some of the Burgers (that had not beene made acquainted with the plot) now taking the Alarme and offering to resist, have some 8 of their company slaughtered. The Swedish upon the walles, runne every way up and downe, shooting at randome in the darke; to fright thereby whosoever should adventure to come neere them. The Earle of Hanaw also, (whose Countesse lay in at the same time) is presently taken prisoner, and a guard set upon his Ca∣stle and person. This was done in a seeming good earnest, to put off all suspition of a plot, from him. By that time it was towards day-light, were the 4 Com∣panies in the New towne up in armes also, though they all this while had attempted nothing for the reskue of the Old City. Said it was, that Brandeis went merry to bed the night before; and that when being awakt by five in the morning, he was by one of the Burgers told of the Swedes being in the Old Towne; he was so farre from beleeving it, as he forbade the Alarme to be sounded. And when one of his own Officers a
little after that, told him the same tale; They are not the Swedes, saith he, they be our own friends of Aschaffenburg, for whom I wrote yesterday: not suffering the Alarme to be strucke up yet. But when he by breake of day perceived his error; The Swedes be divels (quoth he,) how was it possible for them so soone to get in hither? Starting up presently thereupon, and all vnbuttoned as he was, out comes he into the street; running for life up and downe; and even till he swet againe in that frosty morning, to set on his men. Two thousand armed men (what with souldiers, Boores and Bur∣gers) had he by day-light gotten together: which Haubald now perceiving, drawes his Swedes along upon the wall that lookes into the New towne; whence both with Pistols and Carbines, he lets flye amongst them: by which, two men and one woman were slaine out-right, and some others wounded. By this time had the Swedes brought a small peece of Ord∣nance to the place; which they also bending upon the New Towne, demanded them to yeeld immediately. The Citizens answered resolutely, That they would not yeeld up the towne, till they had their Princes consent first. Haubald at first de∣nies it, telling them that he was their Earle. They demaund it againe, telling him that till then, they had nothing but bullets for him. The Earle hereupon being brought with a guard a∣bout him, upon the wall; tells them, That he being now a pri∣soner, could give them no better counsell, then to yeeld upon as good termes as they could get. This mov'd not Captaine Brandeis any thing: but first would he have had the Burgers to have gone on against the Swedes: which they bidding him doe himselfe first, he durst not. Then would he have had the Ordnance brought downe thither from the walls, and dischar∣ged upon the Swedes: but neither would the Burgers suffer that, for feare of spoyling their friends and friends houses in the Old Towne. Then would he have sent one of his own servants over the towne ditch, to have runne to Steinheim: whereabouts Colonel Eynot had some good forces: but this is also crossed by the Citizens; for that it would have brought
Tillyes whole Army upon them; which lying hard by it at that time, might have endangered the plundering of the whole City. A iust feare: seeing Tilly might very lawfully have done it; as having reskued the City from his enemy. Haubald once againe demanding up the towne, and that presently; is answe∣red, That the Magistrates could not so soone come together to consult upon it. He grants them halfe an houre, thereupon: meane while his men gave over shooting. Full three houres after it was, ere the townsmen had resolved: which done, (the towne continuing still in armes) about 11 a clocke, is the Major of the City,The sonne o this Daniel D Latre, a Mer¦chant now dwelling in London, was that time, wi his Father in Hanaw: from whose courte¦ous relation, have receive the certaynes part of this story. and Daniel De Latre (one of the chiefe Aldermen or Magistrates) sent to parlee with the Swedish Co∣lonel. Haubald now meeting them betweene the two gates of the Old Towne, tels them that he had nothing to say against the Burgers: and if they pleased to retire peaceably, let him alone with the souldiers. Here after a while is the yeelding concluded upon. Captaine Brandeis seeing now no remedy, desires for him∣selfe and for his men, that they might have souldiers conditi∣ons, and goe out with full Armes, &c. No (saies Haubald) your selfe with all your Officers and souldiers in the towne, shall immediately repaire unto the gallowes before the gate betweene the two townes, trayle your Armes and Ensignes thither, lay them downe there, and absolutely submit your selues unto my pleasure; either for life or death, favour, or not favour That which cannot be resisted, should not be refu∣sed: they lay downe Armes, and Haubald in courtesie returnes them their swords againe. Thus their Colours being gone, their military oath unto the Emperor was by this meanes void; which Haubald taking advantage of, invites them into his pay: of which all save thirty or forty (that were more Po∣pish then the rest) presently accepted. Brandeis the Captaine refusing, is made prisoner: and so is Merci, Sergeant-Major unto Piccolomini; two Ritt-masters, with divers of Tillyes Commanders more; who had retired into that Towne to be healed of their wounds received at the battell of Leipsich. Bran∣deis
was kept in his own house, vnder a guard of some 5 or 6. souldiers: the rest had the liberty of the towne, but not to goe without the Ports. Haubald having thus mastered the Towne by his valour; provides to keepe it by his wisedome. First sends he two Companies into the Castle: then takes he order for some new Fortifications; of which, himselfe being a skilfull Enginier, drawes the Platforme. Next layes he out to have 5 or 6 new Companies raised; which were made up of those that had lately yeelded, and some others gotten out of the Country: Casting about in the last place, how to have all these main∣tained. For this last purpose, no sooner was Tilly gone out of the Countrey (which he did presently after he saw himselfe defeated of his hopes, both of this towne and Franckford) but that Haubald dispeedes about his letters (in a stile imperious enough) vnto his amazed neighbours of the land of Darmstat, and the Wetteraw; as also to the Townes of Steinheim, Seling∣stat, Dieburg, Hoest, Konigstein, Orb, Hausen and others, be∣longing partly unto the Elector of Mentz, and partly unto other Lords: That without denyall or delay, they bring unto him into Hanaw, all the Contribution money, corne, hay, and oates, which they had before paid unto the Catholike Lea∣guers; and that they never hereafter either pay or aide, the ene∣mies of the King his Master. They that did otherwise, should heare from him in another kind. And thus was this faire City of Hanaw, handsomely sur∣prised by this quick-spirited Colonell: even before Tillyes owne nose (as we say) who was but newly passed the Mayn. His army lay at that very time, in all the neighbour Countries thereabouts. Some of them were yet in the land of Darmstat; others were advanced further, even as farre into the Berg∣straes, as right against Oppenheim in the Palatinate: into which Countrey verily beleeved it was, that he would now have gone; and there have stayed for the defence of it. Others of his were gotten up to Franckford: which Imperiall City he mainely sollicited to accept of a garrison from him: which be∣ing
denyed, was one of the mainest reasons, that hee stayd not in the Palatinate: which indeede he could not safely doe, unlesse that City were either Friend or Neuter to him. The Generall Tilly now perceiving by the taking of Ha∣naw,Tilly returns wards Frāco that the King of Swedens purpose was to drive down the Mayn into those quarters: and that, seeing there were ma∣ny Protestant Princes thereabouts, others were likely enough to doe as the Count of Hanaw had: he immediately turning faces about, marches directly backe into Franconia. Without ever crossing of the Mayn, therefore; first of all towards Miltenburg and Bishofsheim he goes; whereabouts the Lorrayn army yet was.Taking in Mergentheim The towne of Mergentheim he takes in againe by the way; the Swedish being retired. From hence he goes directly on to Oxenfurt; a pretty towne upon an Elbow or Bowt of the Mayn, some three or foure leagues to the South of Wurtsburg. Of the taking of this towne by the Kings for∣ces in the beginning of October, we have before told you. It was Sir Iohn Hebron that had done it; and who yet kept it, though with weake forces. The King fearing Tillies falling upon this towne (which the standing made to be a Passe of some importance) comes with all speed himselfe in person thither.and going to Oxenfurt whe the King then was. Against the Count of Tillyes comming (which was with his whole Army) had Sir Iohn Hebron laid his Out-guards about the towne. Scottish men they were of Colonell Lumsdells Regiment; and some 6 Rotts, or 36 Muskettiers there were of them; and those (while Leiftenant-Colonell Muschamp commanded the rest of the Regiment within the Towne) now led by Sergeant-Major Monipenny. These 36 giving a salvee or volly of shot unto that Partee, which Tilly had ordered should first fall on upon the Towne. Hee by this perceiving their readinesse and resolution for defence; and imagining the garrison to be much stronger then indeed it was; immediately turnes faces about to the right,Whence being frighted away he goes toward Norimberg. and mar∣ches directly towards Norimberg: before which we shall next find him sitting, upon Novemb. 18. following. Of which,
and of what else may concerne our story, we shall speake more, in our Relation of the Generall Tillyes particular procee∣dings. Had the Count of Tilly then knowne the King to have bin in Oxenfurt, and how weake the place was; he would not, I suppose, have bin so soon frighted away. And had he falne on with his whole Army, the King was in the mind to have quit∣ted the place, and to haue retired over the bridge into Wurts∣burg againe. But his enemy never staid to put him to it. The Generall Tilly being thus parted from the King, upon whose motions he seemed hitherto (though at a safe distance) to have waited; the King of Sweden now leaving Gustavus Horne with part of the army in Franconia, to looke there unto the Bishop of Bamberg, Commissary Ossa, and the Ge∣nerall Tilly; and to settle some orders withall in the new conquered places: and the Generall Banier being before dis∣patched with other forces towards Magdenburg;e King sets wards to∣rds Hanaw, d the Palati∣te. (of all which we shall tell you in their due places,) the King with the rest of his Army now sets forward towards Hanaw. The forces he at this time brought with him, were but five Bri∣gades of Foote, besides some of Generall Baniers Regiment, which were afterward left at Aschaffenburg. There ought to be 1800 men in every Brigade: but these of the Kings, were not (I beleeve) so compleat now.hat a Bri∣de is, see in r book of the wedish Disci∣line. What forces e King rings along. Severall peeces of broken, and not yet Recruited or Reinforced Regiments with their Colonells, were put into one Brigade. These Brigades of the Kings, had their names from the chiefest Colours be∣longing to the eldest Colonell of the Brigade. There were but five of them now: and these they were. First, the Life-Regiment, or the Guards for the Kings owne body; com∣manded ever since Baron Dyvels death, by Grave Neeles, a Swede. Secondly, the Greene Regiment; led by Sir Iohn Hepburn (usually called Hebron) a Scottish Gentleman, and the eldest Colonell. Thirdly, The Blue Regiment, whereof Winckle is Colonell. Fourthly, the White Regiment, con∣ducted by Colonell Ʋitzthimb: and fiftly, the Red Regiment, whereof Colonell Hogendorff hath the leading. Amongst all
these,The King w so weake in horse at the Leipsich Batt that he had none for the Reere of his left wing wh Hall comma¦ded. See ou Figure of th Battell, in th Swedish Dis¦pline, how th that part is. were there but few (scarce any) naturall borne Swe∣dens: those were gone otherwhere with Gustavus Horne and Generall Banier. His Horse (which he had well encrea∣sed since the Battel of Leipsich) might be some 4000: or something more perchance. And that he had no greater Ar∣my then this at his comming towards the Palatinate, was plainely to bee sene at his passing thorow Franckeford: where were told but 74 Ensignes of Foote, and 71 Cornets of Horse. So that allowing a full 100 to every Foote Com∣pany, and 60 to every troope of Horse (which is good allow∣ance to so shatterd an Army) you will not find above 7500 Foote, and 4000 Horse at the most: Scanderbeg never desired above 9000 men in one Army: and these are the numbers with which Gustavus Adolphus enforced the Catholicke Lea∣guers, to desire either Peace or Neutrality of him. And with these few forces, but great strength; his Maje∣sty sets forward towards Hanaw: for whose entertainement, Haubald was now providing of the Castle. About some two dayes after the first taking whereof, and whilest Tillyes army was yet thereabouts: two troopes of his horse shew themselves before the Towne: amongst whom Hau∣bald letting flye his ordnance; they immediately retyred. Some five dayes after that (November eighth in the night time) the Imperiall garrison of Steinheim Castle,Some action betwixt Han and Steinheim (which is about three quarters of an houres march from Hanaw) be∣gin to cast up the earth and to erect a Skonce-worke, just up∣on the Chanells side, which was cut out of the River Mayn, to carry smaller vessels up to Hanaw. Their purpose was, to hinder the Hanaw boates, and the Swedes from comming in them, to assayle their Castle. Against this worke of theirs, Haubald the next day raises up two Brestworkes, in the two Church-yards belonging unto the Old Towne. One worke, was at the corner of the Chanel; and the other at that Angle, where the Kintz falleth into the Mayn. Into these he brings three peeces of ordnance, two into one, and one into the tother. Betweene these workes, fell there out a skirmish for
three howers together: but Haubalds ordnance driving out the Imperialists at the last, falls with his men into their worke, halfe demolishes it, and so leaves it. The Imperi∣alists being desirous to renew their worke, but loth to come under the Command of Haubalds ordnance in his two brest workes; devise to come into their owne Fort againe, under∣ground and by myning. Their working might easily be discer∣ned from the walls of Hanaw: and sure they would have brought it to perfection; had they not beene made to give it over by the Kings comming, within some few dayes after. His Majesty having by this time shipt his carriages downe the Mayn,e King nes downe Mayn; and devided his forces on either banke of it (him∣selfe in person marching on the Southern side) comes all along in this manner. And that he might lose no time, and drive the Countrey withall before him; hee takes in Procelden, Miltenburg, Klingenburg, and Trenfelt by the way, some be∣ing on one side of the River,king townes both sides and some upon the other. At Aschaffenburg (or Aschiburg) upon the Northern banke of the River, hath the Elector of Mentz a very stately Palace, where hee mostly used to reside. The place was kept by one Regiment of Tillyans, and two of the Electors owne Regiments of Traine bands: all which by night quitting the place, the King puts in Baniers Regiment for the keep∣ing of it. There passes he the bridge, unto his army on the other side of the River. Those of his men that still kept the Sou∣thern shoare, fall upon Steinhem aforesaid. This Towne is indeed but a Dorp; the Castle was the strength of it; and that had a garrison of 850 in it, which having beene soundly rattled with foure peeces of Cannon on the evening of November 14. 600 of the 850 yeeld it the next day unto the Kings Sol∣diours, and themselves into his Majesties service. The o∣ther 250 that refused, were upon the agreement conducted by the Swedes unto the Franckfurder-waldt,einhem ta∣n. a league or two to the West of them. This Castle does the King bestow
upon the Earle of Hanaws Mother: unto whose family, it had formerly belonged. This Earle stood alwayes firme af∣ter this, unto the Kings party: levying Soldiours for his ser∣vice afterwards, with which he tooke in Drusenheim and other townes about Strasburg and Hagenaw for the King, in Ianuary following; the first of which the King also be∣stowed upon him. He put himselfe at the very first, into the Kings protection, among the seventeen Lords of the Weterau: he followed the Court at Mentz, all the Christmas after; where in a Masquerade; he was one of the Maskers together with the King. All which shewes some good service he had privately done; which obtained so good a degree in his Maie∣sties favour and familiarity. And that the other side also un∣derstood the correspondency which the Count held with the King, about his giving way to the surprising of Hanaw; ap∣peares by Tillyes taking the Towne of Babenhausen from him. November 15. after Steinheim was taken,The King go thorow Hana the King makes his entrance into Hanaw: unto which towne he would suffer his Army to be no further troublesome, then by staying to suppe in it. That very evening does his Maiestie set forward againe towards Franckford; which was to be the chiefest Passe to all his future great actions, in those quarters. About 12 at night towards Offenbach (neere Franckford) he goes, a league and a halfe from Hanaw, where his lodging was provided for him in the Castle: which having anciently belonged unto the Counts of Isenburg, had beene taken from them of late by the Bishop of Mentz. Here at Offenbach he staid all the day, October 16. the cause being, for that heretofore having had some parly with the Deputies of the Common-wealth of Franckford, which had before beene with him upon the way;towards Franckford. and that the Count of Solms had now beene some 3 dayes since sent from himselfe unto them; he here expected their answer. The Kings message was,His demands to those of Franckford. Whether the City for setting forwards the cause of the Gospell, would peaceably and spee∣dily set open their gates unto him, accept fairely of his gar∣rison;
or stand to the hazzard of a siege?s demands those of anckford. loth was the Towne to yeeld: and yet fearefull were the Townes-men to resist: so that their Poasts which passed to and againe, (in which were some 2 or 3 dayes spent) ever bringing one and the same resolution from the King; their deputies are faine, after dinner on the same 16 of Novemb. to come to Offenbach Castle, and to consent there, unto these three propositions. 1. That the King should have free passage for his Army thorow their City,hich are as∣ted unto by m. to and againe. 2. That for the Kings better assurance of the Citty, 600 of his men should be receiued for garrison into Saxenhausen; (which is the strong Suburbs to the City, lying on the other side of the water.) 3. That both Magistrates and people should take an oath unto his Majesty. And thus was this faire Imperiall City of Franckford on the Maine gained to the Kings party, by good words, and the sight onely of an Army. The next day being Thursday, November 17, the Kings Army passing thorow Saxenhausen ouer the bridge: marches quite thorow the City, and so out at the gate of Bockenheim againe. There were told fifty sixe peeces of Cannon:e King pas∣ thorow the wne. seventy foure Ensignes of Foote; forty five Cornets of Horse; twenty sixe Cornets more, the next day likewise following after. Such fayre order was kept by the soldiours in their passing along, that no man com∣plained of injury: and whereas two of them onely flew out into the high-way, they had martiall law presently, and were hanged for it. And as little complaint was there of the garrison in the Suburbs, whereof Colonell Ʋitzthimb (a very able Gentleman, for such a purpose) was left Gover∣nour. The King himselfe rode bareheaded thorow the streets; who with the comelinesse of a Majesticall personage, and the courtesie of a gracious behaviour; generally attracted the beholders affections towards him. He staid not long in it, but taking leave of the Nobility and Gentry of the Country, that came to see and waite upon him; he went to his lodging
at Nidda, to be the neerer unto his Army.Going to the siege of Hoest. His men by tenne a clocke the same night were set downe to the siege of Hoest: a good towne belonging unto the Elector of Mentz, and about a league from Franckford. This is the towne, where, upon Whitsun-Munday 1621. the Generall Tilly overthrew the late Duke of Brunswike. November 19 the garrison of Hoest being above 400 men, deliver the place unto the King: unto which their own feares, and the townsmens perswasions had ioyntly drawne them;Hoest taken. these being doubtfull of the plunde∣ring of their houses. The King having put divers Companies there over on the other side the Mayn, (for all marcht not thorow Franckford) presently filled the next smaller townes by the Rhine, with his forces. The next day being Sunday, Novemb. 20. his Maiestie re∣turnes into Franckford againe, bringing the two Landtgraves of Hessen along with him: one of Hessen-Cassel, which is the elder family, and usually called Landtgrave of Hessen: and the other of Hessen-Darmstat; commonly styled Landtgrave of Darmstat. Hither likewise came the 17 Earles of the Wette∣raw to doe their duty to his Maiesty; who was now feasted in Franckford in the very same roome, where the Emperors at their Coronation use to be entertained There may be a signe of good lucke in that:The Landt∣grave comes with an Army vnto the King. and perchance this may not be the last time, that he shall there be feasted. The Landtgrave of Hessen (his country being now cleered of Generall Tilly, Fugger, and the Imperialists) brings his Army (of 12000 men, as some say, though with the most) to have ioyned with the Kings forces: they being in the Rhingaw at this present, within 3 leagues of Franckford. But the King now hearing how the Count of Tilly had besieged Norimberg ever since the eigh∣teenth of November; the Hessen Army was immediately di∣rected thitherwards: the King himselfe (rather then faile) having a purpose to goe likewise to the reliefe of it. The Hessen Army being already beyond Hanaw upon their march; and there hearing Tilly to be remooved; returne backe againe to their former Quarter in the Country called the Rhingaw,
belonging for the most part unto the Elector of Mentz, and bordering upon the land of Hessen. On Tuesday (which is his usuall Sermon day) his Maiesty went to Hoest againe;The Kings Thanksgiving or the taking f Franckford. where, in the Chappell of the Castle he causes a solemne Thanksgiving to be made, for that he had ob∣tained the faire Towne of Franckford without bloodshed. And truely it was Gods worke to encline the hearts of the Magistrates of that City, to hearken unto the King: especially since they even tother day denied Tilly the same favour. When Spinola in the yeere 1620. came towards the Palatinate; he very respectfully both by letters and mssengers, wooes the Commonwealth of Franckford: so that the King now prevai∣led more with them, then these two great Generalls ever could. And well worthy of a Thanksgiving was the obtai∣ning of this mighty Passe. There runnes a Proverb in Germa∣ny to this purpose. "He that lyes before Franckford a yeere and a day, "Is Master of the Empire for ever and aye. Presently after this did the Landtgraves forces advance out of the Rhingaw, into the neighbour Countries of the Wette∣raw and Westerwaldt: anciently belonging unto seventeene Lords, but much of late dayes encroached upon by the Ele∣ctors of Mentz. The place of these Countries is on the East of the Rhingaw, betwixt it and the County of Hanaw. Here, in the Kings Name, does the Landtgrave take in Fal∣kenstein and Reiffenburg; with the two Castles of Cronenburg and Ernfelt: the strong Castle of Konigstein (some two Dutch leagues from Franckford) onely holding out for the Bishop of Mentz. Most of these townes from whence these Earles have their Honors; are in these two Countries. There be 17 small Earldom of them in all whereof one fa¦mily hath 2 or  sometimes: lik as also there b severall Earle at once of the same Family. The Earle of Hanaw hath 5 Earldomes, and 700 villages vnder him. A the rest also have their townes and vil∣lages with thei Boores vnder thē; some more some lesse. The Wetteraw is that part tha lies next the water; that is, the Mayn: & the Wester-waldt signifies the Western wood: i being a wooddy country upon the West of the Wetteraw, and is a part of the Forest of Ardu∣enna.The Lords of these two little Countries having a long time beene oppressed by the Catholikes, and therefore glad of any Deliverer: being by religion Protestants; and therefore the easilyer drawne to accept the King for their Protector: and having, in the last place, their own disability to resist, for a
faire excuse for their yeelding: at Franckford about this time, both treated and concluded a full agreement with the King. These were the Lords that made it. First, 3 Earles of Nassau and Catzenelbogen with their brethren. 1 Earle of Nassau, Warburg, Ietzstein and Wisbaden. 2 Earles of Hanaw and Muntzenberg. 4 Earles of Solms, and Lords of Muntzen∣berg. 2 Earles of Stolberg and Conigstein. 3 Earles of Isen∣burg and Budingen. 3 Earles of Sagen and Witgenstein. 1 Earle of Wied. 2 Earles of Lemingen and Westerburg. 2 Earles of Waldeck. Besides divers of the Nobility, Gentry, and Cor∣porations: who all consented and signed unto these follow∣ing conditions. The Treaty begins with a Preface, unto this purpose. That seeing the King of Sweden had never deserved of the Empire or Emperor to be provoked to this warre; which the King was forced to enter into for his owne defence, the Electors themselues having heretofore acknowledged so much for him: and that these Earles also, as members of the Empire, having ever beene regardfull of their duties unto the Em∣peror their Head; never having either done or intended hi∣therto, any act in preiudice of him: yet neverthelesse the said Emperor having, without ever denouncing of warre, severall wayes assaulted Vs the King of Sweden; oppressed our Cousins and Allies; vndone many Princes of ancient families (giving their lands and honors away vnto new men;) violated all the priviledges of the Empire; purposed to introduce an absolute government into Germany first; and by help of that, the easily∣er to enthrall the neighbour Princes afterwards: even there∣fore (saith the King) have We by way of prevention, and for our owne security, beene enforced to come thus armed in∣to the Empire. Whereas, moreover, the Princes of the Ca∣tholike League, have against our expectation and desert; both before the battell of Leipsich, and afterward with an armed had continually opposed themselues against our proceedings: even therefore have We, with the assistance of God, and by the right of warre, taken in the country of Francoia, and all
the townes upon the Mayn, even unto Franckford; which belonged unto those Leaguers. And whereas, on the other side, Wee the Earles afore-said, have by wofull experience found; how that under the Emperors name, the Protestant Princes have still beene abused: and that notwithstanding their own often submissions and the Emperors revocation of the proceedings; yet still under some pretence of iustice, or other; their Consciences have beene oppressed; their Lands and Roy∣alties invaded, their subiects pillaged, and no remedy to be gotten: therefore Wee now perceive no other course to be taken, but to oppose force by force; and being forsaken of all other assistance (the Catholikes having often broken all leagues and promises with us) then to put our selues under the pro∣tection of the Kings Maiesty of Sweden: whom Wee cleerely perceive to be qualified with many Royall and imcomparable vertues; put into the businesse, meerly out of a holy zeale for the releiving of the distressed Princes of the Religion; and ap∣parently (without doubt) assisted by the hand of God Al∣mighty. For the honour of God, therefore, the cause of Re∣ligion, the restoring of the course of Iustice; and the preser∣vation of our Country; have We, upon good and mature consideration, accepted of his Royall protetion; both parties freely consenting unto these following Articles. 1. Wee the King of Sweden, doe hereby receive the foresaid Earles, &c. (whether Lutheranes or Calvinists) into our Roy∣all protection: promising to pursue as our enemies, whosoe∣ver shall disturb them for this their agreement with Vs: to maintaine them all in their due priviledges: never to make peace, but upon condition they be comprehended in it; and have first received satisfaction. 2. Whereas these Earles have this long time stood dispos∣sessed of the most part of their estates, by the Catholike Prin∣ces; We promise our assistance to the recovery of them: both in regard of their Religion, and of the many services they have
heretofore done for the Gospell. And if by any misprision they should fall into suits with their neighbours concerning particular interests; We shall doe our best to compound the controversie. 3. If during these warres, the enemy should deprive any of these Earles, or otherwise ruinate their dominions; We shall right him the best We may, and force their enemies to restitution. 4. If any of them shall be taken prisoners; We shall doe our best for the recovery of his liberty. 5. We will doe our uttermost to preserve their houses and Forts: and take order to defend them. 6. And if We find it requisite to place any forces, in their Forts or Passes; We will take care that the souldiours be not troublesome. 7. Whereas the usuall contribution cannot forthwith be fully paid by some of them, untill such possessions of theirs as be at this present in the enemies hands, be cleered; We will reco∣ver them as soone as may be; and without any other clogge or condition, restore them to the right owner. 8. That the said Earles may the better promote the common cause, and yet their subiects not be too much overlayed with contributions: We are content that the Ecclesiasticall goods may be also assssd to contribute: and that upon refusall, so much may be distrained by the Earles, as shall satisfie the con∣tribution. 9. Wee permit them also to take backe againe into their own hands, all such Cloysters and Monasteries, as have of late daies beene wrung from them by the Catholikes.
10. hat these Or∣s be, see our oke of the edish Disci∣e. We will forbeare, as much as may be, to make any Ren∣dezvous, enquartering, or marches in or through their Coun∣tries: But if necessity so requires, we will have our Orders of warre very strictly to be observed: and that all the time our forces are among them, a horseman of ours shall receive but 2. dollars and an halfe a day, with a certaine competency of hay and straw, &c. and every footman two dollars a moneths pay, untill the muster. All which shall afterwards be defalked out of the Contribution. 11. This confederation is no waies intended for the preiudice of the said Earles or their Estates: but for their protection ra∣ther, against the common enemies. And we the Earles, &c. aforesaid, doe for our parts declare our selues as followeth. 1. First, whereas it is as cleare as day, that God Almighty by the Armes of his Maiesty of Sweden (of whose Christian and iust intentions we nothing doubt) hath prevented the enemies of the Gospell in their bloody purposes: We therefore doe here with all thankfulnesse acknowledge, the King of Sweden to be our Deliverer and Protector, next under God; submitting our selues henceforth unto his protection, without any re∣spect to the common enemy, how-ever called. And we doe hereby bind our selues, bodies and goods: to stand for him to the uttermost of our power; never to fall off from him; to doe nothing in preiudice of him; never to have treaty, or to make peace with his Maiesties enemies, (whom we acknow∣ledge for our own:) but by his Royall assent, and except his Crowne bee therein comprehended, and himselfe fully sa∣tisfied. 2. Therefore doe we henceforth promise, to hinder by all our best endevours, his hurt; and to promote his good: nei∣ther by counsell nor by action, directly nor indirectly, doing
any thing against his person, Crowne or Dignity; but faith∣fully to assist him rather. 3. And whereas nothing is more requisite, then that his Maie∣sty have the absolute command of the warres: we therefore as his other Confederates have done, most humbly entreat him to take that care wholly upon him; which we without contra∣diction will altogether leave unto him. 4. Therefore have we delivered up into his Maiesties hands, all our Cities, Forts, and Passages: and I the Earle of Hanaw, have freely put my City and Castle of Hanaw into his power; to fortifie, arme, and dispose the same, as the reason of the warres shall require. 5. We doe further promise, not to open our holds or passages unto the enemy; nor to receive in any of theirs; but keep them out rather unto the uttermost: opening them on the other side unto his Maiesty, to lodge or enquarter his troopes in. 6. Wee will also suffer his Rendezvous in our Countries: provided, that the charges bee defalked out of our Con∣tribution. 7. And for all the time of these warres, we ioyntly promise to contribute 25000. Florens a moneth: beginning the next Decemb. 1. Old stile 1631. to be paid at Franckford. And if any of us shall be negligent in paying of his part, (according to the Rowle of each mans Assessment hereunto annexed) we promise to distraine for it by a military execution. 8. We undertake also, if neede be, to arme our subiects for his Maiesties service: to call home those that at this time serve the enemy; confiscating all their goods that refuse to obey us.
9. We permit all provisions and exportation of victuals, Ar∣tillery, and Ammunition, for his Maiesties service. 10. And to keepe the same things from the enemy; whom we promise for his Maiesties service every where to pursue, as the Common adversaries to Vs and to the Gospell. 11. And in case there be any man found in our Dominions, that hath forsaken his Maiesties Colours, or otherwise offended; wee will neither give him entertainment, nor passage: but ei∣ther punish him our selues, or deliver him over unto the next of his Maiesties garrisons. In testimony whereof, We the King and Earles, have mu∣tually set to our hands and Seales. Given at Franckford, &c. By this agreement was the Imperiall Commissary Ossa ut∣terly defeated of his hopes: who a little before this, had de∣manded of these Wetterawish Earles; a great quantity of pro∣visions, and many hundreds of Carts and Wagons, to be sent him in unto Selingstat in the County of Darmstat. The Landt∣grave of Darmstat (their neighbour,e Landt∣ve of Darm∣ agrees with King.) much about this time (which seemes to have beene about the middle of November) made his agreement likewise with his Maiesty. Hereupon did the Landtgrave consigne over his chiefest Forts and Passa∣ges into the Kings hands: as the strong Towne of Russelheim upon the Mayn, some 5 English miles from Mentz, first; (into which the King presently put Sir Iohn Hamiltons Regi∣ment, which was commaunded by his Sergeant-Mjor Mag∣dugall) and Darmstat after that, the towne of his own resi∣dence, he remooving his Court upon it unto the Castle of Hessen. By this time was the Swedish army advanced beyond Hoest, and a standing Leaguer formed at the villages of Costum and Cassel right against Mentz, though on the other side of the rivers. At Walb a small Dorp upon the Rhine, (some league or lesse from Cassel) was there so narrow a passage into the Countrey of the Rhingaw,trance gottē o the Rhin∣. that 1000 Spaniards of the Bishop
of Mentz his men, thought themselues sufficient for the guard of it. Wafting themselues therefore over the Rhine; and calling in the Country Boores to be their Pyoners in casting up of some workes; they are presently there entrenched. Against these the King now sends: and the Swedens rushing in upon the Spaniards with a power too great for them; after a hard Bowte or two, drive them from their Ordnance and new made batteries: lay some 500 of them dead upon the earth; en∣forcing the rest into the river: where though they dyed not (like their fellowes) a bloody death; yet can they not be said to have dyed a dry death. The next country people presently yeelding thereupon, are amerced by the King to pay him the same Contribution, and to sweare unto him the same fealty; which they before had done vnto their Lord the Elector of Mentz: and to redeeme their Country from present pillage, by a ransome of ready money. The Passage being thus gained, the Kings purpose was, to send out some strong Partees to keepe the Country in action and Alarme, whilest himselfe might vndisturbed lay a bridge over the Rhine at the said Walb, and goe directly unto the siege of Mentz. The Swedish thus sent abroad, range along up∣on the rivers side as farre as Bingen: where lighting upon the Custome-house which was right against the towne on the contrary side of the water, at which, such boates as passed the Rhine and Nau, (here falling into the Rhine) were made to pay Toll and Custome: they there kill 150 of the garrison, and carry away some stoare of ready money, which they there found in Banco. And this, (though an Action of no great mo∣ment) yet would I not passe it over, because it was the fur∣thest place that the Kings people meddled withall,The King turns backe againe. on that side of the Rhine. For the Kings bridge at Walb not fadging accor∣ding to his mind, (the Elector of Mentz with such great forces opposing him on the other side of the river) the army is cald off from those parts; and the Landtgrave of Hessen be∣ing left in those quarters, both to secure that banke of the
Rhine; and to keepe, withall, what was already conquered in the Rhingaw and the Wetteraw: and that, lastly, he might be neer vnto his own Country upon all occasions: the King de∣vises upon another course; which, though in respect of going to Mentz, it were the furthest way about, yet it at last proo∣ved the neerest way home. And now beginnes the Army to gather together about Franckford: over whose bridge of Saxenhausen, December 1. they are passed: with a resolution (as his Maiesties owne selfe affirmed to my Lord Ambassador Sir Henry Vane) to goe to the siege of Heidleberg.oing into the rgstraes, and towards the ege of Heidle∣erg. His forces being directed into the Bergstraes; himselfe fairely followes after; lodging the same night at Langen, a village belonging vnto the Landtgrave of Darmstat. This Bergstraes is (as the word signifies) a street or way of hills: the whole Country being a continued ledge of indifferent high and even mountaines, trending along even from Franckford towne almost, quite thorow the Landtgrave of Darmstats country, part of the Bishoprick of Mentz, and the Prince Palatines Dominions; even untill you come to the very gates of Heidleberg. Betwixt these mountaines, and the goodly river of the Rhine (which runnes along by them al∣most in a streight line) is there a narrow long country, with a many of handsome townes (and some weake Spanish garri∣sons in them) which were to be cleered by the way. The names of them (as they lye in order) are Gersheim, Stein, Swingenberg,Divers townes taken in the Bergstraes. Bensheim, Heppenheim, Weynheim, Starkenberg, and Ladenburg: all which were in this march taken in; the Spanish garrisons easily quitting the places, as too weake to be defended. And now was the King almost come unto Heidle∣berg; when, upon consideration of a certaine strong Fort he had passed by; (which lying upon the Rhine on the Bergstraes side, served for a Blockhouse to defend Oppenheim; that was right against it on the other side of the water) he quite on the sudden altered his determination. Considering, therefore, that if he should engage himselfe upon the siege of Heidleberg, and leave this Fort enemy behind his backe: then might the Spa∣nish
forces under the favour of that Fort, easily there passe the Rhine: and at their owne pleasures both cut off all his provi∣sions, and hinder his retreate besides, backe againe unto Franckford. This therefore (and that worthily) quite altered his resolu∣tion; which is now fully bent for the taking in of this Fort.The King alte¦ring his dete¦mination, The peece was kept by 1000 Italians and Burgundians: and those such old blades, as the King had never yet met with the like since the Battell of Leipsich. No Colours had they with them: those were left with their Comrades in Oppenheim. Vp∣on Sunday, Decemb. 4. Grave Neeles with the Kings Life∣guards sets downe before it: who being the next day relieved by Sir Iohn Hebron and Colonel Winckle with their two Bri∣gades; he rises, and leaves them to pursue the businesse. The Fort was encompassed with a double Graff or Moate;goes and bes¦ges the Fort Oppenheim. and Hebron and Winckle being set downe, and immediately falling to their worke with the spade, were ready by Wednes∣day at night, to make both their lines or rowling trenches, to meete in the outter-most Graff. So soone as this should be done, the King about 5 a clocke at night, gave command unto Sir Iohn Hebron (who being the eldest Colonell, commaunded there in chiefe) to Storme, or give an assault vnto the Fort, before the morning. Scarcely was the King from Hebron; but there was a letter brought him from a Gentleman of the Pala∣tinate, that dwelt above upon the river, that he would send the King some boates that very evening.whither havi some boates sent him, Vpon this was the Storming countermanded: and about 9 or 10 at night, the boates came indeed. One Hild a poore Fisher-man of Ger∣sheim was the man employed by the Gentleman; who not on∣ly brought two great boates downe the streame with him from about Wormbs; but shewed the King also where the Spa∣nish had sunke another very great Rhine-ship, in the bottome of the river. In these three boates, the King first of all (with as much silence as might be) sends over his own Guards, or his Life-Regiment. All this which had hitherto fallen out so hopefully, had like to have beene quite dashed by an odde ac∣cident.
A certaine souldier (a Sweden borne) having gotten into a little boate by himselfe (which upon that river are one∣ly made of 3 boords,) was skimming himselfe at the same time also over the river. But the streame carrying him about 12 or 20 score too low towards the towne, he there chops upon some 500 Spanish horse, which had their guards at that place. These taking the Alarme at the Swedes comming and strange language; passes over Rhine in m, presently march up to the place where the Life∣guards were even now newly landed. But the Swedes having there chanced upon some advantage of ground, as hedges, bushes, and the like: the Spanish horse were by these things so long kept off, untill the other could well put themselues into order. The Spanish charging thereupon with their pistols, are saluted againe with such a volly of muskets; that they are for∣ced to retreate, the better to recover their order againe. It was about midnight by this time; when as the boates being now come backe againe, the King had shipt over Colonell Hogendorff with the Red Regiment in them: His Maiesties selfe passing over likewise with it. By the time that the King was landed, the Spanish having gotten more forces toge∣ther, renew their charge againe with more fury, yet with no better successe,d beats off 3. aults of the aniards. being the second time beaten off againe also. By this time is Colonel Ʋitzthimb come over with the white Re∣giment or Brigade: and the Spanish now againe reenforced, give a third charge upon the King: but being now repulsed with greater slaughter, they perceive their enemies to be too strong for them, and never fall on againe. Thus the King ha∣ving 3 of his Brigades safely landed; and the Spanish being fi∣nally retyred: marches immediately towards the Towne of Oppenheim: where for a while we leave him at his Thanksgi∣ving, for having thus passed the Rhine. Hebron all this while before the Fort, (his command of Storming being contradicted) suffered continuall sallyes and Alarmes from the valiant besieged. About 11 at night, 200 of them sally out with great bravery, and fall into Hebrons Quar∣ter; and a very hot service they made of it: untill with much
importunity, and some losse, they were perswaded at last to retyre againe. About halfe an houre after, out upon Winckles Quarter they fall likewise; who at length also beates them in∣to the Fort. The purpose of these strong and frequent sallyes, first upon one, and then upon another, was, to hinder the mee∣ting of their lines, now ready to be perfected. But hearing a little after this, of the Kings third volly on the other side of the water; and that He had made good his ground; and how the Spanish comming now on no more, the King was marched vp to Oppenheim: they had no more comfort to sally. Fearing therefore that their passage of retreate over the Rhine would be utterly cut off,The Fort yee¦ded unto Sir Iohn Hepburn they about 7 a clocke in the morning send out a Drumme unto Sir Iohn Hebron to parly: with whom they at last concluded upon these Conditions. On the Spaniards part. 1. They were at 7 a clock at night (Thursday December 8.The Cōdition) to march out with bag and baggage, Colours flying, Drummes beating, Matches lighted, and Bandeliers filled. 2. To be assured by the King, not to be molested in their way, by any of his forces; nor by the Landtgrave of Hessens men, or any others. 3. A Captaine should be given them for hostage, (they lea∣ving another with the King for him:) and their garrison to be convoyed with 1000 Muskettiers, to a village the same night halfe a league distant from thence: and the next morning, vnto the bankes of the Mayn. 4. His Maiesty to furnish them all their march, with victu∣alls, &c. On the Kings part. 1. All of the Fort shall take their way towards Bingen.
2. They shall first passe the Mayn, and the Rhine afterwards. 3. They shall not goe into Mentz: but to some other place, where there is a Spanish garrison. 4. They shall carry away none of their Ordnance. 5. Nor pillage any towne or village in the way: nor offer iniury unto any souldier at that time serving his Maiesty. Two hundred Scots of my Lord Reayes and Colonell Lumsdells men, (which belonged unto Hebrons Brigade) were put in the Fort, so soone as ever the Spanish were gone out of it. Wee left the King lately marching towards Oppenheim: where he yet lay, within Cannon-shot (almost) of the very walls of it. Summons had already beene given unto the towne: which, upon the taking of the Fort, sends out their keyes, and yeelds gladly enough vnto his Maiesty:e Towne of enheim lded. and for that they knew him to be a friend vnto the Prince Elector their Lord and Master, they receive in a garrison of 200 Scots vnto them. These 200, were all (or almost all) that were left of Sir Iames Ramsyes Regiment: himselfe lay yet at Wurtsburg to be cu∣red of his wound,his relation Oppenheim; as o in those of ntz, the Lech, d other acti∣ about the latinate and varia: have receiued ne instructi¦ from Mr Ro∣t Marsham, o personally companied olonell He∣n in all these ctions. which there (as we told you) he received. Vpon an hill, a little above the edge of the towne, was there a large vast Castle with a garrison of 600 or 700 men in it; which yet stood out against the King. There having beene 107 boates found under the towne wall, upon the river; of these the King sends over enow, to fetch Winckles Regiment first, and Hepburnes after him: with the Cannon, baggage, and Ca∣vallery last of all. The streame carrying downe Hepburn and Winckle something lower then the towne; they upon their lan∣ding advance up the hill, to meete the Kings forces: whom they now saw standing in faire Battaglia, ready to give a ge∣nerall assault upon the Castle. And now those 200 Scots that had beene put into the towne at the yeelding of it; fall imme∣diately thereupon to Storme the said Castle at the Towne-port,
which is betwixt the Castle and the Towne. The Scots fell in with such a tempest and resolution,The valour o the Scots. that they instantly forced the garrison into the inner port; they Storming in together with them: so that by that time the King was ready to assault on one side, and Hepburn on the other; they meete (to their great admiration,) divers of the garrison that had already leapt over the wals, throwne away their Armes, and crying Quar∣ter; as the rest also now did, that had not yet gotten out of the Castle.The Castle ¦ken by assault In both these actions (about the Fort and Castle) were there some 200 Spanish (though few of them Spaniards) cut downe, and 8 Colours taken: which were the first Colours that ever the King tooke from the Spaniards; this being the first time that ever he had to deale with them. Here fell there out a pretty merriment, which some Rea∣ders may perchance be pleased withall. Whilest the most of the Spanish were begging for Quarter, a certaine Officer with some others of his men, not daring to trust the courtesie of an enemy; fairely slips away from the Scots that had so ferryted them: running out of the towne for life, even close besides the Kings army. It chanced that an Hare starting out of the bushes about the ditch, ranne directly before the Spaniards: and with∣in a few pases after, two other Hares also ranne as directly af∣ter them. The Swedish laughed heartily to see what a Convoy the Spaniards had gotten. Tis ill lucke (saies one of the soul∣diers) to have ones way crost with a Hare; and that ill lucke is now ours: for we are likely to get but little honour by them, should all their Countrimen runne away in the like manner. The next day, the King was purposed to go towards Mentz; and the Army being advanced to the top of the hill; the wea∣ther fell out so bitterly cold, snowy, and windie, that they were even faine to turne backe againe, leaving their Ordnance behind them on the hill top On the morrow morning, they put themselues upon their march againe; and the townes be∣ing not above 3 Dutch miles one from another; the Army by 5 a clocke at night presented themselues before the view of
the City.Mentz besieged They of Mentz out of a Fort they had, let flye their Ordnance a maine upon the Kings folke: but it now growing darke, the King with the most of the forces making his ap∣proaches along the rivers side; sends Hebron to make his, close by the gallowes Port. Hebron lodging his Brigade in a place commodious enough, within musket shot of the Port; that very night (notwithstanding he were extremely shot at) runns his Lines even to the very Graff or towne ditch. The King, on his side, found much more fierce resistance; the gar∣rison still sallying out upon him to hinder his working: who for all this, having once gotten the advantage of the Suburbs; with the losse of 100 men, (or such a matter) brings his ap∣proaches also close unto the wall. The second day the towne gave hote fire upon the Kings side; and the Ordnance from the Castle thundred as lowdly against Hebron: whom Colonell Axel Lillye comming now to visit, had his legge shot away by the shinne bone. The next day being Sunday, the shooting continued very fiercely on both sides: the King having by this time raised some Batteries in a garden, and mounted his Ord∣nance upon them. By Munday morning, the King with his  Brigades on one side; and Hebron with his upon the tother, being gotten close under the wals; the towne desires to parly: which the King denies them, unlesse the Cittadell will parly also. The Castle at first refuses the motion; but considering a little better upon it, how that notwithstanding they found themselues strong enough on that part of the Castle towards the enemy,entz yeelded. yet being conscious of their weaknesse of the part towards the towne, (should the King first take that) they a∣greed also to parly. These were the chiefest of the Conditions. 1. To depart next day with flying Ensignes, bag and bag∣gage, and 2 peeces of Cannon. 2. Have leave, some to goe into Franckendale, some into Creutznach: and some to be conveyed towards Luxemburg. 3. These last not to serve against the King in three moneths.
Thus the next day, Tuesday Decemb. 13. about 4 a clocke, the garrison marched out, after they had the second time well pillaged the townsmen and the Cloysters. Some of the Ger∣manes become the Kings souldiers. They left behind them a very great store of Ordnance, and 120 lasts of powder; with a wonderfull plenty of all other provisions. The City redeemed it selfe from pillage, by giving the King a ransome of 80000 Dollars: 220000 more being drawne from the Spiritualty and the Iewes: which last people paid 180000 Dollars of the money, for the redemption of their houses and Synagogue. And thus was this faire City of Mentz conquered: which is there seated upon the Southerne banke of the Rhine, where the river Mayn flowes into it. By the taking of this towne, hath the King wonne all upon the Mayn, euen to the very place where the Mayn looses it selfe. Mentz is honoured with an Ʋniversity and an Archbishops See: and He with an Electorate and the Chancellorship of Germany. These Honours, together with the great Estate belonging vnto them, had made the Bishop Elector of Mentz a very prime and a potent Prince, among the Catholike Leaguers. No friends had neither he, nor his two predecessors, beene all this while vnto the Prince Elector Palatine; nor to their neighbours the Earles of the Wetteraw. These had beene some of the Kings reasons to mooue against him. This present Elector (Wambold by name) having in October before heard of the Kings atchivements upon the Mayn, had then entertained 2000 of those Spanish, into his City and Country thereabouts, (though much against the minds of his subiects) which under the leading of the Count of Solms, Roverot, and Wittenhorst, had brought some Wallons and Burgundians out of the Low-Countries to reen∣force the Spaniards in the Palatinate. Wittenhorsts Regiment being received into the City, had very basely plundered and abused the townsmen. The Elector asking them whether they thought themselues yet strong enough to keepe his Towne a∣gainst the King of Sweden? You shew your selfe (saies a Spa∣nish Commaunder) to be but a Churchman by your fearefull
question: seeing we are strong enough to beate off three such Kings as the King of Sweden.Spanish brag. For all which confidence of theirs, the Elector perceiving by their getting ready their hor∣ses, by loading their baggage upon their wagons, and by ma∣king all ready to be gone, so soone as ever they heard of the taking of Oppenheim; that there was little trusting himselfe vnto them; he with teares in his eyes protested, That the Spa∣niards had abused him: immediately thereupon packing up his treasure and iewels; and shipping himselfe away downe the Rhine unto Cullen: which hath beene the common Refuge and Receptacle in these late warres for the expulsed Catholicke Princes; even as the Papists heretofore ieered that the Hage had beene, for the Protestants. To see what God can doe! Tis very wonderfull to observe, how much the greatnesse of the Electors of Mentz, is within these few yeeres abated! Bishop Schweichard feasted Spinola at his comming into the Palatinate: since which time, he and his two next Successors have encroached upon the Prince Elector Palatine, and other Protestants: and now Bishop Wambold is glad, for the saving of his deare life, to quit all againe, at the Kings comming into the Palatinate. The next day, being the King of Swedens birth-day, De∣cember 14. (which made him 37 yeeres compleat, and began his 38th yeere:The King en∣ers Mentz in Triumph.) would his Maiesty honour his own Nativity, by entring in state into the towne; being waited upon in the triumph, by Landtgrave William of Hessen, with very many other Lords and Princes. His lodging was provided in the goodly Castle, the sometimes Palace of the Bishop. Fryday next was the day appointed for the Thanksgiving, which is a duty, that this pious King never useth to omit, after any notable atchievement. The Sermon was preached by his own Chaplain; and this Psalme or Hymne of Luthers was or∣dered to be sung after it, beginning, Preserve, ô Lord, to us thy Word. The rest of it being chiefly against Popery, and Popish practices. By this may the Reader see, the Kings zeale and soundnesse in Religion. The goods of such Citizens as fled,
were presently confiscated: those that staid under the Kings protection, received the freedome both of goods and consci∣ences; having nothing at all taken from them. This City did the King make choice of, for his place of residence, to keepe Christmas in; staying there, the most part of the winter following. Here did his Maiesty hold so Royall and Magnificent a standing Court, as no Prince in Christen∣dome (perchance) had such a State and Presence. Here have bin seene at once, 6 soveraigne Princes (that is, chiefe Princes) of the Empire; 12 or 13. Ambassadors of Kings, States, Electors and Princes; besides Dukes and Lords of second houses, and the martiall men of his own Army; which were none of the worst showes, as being the men that procured all the rest of that glory. The Kings next care was for the fortifying of the place, which as fast as could be, was in this order performed. Whereas there were some hills neere-hand that commanded the Towne,Mentz fortifi and how. those the King directs to have taken into his new workes; which were of circuite large enough to lodge an Ar∣my of 20000 men in. Two bridges were also laid over the two rivers. That over the Rhine, was builded upon 61 great flat-bottomd boates; each lying the distance of an Arch one from another: many families of people living sometimes in the boates under the bridge, like as in the Low-Countries. Be∣yond this bridge towards the land of Hessen, was there ano∣ther great worke drawne; able to lodge 10000 men in, for the securing of that passage. The other bridge over the Main, was founded upon fifteene great flat-bottomd boates; where, namely, the current runnes strongest: the rest being builded upon great piles of wood. Vpon that Angle or corner of ground, where the Mayn falleth into the Rhine; was there a royall Fort to be builded, with 6 Bulwarks unto it: which should guard the passage out of the land of Darmstat, and give the law besides, unto both the Rivers. The Lorrayners in the Imperiall City of Wormbs in the Palatinate betwixt Oppenheim and Franckendale, hearing of this newes of Oppenheim and Mentz, provide instantly to be
packing. Osseland their Colonel would needes shake hands with the townesmen upon these termes: 3000 Dollars they must presently give him for his farewell. And that comming something easily, he demands 10000 more. A sackefull of silver plate he also layd hold of: and two Burgers would he carry along with him, till the 10000 Dollars were sent after him. Into a vault behind St. Andrewes Church, were 50 bar∣rels of powder stowed, his men being not able to carry it a∣way. Vnto this the souldiers threaten to put fire, if they might not have what they pleased. Yea they did it, to the mi∣serable spoyling of the innocent neighbours and their houses. The like outrages did other of their Country-men commit, when about this time they fearefully shifted away out of o∣ther places of the Palatinate. Wormbs being forsaken, the King sends,rmbs accor∣d with the ing. and it accepts of his protection. Whereas we have often heretofore mentioned these Lorrayners: Let us, whilest the King refreshes himselfe in Mentz, digresse a little to tell you of their unfortunate Expedition a few moneths before undertaken against the King of Sweden: this being the very time that they returned home againe from him. he Story of e Duke of orraynes expe∣tion, from the eginning to e ending.The Duke of Lorrayne (a great Prince lying betwixt France and Germany) had beene drawne into action by the Emperor. The reward for his service was reported to be an Electorate (of Saxon, or Brandenburg) of which, Lorrayne being a Prince of the Empire, was very capable. Another in∣stigation also might be, an edge which he bare against the French King; Colleague with the King of Sweden, and the drawer of him into Germany. The Duke of Lorrayne being appointed the Emperors Generall on that side of the Rhine, next unto him:The Duke of Lorrayne is by irth, Count e Ʋaudemont n Lorrayne: and y marriage of the old Duke of Lorraynes aughter and heire, Duke Lorrayne. T Prince or D of Lorraine-Pfaltzburg ( small countr in the Forre betwixt Lorr and Alsatia) had married this Count o Ʋaudemonts sister: and s brother in l unto him. about Iuly and August 1631. gives out Com∣missions for 4000 horse, and 14000 foote. His brother in law the Prince or Duke of Pfaltzburg accepts also of being his Lieftenant-Generall: and Harincourt is made one of the chiefe Directors of the expedition. The forces being raysed, the Duke sends to Zabern in Alsatia, (the first Towne of Germany beyond the forrest of Pfaltzburg, and within some
nine English miles off Strasburg) to be supplied with waggons and carriages; that being his way into the Palatinate. He de∣mands also to have his 4000 Horse enquartered for a moneth, in the County of Mompelgart; which belongeth unto a Duke of Wirtemberg. To prevent this, is Ascanio, Governour of Germersheim, about the beginning of September commanded thither, with sufficient forces. About mid September these Lorrayners put themselues up∣on their march: and Generall Tillyes Army being now defea∣ted at Leipsich; Ossa (who had to doe in Alsatia and those parts) is sent to be Commissary-Generall unto the Lorrayners: that is, To direct the actions of warre, to appoint the Gene∣rall which way to march, and what to doe; and to provide and pay the Army, by the Contributions in the Emperors name exacted from the country.The office o an Imperiall Commissary This is the office of an Imperiall Commissary. Now whereas these Lorrayners should at first have marched up to Tilly; Ossa'es desire (at first) was to con∣ioyne them unto Altringer and Fugger: for which reason they now marched directly thorow the Palatinate towards the land of Hessen.The Lorrayn passe the Rh They were gotten to Wormbs and the Bergstraes, by the end of September: and about the first of October (old Stile) the Count of Sultz, with 26 Compa∣nies of Imperiall Foote, and some few horse, avoyding out of Gelnhausen and Fulda (by Hessen) for feare of the Swedish; marches with great speede thorow Slicter and Salmunster in the County of Hanaw, and so along thorow the Speshart Forrest, unto Aschaffenburg: intending thence to goe by Franckford into the Wetteraw, whither he hoped the Lorray∣ners would within a day or two come unto him. But this iour∣ney of his was shortned; the Lorrayners meeting him at Ba∣benhausen neere the said Aschaffenburg; at which bridge their purpose also was, to have passed the Mayn into Franconia. October the fourth, Harincourt passes his horse over the Rhine at Wormbs, to goe towards Steyn in the Bergstraes, and so onwards by Franckford into Franconia.going into Franconia. Hither unto Wormbs the Duke of Lorrayn comes: and now he begins to devide
his forces. Some two troopes of horse, and three Compa∣nies of Foote, are sent into Heidleberg, some are put into Stein, 5 others into Wormbs; 10 Ensignes are by Ossa convay∣ed into Heilbrun: 1500 were put into Creutznach and there∣abouts 4000 of them were by this time runne away: and 8000 sent towards Franconia. Tilly being come to Aschaf∣fenburg, thither about October tenth goes the Duke of Lor∣raine in person. Their conference was; about the Emperors taking on of these forces, and how to get pay for them. To doe the first, is Altringer sent by Tilly: who October 11 pas∣ses the Mayn towards them: but as for the second, Tilly was not so flush of money; the Duke gate onely good words; and hopes of pay within 14. dayes. The Lorrayne Army follow∣ed their Duke thorow the Ottenwaldt, warily and fearefully: so doubtfull of the Swedish Land-lopers; that every night they cut downe the trees to barricadoe up the way against them. Being gotten up as farre into Franconia as Heibach and Mil∣tenburg upon an elbow of the river Mayn,and camping by e Mayn, (halfe way be∣twixt Wormbs and Wurtsburg) thither (about October 17) comes the Generall Tilly from Aschaffenburg; both to requite the Dukes former visit performed to him; and to give some order withall vnto the Army. And now were the Imperiall and Lorrayne Armies so neere together, that they might be said to be conioyned: betwixt which two resolved it was, that whilest he went towards the Palatinate, they should lye in the wind, betweene the Circle of Schwaben and the Swedish: but by no meanes venture to assault them. This last clause, the Lorrayners liked well enough. And Tilly needed not to have put in that; for the Swedish sought all opportunities to begin first, and to be still before-hand with them.here they are ften beaten by he Swedish, About the first weeke in November, (Tilly being now gone, and the Lorrayners left alone) 4 Regiments of them are defeated by the Swedish at Gutterish, neere unto Mergen∣theim and Buttell. A few dayes after that, the Swedish falling into their Quarters betwixt Mergentheim and Bishopsheim; cut in pieces 26 troopes of their horse, beate up their
whole Leaguer, put them unto a disorderly retreate; and fol∣lowed so hard upon their reere, that the wayes side by the ri∣ver Tauber was strewed with their dead bodies.and driven ou of Franconia againe. And thus were the Lorrayners driven out of Franconia; and about the end of November forced over the Rhine into the Palatinate again: where the Duke hearing the French to be fallen into his Country, gathers the remnants of his army together, (which had been left in severall garrisons of the Palatinate,) and home∣ward he returnes; carrying the dead body of his said brother in Law the Prince of Pfaltzburg along with him, who lately dyed at Munchen in Bavaria. Marching therefore (scarce with 8000 men) along the Easterne banke of the Rhine,They passe t Rhine, unto Drusenheim (neere Strasburg and Hagenaw) he comes: where (having first askt leave of the Strasburgers) hee passes the Rhine by the two new skonces, towards his own Country: much about Christmas day, recovering home to his own towne of Nancy. Some of these Lorrayners behaving them∣selves untowardly afterwards; (for they all went not immedi∣ately home with their Duke) were cut off by the Strasbur∣gers: others were knockt downe by the abused Boores of the County of Hagenaw: others, by the new forces levied for the King of Sweden in Alsatia: for in all these quarters were some of them left behind for a time.returning in their own Country. And this was the end of this Princes unfortunate expedition. The losse of most of his Ar∣my abroad; and of some part of his own Country at home: and of his Brother in law into the Bargaine. Thus dearely had this Prince bought his hopes of the Emperors favour, the pro∣mise of the living Lyons skinne, the Electorate: and the sight of a small part of Germany. And this is the fortune of the wars, That every man cannot be fortunate in the warres. Returne we now to that Favorite of Mars; the ever (hi∣therto) victorious King of Sweden; whom upon Fryday De∣cember 16 we left in Mentz at his Devotions: which were within two dayes blessed with a new victory. A strong Impe∣riall towne in the further parts of the Wetteraw, (fronting likewise upon Hessen and Hanaw) there is, Friedberg by name;
which had layne out till now, and beene kept by a Spanish garrison.ridberg sum∣oned. It had beene summoned in the Kings name before; and conditions offered, That if the Spaniards would leave the City in the same estate they first found it; they should goe out with full armes, bag and baggage, every way like souldiers, and be convoyed over the Rhine into whatsoever place they desired. The Citizens were likewise commanded to accom∣modate them with carriages and other necessaries for their remoovall. But Lewis de Ʋerreicken the Governour, retur∣ned this answer unto the Kings Trumpet; That concerning the giving up of the towne, he had received no directions from his Generall Don Philip de Sylva: who being now at Creutznach, the Trumpet might goe thither to understand his pleasure; untill which were knowne, he purposed to defend himselfe, and not to goe out upon such easie termes. A faire answer. But the Burgers knowing the strength of the place, not to be answerable to the high words of the Spaniards; so farre prevaile with the Governour, as to promise another, and a finall answer to be sent unto the King within 10 dayes after: and that some of their City should in the meane time be sent unto Don Philip. The Governour consents, and the Burgers are dispatched unto the Generall: from whom they returne with a peremptory command unto Ʋerreicken, to defend the place unto the last drop of blood. How prodigall men are of other mens lives! and how valiant, when themselues are not in the danger! Ʋerreicken, for all this, perceiving the place not to be tenable against such forces as had so quickly taken in Oppenheim and Mentz: in the night time December 18. sends his souldiers out of Fridberg into Braunsfels, (a towne and Castle upon a hill in the Wetteraw, not farre from Fridberg, and of very much importance: himselfe and family still remai∣ning within the towne.idberg taken. Colonell Haubald (the Conquerour and Governour of Hanaw) getting an inckling of the matter; flies in upon him the very next day, with a lusty partee of Dra∣gooners; seazes upon the towne for the King, chops a garrison into the Castle, arrests Verreicken, and imprisons him; the Co∣lour
being, for his having broken with the King, in not sen∣ding to him at the 10 dayes end, as he had promised upon the former Summons. Done like Haubald. Three dayes after (December 21) was the strong Castle of Konigstein in the Wetteraw (some two Dutch miles to the North of Franckford) surrendred unto William Landtgrave of Hessen: which had till now held out for the Elector of Mentz.Konigstein take The high and hilly situation of it, and the wonderfull store of provisions in it; had made it to be (by some) esteemed im∣pregnable. This procured the garrison to bee wondered at; that having 30 peeces of good Ordnance in it, with provisi∣ons for a whole yeeres siege: they should so easily yeeld up such a place, as commanded the whole country about it. But they liked not their cause perchance, now that the Elector was fled; or had rather serve the King of Sweden: into whose pay, 3 Ensignes of the 4 that were in it, presently betooke themselues. Some say, that the Landtgrave had one of his brothers here slaine with a shot, which (if true) much abated the contentment that he might otherwise have taken, for so notable a piece of service.The Landtgrave of Hessen re∣turnes home. Thus did the Landtgrave take a good farewell of the King, of whom hee presently after takes his leave: going with his Army into his own Country first; and so along towards the river of Weser, as we shall here∣after tell you. The towne of Bingen upon the Rhine (where the river Nau falls into it:Bingen) was much about this time forsaken by the garrison: the strong towne of Creutznach standing upon the same Nau, being by this meanes left the nakeder. And not to take too much paines in writing the Story, where there was not very much paines taking in performing of the acti∣on; the townes of Altzeim, Neustat, Kaisers-lauter,and divers o∣ther townes in the Palatinate forsaken by the Spanish. and o∣thers; were much about this time voluntarily also forsaken by their Spanish garrisons: whom a Panick feare almost every where now surprised. Before this time, and a little after the taking of Mentz; was the Rhinegrave Otho Philip (of the family of the Princes
Palatine) dispatched with 20 troopes of horse towards the river of Mosel.The Rhinegrave ent towards the Mosel. The designe being, to keepe off the Spaniards that then lay in the Bishoprick of Triers; or that might here∣after come out of the Low-Countries: whence (as the newes was) some were now about to march, under the command of Prince Barbanson. These Spaniards having about Christmas time passed the Mosel at Triers;The Huntsruck s not a towne, ut a ledge of ountaines, omething notty on their op, like the idge or chine∣one of a Grey∣ounds backe, whence the ame to the Countrey, Huntsruck, sig∣nifies a Dogs acke. The Rhinegrave defeates the Spaniards, tooke their way thorow the Huntsruck; first marching unto Trarbach, and so into the Pa∣latinate. Here (by Trarbach) the Rhinegrave encountring with them, put them to the rowte; the most of the spoyle lighting upon Wittenhorsts regiment: who being by agree∣ment at his turning out of Mentz, to goe into Luxemburg, and not to serve against the King in 3 moneths; had now been met withall by the other Spaniards, and perswaded to turne backe againe with them. And thus was his breach of Articles iustly now requited: he at this encounter losing all that pil∣lage, which he had so uniustly sharked away from those of Mentz. Three Cornets were here taken by the Rhinegrave, and at Mentz presented unto the King. The Spaniards being thus forced over the Mosel againe; the Rhinegrave converts his Armes towards the North-we∣sterne part of the Palatinate, into the Duchy of Simmern, namely: whence Prince Lodowick Philip brother to the King of Bohemia,and takes some frontier townes in the Bisho∣pricke of Triers. hath his Title of Duke of Simmern. Hereabouts tooke he in the towne of Simmern first: and of Bachrach next: (whence the good Rhenish wine is named) as also Caub, Bop∣part, and Over-Wesel; all in that corner; some of them in Sim∣mern, and some in the Bishopricke of Triers: and all till that time kept by Spanish garrisons.This Don Philip was Generall of all the Spa∣nish in the Pala∣tinate, & in the Bishopricks of Mentz & Triers. The Rhinegrave presently upon this marching towards Franckendale, chances upon a Par∣tee of 9 troopes of Don Philip de Sylva'es horse, that were going out a boote-haling: whom after a long fight, he rowtes and overthrowes, taking 5 Cornets away from them. The neighbour Boores assembling together at the noyse of the fight; way-layd, and gave chace unto those Spaniards that es∣caped: with clubbs, and flayles, and pitch-forks, and some with
better weapons, shewing their love in this sort unto these their old neighbours: their quarrell to them being the same their wives had vnto the wolues and foxes, for stroying of their Lambs and Pullen. As much Country-courtesie did other Boores shew like∣wise unto the garrison of Heidleberg, who now slew out al∣so: of whom, the Friday before Christmas day, they were said to have knockt downe the best part of 200. Before this time had the faire Imperiall towne of Spiers (on the South edge of the Palatinate, and upon the Rhine,Spiers accorde with the King where the Imperiall Chamber, and Pleadings of the Crowne are kept) accorded with the King, and accepted of his garrison, as the Imperiall City of Wormbs had before done. The Citizens now raising 3 new Companies for the Kings service, made the Swedish pretty and strong in these parts: whereupon, Decemb. 21. they flye out and surprize Eyserstal, belonging unto the Prince Elector Palatine. The Spanish garrison of Germersheim, (some 2 leagues to the South of Spiers, and upon the same side of the Rhine) perceiving the danger to be neere, and their friends to be farre off; voluntarily forsake the town. The same doe their Countrimen (more Southerly) in Lindau, Weissenburg and Sultz; pretty townes all: and all neere upon the Rhine, and towards Strasburg. The garrison of the strong towne of Ʋdenheim (newly by the Spaniards called Philips∣burg) lying right almost against Germersheim on the other side of the water, thinke presently to reprise Spiers againe.The actions about Spiers. Two hundred of them therefore, secretly, in the last night of the yeere, wafting themselues over the river at Rhinehausen; lye there in close ambush for such Partees, as should come in or out of the City. But Colonell Horneck (the Swedish Gover∣nour of Spiers) having an inckling of their forces and lodg∣ing, sets unawares upon them first: kills eight; wounds ten; takes 18 prisoners; drives a many into the river, and compells all to get them packing. To beginne the New yeere withall, was the strong towne of Manheim, (yea the strongest of all the Palatinate) there
seated upon the Rhine, where the river Neckar flowes into it; by a pretty Stratageme surprised on this manner. Duke Bern∣hard of Saxon-Weymar upon New-yeeres day at night, goes out with well-neere 500 men after him. The plot was so laid, that he might come to the Ports of Manheim an houre or two before day-light the next morning. There hee pretended to come in great haste, naming himselfe to be a Commander of some towne of their side; that having beene out upon a Partee that night, was thus beaten in thither by the Swedish, who were now even ready to fall upon his Reere, as he fained. This was the tale he told to the Guards and Sentinels at the gate;nheim sur∣ed. desiring for Gods sake to be let in presently. Being be∣leeved and admitted; hee cuts in pieces the next Court of guard, and to be briefe, kills well-neere 300 of the garrison: layes hold upon Maravelli the Governour, and his Lieftenant-Colonell; giving quarter to none but to the Germanes. Mara∣velli having (after a while) paid his ransome, must needs pay for his folly too; which going afterwards into Heidleberg, he did: having his whole head there strucken off, for the fault committed onely by his eares; which had, indeed, beene too credulous in a trust of so much consequence. Heidleberg and Franckendale blockt up.And thus became Heidleberg and Franckendale to be blockt up: the townes were by this time taken round about them, and the Kings horse every where laid upon the passages. The gar∣risons, indeed, were very strong in both of them; by reason so many had thrust in thither, that had beene turned out of other places. And yet this blocking up being not strickt enough; these 2 garrisons, together with that of Vdenheim, stealing out sometimes; did much mischiefe ever and anon among the neighbour villages. There was reported to have beene a dissen∣tion within Heidleberg, betwixt the Spanish and the Bavarian souldiers. Certaine it is, that many Ensignes of the Bavarians shortly after this forsooke their garrison, and went and put themselues into Vdenheim. About this time also, was much of that goodly Castle of Heidleberg set on fire; either by the mis∣chiefe, or by the negligence of the souldiers.
I must for brevities sake here omit the taking of the strong Castle of Brunsfels (which is indeed something out of the way) into which I told you, that the garrison of Fridberg went. The taking of the strong Castle of Stein in the Berg∣straes must also be passed over; as likewise some other actions about Strasburg, and Zabern: for I undertake not to relate eve∣ry victory of the Kings, but the famousest onely. And here are we to turne the Scene: to leaue our discourse of warres for a while; and to acquaint you with the treaties and overtures of a peace, desired by the Catholikes. His Maiesty, you may observe, had not beene personally abroad in the field (or not much) since his comming into Mentz: where his time was chiefely taken up, with giving of Audience and Answers, unto those many Ambassadors which there waited upon him. There were the severall Ambassa∣dors of France, of the 3 Spirituall Electors, (the Bishops of Mentz, Triers, and Cullen) and the Ambassador of him too that writes himselfe Elector, the Duke of Bavaria. The chiefe businesse of all these Ambassadors, was but one and the same negotiation: to importune the King, namely, for a faire Neu∣trality for the Catholike Leaguers; and if a Truce could not be obtained,The story o the Neutral yet to procure a Cessation of Armes (or Still-stand) at the least, whilest the conditions were a sending vnto the Leaguers. The potentest mediators (and indeed the earnestest) were the two French Ambassadors; one of which (Charnace) was reported to have spoken in some high language unto the King; and to have mentioned the greatnesse and power of his Master, and the Army that he had now on foote. Vnto this, the King was said to have returned as couragious an answer: That he confessed the greatnesse of his Master; and yet if the French King would but give him a dayes march before him, he would meete him at Paris. It was spoken also, that one of the Ambassadors should have obiected unto the King, his breach of the league betwixt his Master and Him; namely, by his comming over the Rhine: and that the King of Sweden should have answered that againe, with breach of Articles on
the French side; in his failing of some payments agreed upon. But whereas (sayes the King) two Armies will never agree well together in Germany; better therefore it were, that his Maiesty of France would be pleased to turne his Armes against the Spaniards, somewhere else: and leave the correction of what is amisse in the Empire unto my self. And thus (or some∣what this way) became this controversie compounded: and the French King did indeed send halfe his Army (which was at that time about Metz in Lorrayn) into the Elector of Triers his Country; to keepe the Spanyards from passing over the Mosel, or encroaching upon that Electorate. And thus the former Ruffing being fairely over-smoothed againe; the Am∣bassadours returned with more mildnesse, to the sollicitation of their former businesse. Thus the King of Sweden for his Colleague and brother of France his sake, was drawne to con∣sent unto the Neutrality, upon these termes following: which himselfe, in wisedome, caused to be published, for feare lest some cunning adversaries should for their honours and advan∣tages, have scattered abroad false copies and rumors of them. Which for all that, was done notwithstanding. The true Co∣py whereof we here at large affoord you, as we have it out of the Latine. Here followeth the true Articles of the Neutrality. With which I also forewarne my Reader, not to give cre∣dit unto other Copies of these Articles, many having been dispersed. And in particular, those 2 Copies in Gallobelgi∣cus, pagg: 91. & 92. which be both false. As those of his likewise pag. 105. concerning the Neutrality with Cullen. HIS sacred Majesty of Sweden, taking speciall notice of the desire which the Duke of Bavaria and the Ca∣tholike Leaguers have for obtaining a Neutrality; al∣though by their making themselues partyes with the Em∣perour
in the Warres, they had deserved nothing of him but hostilitie: yet upon the earnest intercession of the most Chri∣stian King presented by his Ambassadours; and to testifie withall his owne brotherly affection unto him: he is conten∣ted to conclude the Neutralitie, upon these following con∣ditions. 1. Let this Neutralitie be religiously and inviolably kept with his sacred Majestie of Sweden, his Kingdomes,The true A¦cles of the N¦tralitie. Dominions and Subjects, as well those that are hereditary to him, as those that have in GermanyThe King especiall (Is pose) mean Franconia; which himse had incorpo¦ted and mad Dukedome. Yea his Sou¦diours also c¦led Mentz,  Dukedome of Mentz, mor frequently th The Bishopri of Mentz. beene conquered by him: as also with his Confederates, the Electors, Princes, Nobles, Cities, Com∣mon-wealthes, Communalties and States, and with the Ele∣ctor of Saxony in particular; by the Duke of Bavaria and his Associates the Catholike Princes and States of Germany: who shall also give sufficient Caution unto His Majestie for the sure keeping of it. 2. Let the said Duke of Bavaria and the Catholike Princes of Germany his Confederates, forbeare all acts of injury and ho∣stilitie; both towards His sacred Majestie of Sweden, his Ar∣my and Dominions now in his possession; and towards his Confederates the Evangeliacall Electors, Princes, Earles, No∣bles, Cities, Communalties, States, and all other Evangeliacall Professors of what condition soever: and let them not by their Souldiours be troublesome hereafter unto them in their Dominions, upon any pretext whatsoever; nor suffer them to be disturbed by any forces of the Emperours. 3. Let the Duke of Bavaria and the said Catholike Princes of Germany, as many as are of the League, restore unto the E∣vangeliacall Princes and States of what condition soever, all and singular Strengths, Fortresses, Castles, Cities, Territories and Countryes how many soever, which in all the time of this Warre, begun in the yeere 1618, they have taken and kept from the Evangeliacks in the lower Saxony: and leave
them in the same state they were in, before the beginning of the Warre. 4. Let the Duke of Bavaria, with the Catholike Princes of Germany his Confederates, withdraw all their Armyes out of the Countryes of the Evangeliacall Electors, Princes, and States, so soone as may be; sending for the Souldiours into their owne Territories. 5. Let the Army of the Duke of Bavaria, and of the Catho∣like Princes of Germany his Confederates, be reduced to the number of 10000 or 12000 men: all the rest being presently cashiered. Which Army, let it be distributed and enquartered here and there among the Cities and proper Dominions of the said Princes, and not be kept together in one entire Body. 6. The Duke of Bavaria and his Associates, the said Catho∣like Princes of Germany, shall not with the said Souldiours (being either cashiered or distributed among their Territories) give assistance either openly or under-hand, unto the Empe∣rour or any other Prince, enemy unto His sacred Majestie of Sweden. 7. Nor let the Duke of Bavaria and his Confederates the Catholike Princes of Germany, give leave unto the House of Austria or any other whatsoever enemy of His sacred Majestie of Sweden; to raise souldiours, appoint places of Muster or Rendezvous, buy up Armes, or make any other Mi∣litary provisions within their Dominions: but let them eve∣ry where observe an inviolate and sincere Neutralitie. 8. Let all their Passages be without deceit either open to ei∣ther party, or shut up, as it shall be agreed upon: provided it be without all injury and domage unto the owner. 9. His sacred Majestie of Sweden with his Confederates in
like manner, shall in no wayes offend the Duke of Bavaria, nor any Prince or State of the Catholike League, whose Do∣minions he is not yet Master of;The Bishop o Bamberg exce¦ted out of th Treaty. excepting onely the Bishop of Bamberg: nor shall hee lay any other kinde of Military impositions upon them: but shall keepe and observe a sincere Neutralitie with them. 10. All those places of the Lower Palatinate whatsoever, now taken away from the Duke of Bavaria, will His sacred Ma∣jesty restore unto the said Duke of Bavaria againe; untill by the mediation of the Kings of Great Britaine and of France, there be some friendly composition made betwixt the Duke and the Prince Palatine; for which some short day shall be appointed. So likewise will his Majestie restore unto the Archbishops of Triers andBy the Land∣grave of Hessen in Cullens Bi∣shopricke of Paderborn. Cullen, whatsoever places are ta∣ken from them: the Citie of Spiers and the places now re∣maining unto it, beingSalvâ civitat Spirensi, sibiqu relicto. left entyer unto it selfe. 11. All other countryes and places of the Catholike Princes and States (besides those forenamed) already possessed by His sacred Majestie: shall not the Duke of Bavaria, nor the Ca∣tholike Princes of Germany his Confederates, make demand of againe in any kinde; either by themselves or by others: but shall leave them in His Majesties hands untill some generall Treatie. 12. All States, Princes, Earles, Nobles, Cities and Communalties Evangeliacall whosoever will, may be under the protection of His sacred Majestie of Sweden: nor shall they to the pre∣judice of the said protection be disturbed any manner of way, either directly or indirectly, by the said Catholike Princes of Germany. 13. Let all Commerce with his sacred Majesty of Sweden, his Subjects and Evangeliacall Confederates on the one party; and with the Duke of Bavaria and the Catholicke Princes of
Germany his confederates on the other party; be free and o∣pen every where, and no wayes hindered. 14. Let all prisoners on both sides be delivered without ran∣some, and in particular, let the Administrator of Magdenburg taken by Tilly, be forthwith set at libertie, without prejudice. 15. For the better securitie shall the most Christian King of France engage his Royall word, that the Duke of Bavaria, and all other Catholike Princes, States, and Cities of Germa∣ny his Confederates, shall religiously observe this Neutralitie in all the Articles of it: which if they shall infringe; then shall hee declare himselfe for his sacred Majestie of Sweden, and fall with all his power upon the violaters, untill he hath compell'd them unto satisfaction. The Articles beeing delivered unto the Ambassadours, were with all post-hast, to be dispeeded away unto the severall Prin∣ces whom they concerned: and till such time as their answers could be brought backe againe (provided it were within 14. dayes) a Cessation of armes was also assented unto by the King for his partie; and undertaken for by the Ambassadours, for the Princes and Armies on their partie. The King therefore to shew his sincere meaning, thus signifies his pleasure unto his Generals and Lieftenants wheresoever. Gustavus Adolphus by the Grace of God King of the Swedes, &c. The Kings Letters to his Lieftenants for a Truce.RIght trustie and wellbeloved, &c. Wee will not con∣ceale from you, how that the King of France hath made a kinde brotherly sute unto Vs, by his Ambassadours, for a Neutralitie betwixt Vs, and the Elector of Bavaria and the Catholike League. Forasmuch as Wee have thereupon fra∣med certaine Articles, and delivered the same to the said Am∣bassadours, who have promised to bring Vs within the space of foureteene dayes a plaine declaration and confirmation thereupon; And in the meane while by vertue of their power to take order, That Pappenheim shall forthwith withdraw
himselfe with his troopes out of Westphalia and the Bi∣shopricke of Magdenburg: And likewise, That the forces of the Electors of Bavaria and of the Catholike League, should forthwith be called and drawne out of Bohemia, if any there should bee. For this reason, and for the furtherance of such a worke, and to gratifie withall our said good bro∣ther the King of France: Wee have thought good to yeeld them so small a time, and to abstaine from all hostilitie, during the said foureteene dayes, against the said Catholike League and the Duke of Bavaria: If so bee that (according to the said promise) they doe behave themselves in like manner; withdraw their forces, and use no hostilitie against Vs. Whereof Wee doe hereby give you notice: and withall doe will and command you, Forthwith to publish this said Cessa∣tion of armes for foureteene dayes, throughout the armie which you doe command, (to which end Wee have dis∣patched this Trumpet unto You) And thereupon to cease and abstaine from all hostilitie, pillage, robbing, and other deeds of enmitie, against the said Elector of Bavaria and the Catholike League, and during the said time to remaine quiet. But yet Wee have expressely excepted (as the said Ambassadours doe know) and Wee doe intend, That such Townes, Places and Castles which are now by Vs besieged and blocked up, shall so remaine besieged and blocked up: And that the besieged shall have liberty during the said time, to treat, conclude, and compound with Vs; to deliver up the said places, and to depart from thence according to the agree∣ment that shall be made with them. This you are to observe, and to governe your selfe accordingly. And if some one or o∣ther place be at this present by you besieged or blocked up; you are by no meanes to remove or depart from the same, but rather to continue & finish the designe, with all your best endeavors; As being a thing no wayes contrary unto the said Cessation of armes by Vs graunted, &c. Given at Hoest the 10 of Ian. 1631. These Letters of the Kings were (as you may perceive) da∣ted at Hoest betwixt Mentz & Franckford: through which His
Majestie now went towards Hanaw, there to meete with his Royall Consort the Queene of Sweden, whom for twentie moneths before he had not seene; that is, not since his com∣ming out of Sweden. Of her Majesties arrivall at Wolgast in Pomerland, wee told you in our First Part. Her Majestie therefore having in the beginning of Winter parted from that place to follow her Lord; and having since that passed away the time in Leipsich, Dresden and Ertfurt, (at which last place shee was by agreement to have her residence:) ar∣rived this very Tuesday night Ian. 10.he Queene  Sweden mes unto the ng. at Hanaw aforesaid. The Queene (as tis reported) at first meeting taking her Lord in her armes, Now, saith Shee, you are my prisoner. Which pleasantnesse of hers was turned into earnest, by that time it came into England: divers of those that would have had it so, confidently here giving it out, That the King of Sweden was taken prisoner. But let us take notice how the Truce was observed, in these 14 dayes interim, by those that so much desired it: surely the King was not well used,The Neutrality ot observed either by Bavaria, Pappenheim, the Duke of Newburg, or the Archbishop of Triers his subiects. As for the cunning Duke of Bavaria, verily beleeved it is, that he meerely made use of the authority and favour of the French King in procuring of it; never purposing to accept of such conditions as the French Ambassadors thought conve∣nient for him: the maine of his policy being to gaine time by it,y the Duke of avaria; and to make these three advantages (among the rest) of it. 1. To set forward his own preparations (which hee ne∣ver intermitted) whilest the King should leave off his pro∣secutions. 2. That the Archduchesse forces, (whom he had now in∣telligence to be upon their march) might in this time get over the Mosel into the Palatinate to entertaine the King there;ho makes ad∣vantages of it. that so himselfe might not as yet be lookt after. This plot tooke. 3. That he might in the meane time get the better termes of the Emperor, for feare he should fall off, or become Neu∣ter:
unto whom at this very present he had dispatched an Am∣bassador. The contents of whose Ambassage we will (as we received it) communicate unto you afterwards; namely, where we relate the Dukes own Story, at the end of the Generall Tillyes Proceeding. The Emperor esteeming (as it appeares) Bavaria more likely to serue his turne, then Wallenstein; gave such satisfacti∣on unto that Duke, as he was presently accepted of, and Wal∣lensteins imployment for a while went on the more slowly: which affront how so vast and haughty a spirit as Walsteins would put up, let time discover. This was the use that Bava∣ria made of this treaty of Neutrality. And as for the Earle of Pappenheim; he either had no no∣tice of this Truce at all; or no purpose to take notice of any. For though he withdrew (indeed) his troopes out of Mag∣denburg;Pappenheim obserues not the Truce, yet was it not before he had spoyled it the second time. Nor were his forces utterly drawne out of Westphalia: hee playing Rex about the latter end of the Truce in the Duchy of Lunenburg, the furthest corner of Westphalia. Yea so late it was ere he stirred out of the Bishopricke of Magdenburg, that the King was upon his march as farre as Gelnhausen (some 5 leagues to the North-East of Hanaw) to have gone against him, as it was reported. Neither in the Archbishoprick of Triers was there a sincere Neutrality observed:nor those of Triers. seeing the Spaniards in the Truce time had ready passage thorow that Countrey. The Archbishop Elector himselfe, seemed, and was too, most glad of this Neu∣trality: and no wayes, perchance, consenting for his part to this Passage of the Spaniards: he having before this put himselfe under the French Kings protection. Both which observations we may collect out of this his following letter of Declaration, written from his strong Castle of Hermanstein, unto the City of Triers and the rest of his subiects, as here followeth. I cannot conceale from your Honors,The Elector Triers letter u on the Neutr¦lity. how graciously it hath pleased Almighty God of late, to deliver both our selues and Bishoprick, from our apparent, cruell and terrible enemy,
the King of Sweden; as in like manner also from that most la∣mentable and vn-christian persecution, exercised upon us by the Spaniards; which deliverance hath beene occasioned by meanes of the Duke of Bavaria: who by the well-meaning and heroicall mediation of his Maiesty of France, hath not onely agreed upon a Neutrality with the said King of Sweden for the said Duke, but for others also. In which matter Our selues have not beene negligent; but have by the mediation of the said King obtained, that both Wee and our Archbishopricke are now declared to be Neutrall: by which meanes, may the Princes of the Empire in generall, and your selues in particular; be freed both from the Swedish and the Spanish. To the end therefore that this Neutrality may inviolably be kept, both for Our good, and Our subiects; the said King of France (as Inter∣ponent) hath offered his assistance royall: and for the remoove∣ing of all incumbrances from us, hath promised (if need were) to bring his Army into the Empire. Take comfort therefore, give God thanks, and pray unto him, that the promise may be seconded by the performance; and that this heauy punishment now lying upon us, may thereby be remooued. Your care in the meane time it must also be, that those daily insolencies and persecutions committed upon us by the Spaniards, may for the time to come be resolutely put by, and their yoke shaken off effectually. For this purpose shall you cause this Neutrality in all places to be proclaimed: after which if any notwithstan∣ding shall persecute us (as in the diocesse of Mentz it hath hapned:) or if upon occasion and pretence of Spanish assistance, our Archbishoprick should fall into the hands of the Swe∣dish: Our selues shall remaine guiltlesse of the matter; and the occasioners shall be bound to answer for the same, unto God, the Pope, and all Christian Potentates. Hermanstein, Ianuary 14. 1631. Signed underneath Philippus Christofer.
Together with this Declaration,The Articles  Neutrality off¦red to those of Triers. were these 4 Articles fol∣lowing, propounded unto the City of Triers; as being the termes upon which the Neutrality must be obtained from the King of Sweden. 1. The passage ouer the Rhine at the bridge of Coblents, to be granted unto the King. 2. The strong Fort of Hermanstein, with all the Ordnance, &c.This Fort (which is the Archbishops Palace) stan on the other side of the Rhine, right over against Coblentz, iust Lambeth hou is against W¦minster. to be also deliuered up unto him. 3. The souldiers there in garrison, to take the oath of fideli∣ty to his said Maiesty. 4. A reasonable competent summe of money to bee contri∣buted by the countrey, towards the payment of the Kings souldiers. But the City of Triers would in no wise accept of these conditions; but immediately called in the Spaniards thereupon unto their assistance; granting passage withall unto as many as would, over their bridge, to march into the Palatinate. Thus beganne the Spaniards to incorporate the chiefe townes of the Archbishoprick, the people siding with them against their owne Prince the Elector. So, notwithstanding that the former letter were wisely written unto them; both for ma∣king of them sensible of the Spanish insolencies (as he termes them;) and to prepare them withall for entertaining of the French forces: yet had the Spaniards so great a power and faction in the Country, and in the Archiepiscopall Chapter of the Church of Triers likewise; that they procured so much bandying amongst the Clergy against their Archbishop; as neere they went, afterwards, of depriving him. And had not the French army (under the command of the Marshall De la Force) presently strucke in upon it; both Bishop and Bi∣shoprick had beene in danger, to have at once beene swallow∣ed up by the Spanish.
The Elector perceiving his former letters to doe no good among his subiects; sends forth his second Proclamation for the ridding of the Spaniards out of his Countrey: dated the fourteenth of February following. he Elector of iers his Pro∣mation a∣inst the aniards,VVHereas so much is by this time apparent, as the most Reverend and Illustrious Prince Philippus Christofer, Elector, &c. hath timely enough heretofore misdoubted, how that the enquarterings of the Spaniards, and the offering of their service in his Archbishoprick, would minister occasi∣on unto the King of Sweden, to draw neerer and neerer unto the country, (some of them, indeed, having already very neere approached unto his towne of Coblentz) and that his Electo∣rall Highnesse was afraid thereby to be bereaved of succours convenient for his Castle of Ehrenbreitstein;mely, when  Rhinegrave ke Boppart: ich is within  leagues of lentz. renbreitstein stle, is the ne with Her∣nstein Castle. in regard that on the one side, the Spaniards had already made themselues Ma∣sters of the chiefe Quarters and Passages; and that on the o∣ther side, the Swedish had thereby beene invited into those pla∣ces: to prevent therefore all further mischiefe, it was by his said Electorall Highnesse at this time required, That all and every Spanish officers of what condition soever, shall imme∣diately with all their troopes march foorth of his Archbishop∣ricke; some reasonable satisfaction being by them given unto his subjects, for the domages susteyned by them. His High∣nesse can see no cause or reason, why hereafter hee should ac∣cept of any Orders or Commanders, (contrary unto the Con∣stitutions of the Empire) either from the Spanish or Imperiall Commissaries: hee well trusting to bee as able now, as hereto∣fore he hath beene, to keepe up and maintaine his owne Forts and passages: provided, that his meanes were no longer dreynd away, his necessary succours hindered, and his passages not encumbred. If therefore after all this warning, the Swe∣dish party (now growing daily stronger both in Horse and Foot,) should come to assault the said Spanish or Imperiall for∣ces; or his own subiects driven into despaire, should fall foule upon them: his Electorall Dignity hereby protesteth him∣selfe
innocent in the matter; and to stand excused for it, by this his faire and friendly admonition. And thus much hath his Highnesse thought good to publish, for every mans direction. As for the Duke of Newburg, though he as yet perso∣nally did nothing against this Neutrality; yet he afterwards suffered Tilly to take his towne of Newburg in Bavaria, and then sent his Ambassador to the King, to iustifie that it was not against the Neutrality. Thus have wee seene how badly this Neutrality was ob∣served: and had it not by much importunity beene wrested from the King,What hopes the King of Sweden lost, by yeelding to this Truce. Heidleberg and Franckendale (tis verily belee∣ved) had beene his own; and Cullen too, perchance, after that: Gustavus Horn might by that time likewise, have made him∣selfe Master of Forcheim, and then might Tilly have cast his cap at him. Nor would Hessen, Lunenburg, Todt, Bremen, and Banier, have suffered Pappenheim so freely to have roaved up and down at his own pleasure: nor had the Spaniards, finally, so quietly advanced themselues over the Mosell. But the French Kings honour then lay upon it; he to retaine the opinion of still being a Catholike, must needes doe something for that Religion; and the King of Sweden out of an abundant good∣nesse of nature, knew not how to deny such his importunity. These inconveniences, doe wise men suffer themselues to be sometimes put unto by their Friends; even after they have warned those Friends, of their foresight of these inconveni∣ences. Thus came this Treaty of Neutrality unto a meere nothing; the onely advantage which the King of Sweden made of it, was the resting and refreshing of his Army: which is a duty of nature that all men owe vnto their bodies. For though the affections and motions of the Soule, be (like the Soule it selfe) restlesse and Spirituall: yet were it extremity of inju∣stice, to exact so much labour and continuance of a corpulent and restive body, which is but mortall; as the Soule were wil∣ling at all times to require of it, which is vntireable by being immortall. Turne we from Words now, vnto Deeds againe.
Ian. 20. towards evening, his Majesty of Sweden returnes with his Queene into Franckford:The King re∣urnes into Franckford. which was some 4 dayes before the expiring of the Truce. No sooner were they out, but the Rhinegrave falls upon Kirckberg in the Huntsruck, and takes it in by assault; where 147 Italians and Burgundians were put to the sword: 100 Germanes requited the saving of their lives, by becomming the Kings souldiers. The Germanes (we are to know) are every where spared: the delivery of their nation, being the thing that the King professeth to come for, into Germany. In this time of the Truce, had 10000 Spaniards with long and continued marches gotten out of the Low-Countries, up to the river of Mosel;The Spanish asse the Mosel, and had already passed betwixt three and 4000. men: the two Regiments, namely, of the Count of Nassaw, and Torquato. The Rhinegrave thereupon drawing all his forces out of Boppart, Overwesel, and other places in the Duchy of Simmern, and country of Triers; sets amaine upon these 2 Regiments:and re defeated by the Rhinegrave. whereof one he utterly overthrew, forcing the other to retire into the fastnesse of a wood. Here were 7 Colours obtained, and afterwards presented vnto the King at Mentz: and about 3 dayes after, Rit-Master Humes a Scottish man, brings in the eighth. The Spaniards resolving not to put it up so; suddenly passe over 1800 horse, and disposing one Foot-Regiment in close ambush; with the rest of their strength, tempt the Rhinegrave unto the encounter. He ho∣ping of the former fortune,They defeate the Rhinegrave againe. though he had but 600 horse in all with him: lost in the cloze of the businesse some 300 men; himselfe and all the rest being put to the retreat, and the young Earle of Nassau of Sarbrucken left behind him, wounded and taken prisoner. The Spaniards after this, advanced more bold∣ly thorow the Huntsruck; and so onwards towards Francken∣dale. But newes being Febr. 4. brought unto the King at Franckford, of the Spaniards second passing of the Mosel, and of the Rhinegraves defeate; his Majesty with all speed passes unto Mentz, to goe after his Army: which upon the first hearing of the Spaniards comming, had beene sent on∣wards
towards the Mosel. The Horse which lay enquartered along the Bergstraes, had beene set over the Rhine by Oppen∣heim: some Regiments of Foot having order presently to passe downe the streame of the same river, towards Baccharah.Vpon the fa of the Kings comming a∣gaine retirin Of the neere approaching of these forces, and of the Kings com∣ming after them, the Spaniards now hearing; voluntarily and of themselues, retire over the Mosel, backe againe into Lux∣emberg. And here they containe themselues from comming over againe, vntill Easter following: at which time they heard the King to be utterly gone out of the Palatinate. And now begins the valiant Duke Bernard of Saxon-Wey∣mar, to imploy his time and forces,The remain of the Bishop¦ricke of Me taken. against the remnants of the Electorate of Mentz: by taking whereof, that whole Coun∣try became universally subiect unto the King of Sweden. Vpon Thursday Febr. 9.Babenhausen covered, by a Count of Js∣berg. was the Count of Isenberg (as I take it) sent to reprise Babenhausen: which Towne and Ca∣stle, Tilly had before taken from the Count of Hanaw. Vpon the sight now of 50 Swedish Rutters or Horsemen, and assu∣rance of more forces that followed; the garrison came to com∣position, and yeelded to the Count of Isenberg. The King re∣stores it vnto the Count of Hanaw. The better to keepe the Country towards the Mosel here∣after, the King resolues upon the taking of Creutzenach, a faire towne of the Palatinate upon the river Nau; in the very Frontiers of the Duchy of Simmern, and belonging vnto Prince Lodowick Philip Duke of Simmern, brother to the E∣lector Palatine. Vnto this worke whilest the King was a pre∣paring, his Maiesty of Bohemia, Fredericke Prince Elector Palatine, timely and safely there arrived. His Maiesty was waited upon by my Lord Craven;The King of Bohemia com vnto the King of Sweden. and had beene lovingly ac∣commodated by the Lords the States Generall for such a iour∣ney, and honourably convoyed at their command with 2500 horse, which waited upon his Majesty out of the Low-Coun∣tries, till he had passed all the danger. This Prince passing tho∣row Hessen, Hanaw, and the Wetteraw; recovered into Franck∣ford by Friday 10 a clocke, Febr. 10. going the next day unto
the King of Sweden then at Hoest; betwixt whom there was a most loving interview. The 2 Kings and Queene of Sweden, returned in all faire manner the same evening, into Franckford. Sunday next (being Shrove-Sunday) he was royally feasted by both their Maiesties of Sweden; who at every word gave him the Stile of King of Bohemia: which respect the young Landt∣grave of Darmstat once omitting, (whose Father had beene no good neighbour to this Elector) the King of Sweden ex∣pressed much displeasure at him for it. Wonderfull welcome was this Prince unto his owne subiects of the Palatinate, who every way ranne out to see his Maiesty, with infinite expressions of ioy and contentation; welcome to  own people. with many a hearty pray∣er, and teare, and high sounding acclamation. The King of Sweden (tis said) in one of their first discourses, told the King of Bohemia, of the enemies great strength, and the difficulty himselfe had thereupon; to hold the countries which he had already overrunne: and that he was constrained therefore, to keepe many and strong garrisons in the townes of the Palati∣nate. But this he assured his Maiesty withall, that he desired nothing more, then to be able to restore it wholly vnto him; and to see him once againe well settled in it. These entertainements being overpassed; the King of Swe∣den strives to prevent the Spring, by bringing an earlier show of Colours into the field, then Flora had yet put forth any. Vpon Thursday Febr. 16. he first sets forward from Franck∣ford to Mentz, and so onwards towards Creutzenach: the King of Bohemia following, and lying at Oppenheim. Before the Kings arrivall at Creutzenach, had the Boores of the Country taken up all the passages upon the hills, and kept a very order∣ly watch against the enemies in the towne: thus shewing their love and diligence to doe some service for their new-come Prince. On Saturday Febr. 18. the King first presented a small army of 1800 foot, some few troopes of horse, and 4 halfe Cannons, before the town; because he supposed to make but an easie worke of it. This towne is situated 5 little Dutch miles from Mentz, and 10 from Franckford; in as pleasant and
rich a soyle, as any of the Palatinate. The river Nau or Nah, runnes thorow the midst of it; which beeing crossed by a Bridge, betwixt two Market places, gives name unto the Towne: Creutzenach, signifying Crossing the Nah. A faire Castle it hath upon the hill, which before these Warres was a dwelling house onely: the loftie situation giving it the com∣mand over the Towne. Both Towne and Castle had some 600 men in garrison:The siege of Creutzenach. The Story whereof wee have received partly from a Letter writte by a Scottish Commander unto my Lor Reay: and par¦ly from the R¦lation by wo of mouth mad by Sir Jaac Ashlye, at h late being in England. whereof one halfe almost were Ger∣manes, and the rest Wallons and Burgundians. They had a Ma∣gazine of bread and wine, for twelue moneths provision. The first view the King tooke of the Towne, was upon the lowest side; and where he had thought to have begun: but that he found so well fortified with Outworkes, Seconds, and Retreats, one worke within another, that he call'd them the Divels workes. He quickly discovered, that there was no attempting that way: yea judged by the best souldiours it was, that it could not have beene a businesse of lesse then a fort∣night or three weekes time, to have mastered all these works, and so to have come at the Towne. Altering his course there∣fore, and deviding his little Army into two parts, hee by faire day light brings them on by another side, and lodges them within Musket shot, or 150 pases of the very walles: yea Lieftenant Colonell George Douglasse (a brave souldiour then newly come up to the King) having first runne his lines, sets himselfe downe with some three hundred men, (the most of them being the same Scottish that had stormed Oppenheim Ca∣stle) even in the very Port. Here lay Douglasse all the night following: notwithstanding the place were so hot, that the enemy kill'd him some 47 men, with their shooting upon him; both from the walles, and Port aboue him. On Sunday, the King tooke a full view of the Castle on the lands side; which he found to be regularly and modernly for∣tified, and so well flancked with small workes one within an∣other, that hee called it the Divels head. His Majestie now finding, both Towne and Castle likely enough to dispute the matter with him; immediatly sends to Mentz for more ar∣guments:
whence the next day two more Regiments and all his Cannon both great and small came unto him. Two of these Cannons the King causes to be planted before the Ports: wher∣with there was a breach made, thorow which the Towne was entred. Skaling ladders are immediately set unto the Breach, and divers gotten in, whereof whilest some are ear∣nest in beating away the garrison,he Towne onne. others are as busie with sho∣vels and pickaxes to throw away the horse-dung from the in∣side of the Sally-port, with which it had beene mured and damm'd up. This Port Lieftenant Colonell Dowglasse imme∣diately forcing open, brings in his men that way also. The garrison perceiving the Towne to bee wonne, runne immediately towards the Castle: fleeing so fast, that they had no time to breake downe the bridge. One thing was here ve∣ry remarkeable and wondered at, by such strangers as were not before acquainted with the exact justice of the Swedish Discipline: namely, that the Kings souldiours beeing now Masters of the Towne, marched so civilly thorow the streets, and so quietly placed themselves in their order upon the Mar∣ket places; that no man so much as offered to stirre out of his rancke, to plunder or ransack any house or person: nor once to knocke at a doore which they found shut.The civilitie of he Swedish ouldiours. The Burgers ad∣miring at this civilitie in the souldiours, begin to put off all feare of having their houses rifled; and after an houre and halfe (or such a matter) begin to take so much courage unto themselves, as to looke out at the windowes; and the sight of the souldiours becomming more familiar unto them, they open their doores, and with much plentie and heartinesse, unaskt; bring forth bread and wine unto them; making wonderfull expressions of their joy, that they were so well rid of their overburthensome garrison; that their towne was now falne into the Kings hands; and above all, that their naturall Prince the King of Bohemia, was now so neere at hand with them. In signe of all freedome, were their doores set open; and di∣vers Gentlemen were even invited into their houses: Yea a Commander of our Nation going into a house to write a Let∣ter,
found himselfe even disturbed with their pressing of courtesies upon him; with urging him to eate and drinke with them; with expressing their joy; and with asking questions about their Prince. The towne thus wonne, the enemy from the Castle on the hill (which hung over the towne) shot amaine into the streets,This was not Lieftenant Co¦lonell Dow∣glasse. and there was Captaine Dowglasse shot thorow the heart. That men might therefore goe up and downe unaym'd at, was there a Blind drawne crosse the streete next unto the Castle. The Castle hill is very steepe; and so neere unto the Towne, that the foot of it even touches the very houses: nor is there any wall betweene. The Castle it selfe was of no strength; it was the situation onely, and the continued works, (from the very top unto the bottom almost) which made it so strong a place. The Second view of it, was at a distance taken by the King the same Munday night; when himselfe going prying up and downe at the foot of it, was the formost man; his great Commanders comming all hard behind him. All this time did the Enemy out of their next workes, shoot and fling stones and firebrands amayne at him:The King in some danger i viewing of th Castle. one stone being said to have hit him upon the head, and missed but little of having brayned him. The Kings sight being naturally none of the sharpest at a distance, hee looking behind him, spyes a Serge∣ant (whom hee very well knew) to whom hee immediately calles by his name; Come hither Thou, such a one; thou shalt have 100 Dollars to goe up and see what the enemy doth in the next Traverse, and to bring mee a perfect view of what thou there discoverest. The Sergeant did so, came downe safe∣ly, and had his money. Being downe, the King laying him∣selfe along the sloape of the hill; upon his backe almost, (that is, more upon his backe then upon his side) commands the Ser∣geant to come and lye upon him, and to shew him what hee had discovered. The Sergeant did so: laid himselfe so upon the King, that his backe lying upon the Kings bosome and brest, and his further arme over the Kings shoulder, (both their faces being towards the enemy) hee there points with
his other hand towards the Traverse, to describe the enemies posture unto the King. But the Kings Iudgement (which is a Curious one) being not yet satisfied; he commands off the Sergeant, and clambers up himselfe to the very corner of that Traverse: where having satisfied himselfe, he at his comming downe speakes it aloud unto his army, Now will I have this Castle by to morrow five a clocke. Instantly thereupon was there order given to begin the Ap∣proaches: and that night they brake the ground about three pikes length from the rising of the hill, under the enemies workes.The Appro∣hes begun by Rowling Tren∣hes. A line being here runne, 80 Muskettyers were lod∣ged in it before morning. The hill being stony in many places, the souldiers were faine to breake it with pickaxes; and to climbe up that steepy place with great difficultie, scarce able to hold their feet many times. At the end of this first line, was there (the next morning) another line runne, even unto the point of a great Ravelin of the enemies. In this Trench, my Lord Marquesse Hamilton (out of his desire to satisfie and en∣forme himselfe) beeing something farre advanc't alone by himselfe; was friendly advised by the King not to be so haz∣zardous, nor to adventure his person singly, so neere unto the enemies. The lines being by Tuesday night perfected, a myne was presently digged; directly under the Ravelin aforesaid. This being the next day finished, the King caused about three a clocke in the afternoone to be sprung. The myne, tis true, sprung not altogether so cleerely forward,A mine Sprung. as it might have done, but something backwards withall; whereby some of the souldiers passages were encumbred with loose earth and rubbish. And yet all considered, it wrought well enough: seeing it blew open the point of the said Ravelin, huffing up many of the Defendants into the ayre, and leaving the rest more naked and open within the worke. Hereupon was the assault given, in this following manner: Colonell Winckle commanding in Chiefe over the foot; three Captaines of his Regiment with some 350 men, and
divers English and French Gentlemen voluntiers,The assault. came first into the breach: among all which, my Lord Craven, Liefte∣nant-Colonell Talbot, Master Robert Marsham, and Master Henry Wind, marched in the first File. The Hill was so steepe where they approached, that the enemy by darting downe of Partisans and Halberts, casting downe of great stones, flinging of Fire-brands,The Swedes b¦ing beaten  and rowling downe of great pieces of Timber, forced the assaylants unto a retreate. And whereas other soldiours would roundly have come run∣ning off; these onely turned aside a little under the enemies Ravelin, where they stood safely enough. In this first ser∣vice, was Lieftenant-Colonell Talbot shot in the Shoulder: who being rowled downe the Hill, was fetcht off by Master Marsham, and led into the Towne. The King, (then at the Foote of the Hill) perceiving his men to be beaten off; call them Pultrons, and all to be-cowardied them: presently commanding the skaling-ladders to be in another place,fall on againe. set unto the Rampier of the Ravelin. And heere his Majesty ha∣ving taken notice of the valour of my Lord Craven, in a fa∣miliar and encouraging manner claps him upon the Shoulder, bidding him to goe on againe. The young Lord did so: and was the very first man, that gained up to the top; where he valiantly came to push of pike with the enemy: himselfe receiving an honorable wound with the thrust of an Halbert in his thigh; which was not found to be dangerous. Those of our English Gentlemen before named, behaved themselves right couragiously; being next unto my Lord Craven, and in the very heate of the danger. And this was the manner of the fight, for two houres together almost; the defendants bearing themselves like tall Souldiours. At last, the High-Dutch being in mutiny with the Wallons and Burgundians, (who were resolved to defend the place) one of the enemies began to speake of Quarter, and of Termes of yeelding:A very good service done by the Lord Craven. which the Lord Craven (who was still the formest man) wisely apprehending; reaches out his hand unto one of the enemies Captaines, and undertooke upon his honour to bring
him to the King. The enemies Muskets hereupon gave over playing; though the Kings ordnance (of which he had got∣ten two small peeces mounted from the bridge of the Town) still continued shooting.The besieged rly. The King told the Captaine to this purpose. That hee and his fellowes had made him lose his time, had kild his men, and that they deserved but ill conditi∣ons at his hand: yet neverthelesse he was contented upon their submitting to his mercy, and present laying downe of Armes, to let them goe out with bag and baggage, and with their swords; but not with their Colours: which, saith the King,nd yeeld. you shall leave all furled up together in one Chamber, and so march forth of the Castle. These hard conditions were consented unto: for which, the imputation must rest upon the Commanders, and not upon the souldiours; who did their duties like tall fellowes. The King hereupon calls off his men from the assault, and sent a guard presently into the Castle. The next morning being Wednesday, Ianu. 22. the King entred the place; giving the enemyes leave to depart with their Armes and baggage, but not with their Colours: adding again this further condition, That they should not serve against him in sixe moneths, on this side the Mosel: marry if they found him on the other side, let them doe their worst and spare not. To convoy them over that River, the King now assigned them horse and carriages: where they might tell their fellowes the Spaniards, that it was now too late for them to come to the reliefe of Creutzenach; which, it was given out, they would againe have passed the Mosel to have done. The Germanes tooke present pay for the Kings service. There were lost on the Kings side, those three Captaines of Colonell Winckles Regiment, Lieftenant-Colonell Talbot, who was the very next man unto my Lord Craven: Captaine Dow∣glasse,The losses on the Kings side. a French Marquesse, Brother to the Duke of Mam∣brun, with two or three other French Gentlemen of quality: and of common souldiors 250. Hurt men: Colonell Winckle himselfe, who was shot in the foote; my Lord Craven, wounded in the thigh, &c. Sir Francis Vane, (brother to the
Earle of Westmerland) shot in the huckle bone; Master Ro∣bert Marsham, hurt with a Firebrand, and a large stone on the thigh; Master Wynd, shot in the shoulder: with some others. Captaine Ramsye Quarter-master to my Lord Mar∣quesse Hamilton, was made Governour of the Towne. The King gave order for new fortifications, leaving 300 men in it: and directions where to have 300 more, upon occasion. The Magazine or Storehouse, he would not have opened nor meddled withall, but to be supplied onely by exchanging new for old, either of wine or victuals. The souldiours in the meane time, he wills to be fed by the Burgers. All this being done, the King returnes againe towards Franckeford. By this time had Duke Bernard of Saxon-Weymar,The rest of Bishopricke Mentz take taken in the residue of the Bishop of Mentz his townes. In the Duchy of Wirtenberg, bordering South of the Palatinate; all things likewise wrought successiuely. Gustavus Horne had taken Hailbrun with other Townes of that Duchy, the Christmas before. The Imperiall garrison of Shorndorff in Ianuary after, begins to trusse up, carrying their ordnance with them to Diensburg: removing their office of Receipt or Imperiall Exchecker (which had beene there settled for the paying in of the Military Contributions,Some action of the Swed in Wirtenber raised out of that Duchy) unto Munchen in Bavaria. Many of the souldiours turned to the Kings party. Elwang is also taken, the garri∣son marching into Dunkelspiel; whither the Swedes begun presently to follow them: as resolved not to suffer an Impe∣rialist to roost any where. Glad were the Protestants: the pres∣sures having layne sore upon their Country, ever since the Count of Furstenberg had brought then under contribution. Now began there some levyes to be made for the King,The Palatine of Birckenfel makes some new levyes f the King. in this Duchy, and in the lower Alsatia: even all the Coun∣try over, from the River of Neckar in Wirtenberg, unto Strasburg upon the Rhine. The Count Palatine Christian of Birckenfeld (of the Palsgraves family) whose Towne and Honor lyes in the little Country of the Hunstruck, so often heretofore mentioned, was to be their Generall.
These new levyed men, though they tooke in some smal∣ler Market Townes as they came along to their place of Ren∣dezvous, (which was to be about Strasburg) yet were they rather robberies; then Warfarings. By Rotenburg, a Towne in Wirtenberg upon the Neckar; they pillaged Mule, and the Abby of Marchtall: neere Strasburg, some sixe troopes of horse of them, and one company of foote, passe the Rhine upon Fryday, Feb. 10. where they drive the Imperialists out of some little Townes of Gersheim, and Appenwyer; and in revenge of the death of foure of their fellowes, they burne Commerswyer. They offered to take Offenberg, a pretty strong Towne (which was the best thing they did) but having no Ordnance to doe it withall; the Imperiall garrison rather laught at them. They spoyled the fort of Faussenburg (Stauf∣fenburg some write it) belonging to William Marquesse of Ba∣den. Their Generall hearing of these Freshmens trickes of theirs, called them off presently; whereupon the next day after our Ashwednesday, they passe the Rhine at Strasburg againe, all to be loden with their new gotten luggage. Their Generall, the Palatine Christian, the next Friday, Feb. 17. going before to carry his Lady to waite upon the Queene of Sweden at Franckford; leaves his Lieftenant-Colonell to bring up the troopes after him, to be joyned with the Kings: where, no doubt, they learned better discipline. All this did but stirre up the Imperiall Commissary Ossa, to doe the more mischiefe in those parts after they were gone. In this time, had the Count of Hanaw taken in the Towne of Drusenheim; with the two new Forts (built by the Imperialists) upon the Rhine.usenheim and ichtenaw ta∣n by the arle of Ha∣w. And the Towne of Leichtenaw after that: both being neere unto Strasburg. This Drusenheim, did the King bestow upon the Count of Hanaw for his labour. To draw neerer home. At Spiers, were 700 new Swedish Souldiors received, which were billeted both upon the Law∣yers and Fryers, as well as upon the Burgers. The first ser∣vice they did, was the saving of this faire City from burn∣ning, whereunto tenne Boores of Lauterburg had beene hy∣red:
for which they were afterwards executed.The State of Spiers, Their second service was, the quieting of a mutiny in the City; raised by occasion of the Spanish garrison of Franckendale; who upon confidence of some Correspondency in the Towne; had beene bold to come before it: and being strengthned with their fellowes of Ʋdenheim or Philipsburg, had well hoped to have taken in this Citty. But of this purpose they were defeated: and the Monks being discovered to have laid the plot with the Spanish, have Soldiors put into their Cloysters. By this it appeares, that Heidleberg, Franckendale, and Vdenheim were not hitherto so streightly blocked up, but that the Spanish would goe out with strong Partees now and then. And as for Franckendale,and of Heidle∣berg, Francken∣dale, and Vden¦heim. Don Philip de Sylva had by letters assured the Archduchesse, that he had both men and victualls enough to hold out a siege of nine moneths; in de∣spight of the King of Sweden. Nor doe I beleeve Heidle∣berg to be in worse case. And this was the State of the Pa∣latinate, and of the Kings Army, at this present. Beleeved generally it hath beene, that the King of Swe∣den (now after the taking of Creutzenach) would have put Don Philip to it, to make good his word. And feared by those of Cullen it likewise was, that he would have had a blow at them too, in the next place. But the King at this time, hearing of Tillyes being upon the wing againe; and that he had lately flowne upon Gustavus Horne about Bam∣berg: was enforced to let the Conquest of the Palatinate a∣lone for a time; to countermand his Horse, which were al∣ready upon their march to besiege Franckendale; and to accept of a kind of submission from those of Cullen. The story of which businesse, is the time now to communicate unto you. Ferdinand the Archbishop and Elector of Cullen, Bishop of Paderborn, &c. brother to the Duke of Bavaria, and a prime member of the Catholike League; is a Prince of great meanes, and of very large Iurisdiction. He was the man that set out Pappenheim: to whom when the Catholike Leaguers
had given a Commission for a flying Army, the Elector of Cullen furnisht him both with men and money, in his Domi∣nions. He, whilest the Swedish tempest was yet farre off from him in Franconia; wisely begins to thinke how to keep it off, should the wind once blow it that way. In a bodily feare of his Bishoprick he was, and could have wisht that the Empe∣rour had not proceeded so roundly against the Protestants, and so farre provoked the King of Sweden to repay the Catho∣likes in their own coyne againe for it: Was there ever such an Imperiall Decree (saies Cullen) to cause all Cloysters to be resto∣red, for which we are now losing whole Bishopricks? About the end of October, therefore, 1631. he agrees with the States of Cullen for the summoning of a Diet, to consult together a∣bout the meanes of defence: to whom his Electorall Highnesse made this following proposition. That seeing the Empire was now brought into such a strait; there was no remedy fairely to relieve it, but for the State to agree upon a good round Sub∣sidie. They consent to levie 200000 Dollars: with Conditi∣on, that the monies should be expended no otherwaies, then for the necessary defence of the Bishoprick;Diet at Cullen and for the pay∣ing of the souldiers, which they then agreed to have raised, over which one of the Counts of Isenberg was to be Generall. The money, by three even portions to be levied upon the Gentry, the Cloisters, and the severall Cities of the Bishop∣ricke. The King of Sweden working downe lower towards them, this Subsidie now proved too little: whereupon in De∣cember 14 following, the Elector sets out a Briefe for the drawing of a voluntary Contribution out of the richer sort: That for Gods sake, his Mother, and Saints cause; they would give what they could spare, towards the upholding of the Roman religion: promising that the money so given, should be to no other purpose employed: but be put into a chest with 2 locks in the Carthusians Church: of which the Prior to have one key, and his Highnesse Steward the other. The Briefe he commands to be first read in every Church, and then the Copy to be set upon the Church doores.
The same day Sennight did the Towne of Cullen set out another Briefe something contradictory to the former; for they would have a Chest placed in the Chamber of their City, to put the Benevolence into: which was to be expended for the safety of the City alone. But for all this, neither Bishop nor City durst longer trust vnto their own strengths: the Elector ioyning with the other Catholike Leaguers in sending theWho went from Cullen Ian. 7. 1631. Bishop of Wurtsburg their common Ambassador vnto the French King, to desire his pro∣tection, or mediation at least, with the King of Sweden in their behalfe. At which very time, both the Elector had his Am∣bassador with the King of Sweden, for a Neutrality; and the City their Agents, that they might not be infested. The Ele∣ctor being a member of the Catholike League; the Treaty of Neutrality with him came to nothing, but the towne of Cul∣len obtained their desire of Neutrality, upon these follow∣ing Conditions. The King of Sweden in his Preface to the Articles,The Kings A¦ticles of Neu¦trality, with t City of Culle gives them to know, That seeing his own Expedition into Germa∣ny, had principally beene for the deliverance of the Protestants, from the cruell oppressions which they endured from the Papists, and that He very well knew, how hardly they had beene used, euen in this City of Cullen: upon this Condition, first of all, would he condiscend unto a Neutrality with them; namely, that those persecutions, under whatsoever colour or pretence inflicted; should with all speed be released, and that, 1. First, Free exercise of Religion should be granted unto them; wherein they should no wayes be hindered: and that the ordinary Processe which used every yeere to be set out by the Ecclesiasticall Court, for the forbidding of such Exerci∣ses of the Protestants, should be taken away from thence∣forward. 2. That the Protestants should enioy the freedome of the Ci∣ty, and of their private Wards and Companies; and be received
into their Colledges, equally with the Catholikes: and that Act of Common-Counsaile made some yeeres to the contrary, to be cancelled. 3. Which former Article, is likewise to be vnderstood of the Protestants Children, that are borne free of the City. 4. All liberty of trade and Commerce in the said City, shall be left as free for the Protestants, as for the Catholikes. 5. Protestants shall not be bound to be married by Popish Priests. 6. Nor shall their youth be enforced to be taught or brought up, in Popish Schooles. 7. The City shall not make it selfe partaker with the Kings enemies, in any counsell or act of hostility: and shall give all ayde of Contributions unto him, and withdraw it from his enemies: whose Bills of Exchange that City shall not accept of. 8. The City shall either grant free passage and thorow-fare, both by their towne and territories vnto both parties, (the King and his enemies) or else denie it vnto both parties. 9. It shall be free for his Maiesties Officers and Servants, to passe and repasse thorow their Towne and Territories: and have free leave of staying there, for the dispatch of their bu∣sinesse. 10.The City shall give way to the King to settle an Agent of his in their Town; who shall take care that no fraud be com∣mitted in the observation of these Articles of Neutrality. 11. That vnto whosoever hath obtained of his Majesty, free li∣berty
of trafficking in the parts neere the Rhine, now subiect unto him: as also unto those that are subiects vnto his Maiesty, or Confederates, or that doe traffick with them; the City shall allow all manner of free and vndisturbed liberty of trading, within their said Towne and Territories. Vpon these easie termes did the great City of Cullen di∣vert their so much feared invasion; which they may thanke the Generall Tilly for: for had not he, at this instant, fallen on upon Gustavus Horne; Gustavus Adolphus, perchance, ere long had fallen upon Cullen. But now was it beleeved all the Kings Campe over, (yea and feared by the King himselfe too) That the Count of Tilly had utterly defeated Gustavus Horn, and beaten him all to pieces. The story of which businesse, we will here affoord you, from the hands and relations of the Generalls on both sides; Horn, and Tilly. Most gracious King: I shall here rightly enforme your Maiesty,Gustavus Horn letter to the King, concer∣ning the action betwixt him  Tilly at Bamber of all the pro∣ceedings at Bamberg. This City, though spacious, yet so o∣pen on all sides it lies; hath such slight walls about it, and so to be commanded from divers hills thereby; that my selfe and others made it a great question, whether the place were to be held or no: or whether it were possible to be so fortified, as to be fit for us to enquarter in. But the reasons for the keep∣ing of it prevailing, (especially after we made our selues sure of theHe meanes Duke William o Saxon-Weymar Duke of Weymars succours) we thereupon gave or∣der for the making of retrenchments; casting out to every Regiment, how much they were to make up. Herein the Co∣lonels and Companies of the old Regiments, did their parts: and much better would the worke have gone on, had the Count of Solms his Regiment beene used vnto labour,Tillies vant cur∣riers appeare. and not have loitered it so much. The enemy having first dressed an ambush, presented some certaine horsemen very neere unto the City, Febr. 28. betwixt 12 and one a clocke at noone: of which I being advised, gave present order for every man to be in readinesse; instantly dispatching away the Count of
Solms unto our Horse-guards without the Towne, that they should by no meanes engage themselues in fight with the ene∣my. My selfe in the meane time, hastned to goe the Round about the Trenches; commanding such places to be enclosed, as were yet open: and sending the Lord Kochtitzky withall, unto Colonel Bauditzens Regiment, to put themselues into rea∣dinesse; which Regiment was in their quarters at that time within the City.orne prepares r resistance. But Kochtitzky not meeting with any of the Officers, sent the word unto Lieftenant-Colonell Bilaw by a horseman of the Regiment: whose message Bilaw mis-under∣standing, marched presently into the field, even very neere unto the Ambush. When I comming to the Horse-guards saw the Regiment so farre advanced, I imagined them to be in very great danger, and that they would put us all into confusion, should they be once forced to the retreat: whereupon I gave present order for them to retire againe into the Suburbs. In the meane time, (seeing none of the enemies to appeare, but a few loose horse onely, which had at first shewed themselues before the little wood neere the towne side) my selfe and the Count of Solms, went to give order to every horse-Regiment for their place of Alarme: at which instant, those horse-troopes which I had before sent over the water for discove∣ry; came backe with newes of the enemies being at hand with his whole Army,illy comes ith his whole rmy, even very close unto the City. Vpon this newes, I sent present order unto Lieftenant-Colonell Bilaw by the Quarter-master of his Regiment, that he should retire himselfe behind the Work, which Count Solms his Regiment were now labouring upon; and there to stay for the safeguard of the Pioners. This my Order was executed indeed; but so late ere they went about it; that in their turning faces about to goe thither, two Regiments of the enemy charged them up∣on their croopes,d takes part  Horns works. and disordered them. At which sight, the Regiment of Solms, (who were to have made good their own trenches) being much affrighted and confounded; presently quit their station thereupon. And notwithstanding that my selfe, (so soone as I was enformed of the matter) made haste
with the Count of Solms vnto the very place where the ene∣my was already fallen in; and with some few men (whom we made to turne faces about) drove the enemy quite out againe;Horne beates them off agai recovered our ground, and round beset it againe with some of the Count of Solms and Colonell Mufflers Regiment: for we could not possibly so soone bring on any of the old Regi∣ments, out of their Quarters within the City, and the other Suburbs. Yet was all this to no purpose, seeing that no sooner was my backe turned to give order for other places; but they presently left their ground againe, running at last quite over the bridge into the City: yea doe what I and their own Co∣lonell the Count of Solms could,Henry William Count of Sol wounded. Which woun putting him into a feaver, died in Marc following of at Swinford. (who was now shot in the thigh) yet were we not able to make them to stand their ground a little, nor give on againe upon the enemy. Hereupon, one Foote-Regiment of the enemies, (which we iudged to be Fa∣renbachs) pressed over the bridge into the Towne; whom I, with a few muskettiers of the Count of Thurns Regiment, (which were quickly seconded by the Swedish muskettiers) once againe drove off; and that with remarkeable losse on their party. Thus recovered I the bridge againe, which presently causing to be broken downe; I there disputed the point so long with the enemy,They get ov the bridge; a Horne drives thē over again untill I could send away the drosse and baggage keepers of the Army, and had taken all our Ordnance off the Carriages, and gotten them a ship-boord. This done, I in good order marcht off with the Infantery, the horsemen of Bauditzens Regiment, and the Dragooners: which last, missing their way in the darke, gat into Kitzing afterwards. All our Company, safely recovered into Eltman: at which towne passing over the bridge,Horne retires out of Bambet over the May I kept me on this side of the Mayn. The enemies Dragooners and Crabats, fol∣lowed us a farre off; not much desiring to engage themselues with us. As for the other Regiments of our horse, who were enquartered part on this side of the Mayn, and part at Halstat and Kemeren, (who likewise marched away on the North side of the Mayn) they having according to my direction, broken and burnt downe the bridge of Halstat, retired into
Hasfurt. For this reason, my selfe having first broken downe the bridge at Eltman,eaking the ridge behind m. drew also to that place with those troopes I then had with me; where I recollected our Army together againe; those onely excepted, which out of feare were quite runne away. But the enemy being readily furni∣shed by the country people with timber and other necessaries, he presently caused the bridge of Halstat to be repaired againe:illy repaireth e bridge, and llowes Horn. beyond which having lodged himselfe, with divers Regi∣ments of horse, he the second of March againe shewed him∣selfe unto us at Tzeill, a mile from Hasfurt. Vpon sight where∣of, I immediately sent forth a troope of horse to discover the place, where it was possible for the enemy so suddenly to have passed the river, now that the bridge was broken downe. This troope brought backe 3 prisoners with them; of whom I learned, how that the enemy had come over at Halstat with 4 Regiments, and the manner how they were lodged. Of them I also further enquired, which way I might come to surprise them at unawares; so that I sifted out thus much from them; That it was not very difficult for me to march thorow the woods, and by waies, and so to come upon them. Having gotten this Intelligence, I set forwards with the Cavallery; and some 2 houres before day, gave a Camisado upon one of their Quarters, which was lodged by Oberheyd within a mile of Bamberg. It was the Quarter of Planckharts Regiment, and young Merodi, all which, (excepting 4 troopes which some halfe houre before were gone out upon a Convoy) I utterly ruinated with fire and sword,Horn surprises and cuts in pie∣ces 2 Regimēts of Tillies horse. obtaining 2 Cornets; the rest, together with the baggage, being all burned. The Crabats which lay in the head of the Quarter, so soone as ever they perceived the businesse, betooke them to their heeles; some venturing thorow the Mayn, where a many of them were drowned: others betaking themselves into the mountaines; of whom divers were afterwards slayne, I getting one of their Cornets: the rest gate up to the Dragooners Quarters, in the village of Staffelbach; where they recovered a Church∣yard environed with a very high wall. These thought I to
have destroyed by fire, for that I had no muskettiers with me: but perceiving my selfe unlikely that way to prevaile, and that they might easily have beene relieved from other the enemies garrisons, (which were hard at hand) I was enfor∣ced to give them over, and returne againe unto our Quarters at Hasfurt. The fourth of the same moneth did the enemy againe shew himselfe, neere unto Tzeill,Tilly intends be revenged about one a clocke in the afternoone; marching presently with his whole army towards Hasfurt: with an intent (no doubt) to revenge himselfe of the late slaughter we made of his two Regiments. Whilest therefore I sent the Scullery and Drabblers of the army away before, with the baggage & heavier luggage towards Schwein∣furt; my selfe retired after in good order: without the losse of any one man, recovering into Schweinfurt also. Here having given order for all necessary provisions, and left there in garrisons the Regiments of Carl Hord, of Colonel Truch∣ses and the Count of Solms: and lodged the Horse conve∣niently in the villages about Schweinfurt; (some, halfe a mile off; some, a mile; and some, a mile and a halfe from the Town, and behind it) my selfe with the rest of the Infantery, tooke up our Quarter at Geltersheim; attending there the enemies fur∣ther purposes. Geltersheim, March. 7. 1631. Having thus by Gustavus Horns relation, learned what was done on his side; we will also affoord you the other part of the action, and what was done on Tillyes side. And that out of his owne Relation too, printed afterwards at Aus∣purg: leaving nothing out that may make for the Relaters glory. General Tilly report of the same action. After the Swedish had taken Bamberg, February 11. 1631. the Lord Marshall Gustavus Horn, together with George Bernard Duke of Saxon-Weymar, settled their Quarter in the same City. But long they here stayed not: for his Ex∣cellency
the Count of Tilly marching with 12000 men out of Forcheim,Observe that Hornes letter eares the old tile; and Til∣es the new. illy (againe) as deceived: it as not Duke ernard of Wey∣ar, (he was ow with the ing:) but his rother Ernestus March 8. towards Bamberg; the same night about 4 a clocke he shewed himselfe before the same City; as like∣wise the Swedish Cavallery did unto him, neere unto the gal∣lowes. The Tillyish Horsemen stood not long considering up∣on the matter, but the Crabats, the Dragooners, and the Re∣giment of Cronenberg, fell with such fury upon the Swedish, that they utterly dispersed them; forced five Regiments to runne away; tooke five hundred prisoners (amongst which were some chiefe Officers) killing a great many. The Swedish retired themselues into the Suburbs, but they were so follow∣ed with our Ordnance, that they were glad to leave both City and Suburbs: Gustavus Horn with a few horsemen, be∣taking himselfe into Schweinfurt. Here was the noble Count of Sultz slaine on our side, besides another Lieftenant-Co∣lonell of great note. The next day being the ninth of March, the Generall Tilly entered into the City with his Ordnance. By comparing these two relations together, you may ob∣serue, that Gustavus Horn omits his losse of 500 prisoners; and Generall Tilly is content to passe over his losse of the two Regiments, which was 4 times so much. One thing is defe∣ctive in Tillies relation: that he saies Horn immediately reti∣red into Schweinfurt: which was not till 3 or 4 dayes after. Tilly had the better of it, in that he put Horn unto the retreate, and continued after it, Master of the field. And yet was all this but a meere Cacade, a Squirt; as the King cald it: which was, for all that, the first action of any consi∣derable honor or comfort, which those of that party could cheere up their drooping hopes withall, since the going down of their side at the great Battell of Leipsich. Much noyse, was there made of this little. They that make much of little, tis a sign they have not much. By Gustavus Horns letter may the Rea∣der find, where the fault on the Swedish side was: in the Count of Solms his Regiment, namely; who had not beene long enough under the Swedish Discipline, to learne either to
You may per¦ceive by the 45 Article in our Booke of the Swedish Disci∣pline, that eve¦ry Band and Regiment wer to be their ow Pyoners, to make up their own Trenches and to fortifie their owne Quarters: which Solms his men were not yet used unto.labour, or to fight. Horn (me thinks) was to blame too, to be so carelesse, as to have no skouts abroad. The King having heard of Horns forsaking of Bamberg, some 4 or 5 dayes before the receipt of his letter; resolues to succour his Felt-Marshall, and to be revenged of that Ʋeillard (that old man) as he called the Count of Tilly. Whilest therefore his Maje∣sty is employed in drawing his old souldiers out of their gar∣risons neere unto him; in putting of new levied men into their places; and in dispatching away Messengers unto Duke William of Saxon-Weymar, and the Generall Banier, to come and meete him with their forces upon the way: it shall not be amisse to goe backe againe, to fetch up Gustavus Hornes Story; even from the time of the Kings former leaving of him in Franconia, untill this last businesse of Bamberg, betwixt him and the Count of Tilly. For this hath beene our Methode in the First part of our Intelligencer.
Gustavus Hornes Story. THERE is (at least) a show of force, as well as a reality of wise carriage & gentle usage; required to the setling of a Country, as there hath been to the conquering. Whereas, therefore, the King of Sweden in his late Declaration or Manifesto at Wurtsburg, had ende∣vored to reduce the Dukedome and Bishopricke of Franconia into the forme of a Province; by introducing (as the Romanes used) a new order of Government among the subjects of his new Duchy: to see these Orders there well observed, was one of the reasons why Gustavus Horne, the Field-marshall, or second person unto the King himselfe; was at his Majesties comming away left with an army of 6000 or 7000 men about Wurtsburg. And this, I collect, by the stillnesse of actions in those parts; to have beene the first of his businesse. I find no mention of any motions of his, all that moneth of Octo∣ber; in the beginning whereof the King parted from him. Another reason for which quietnesse of his, may likewise be; that he was not to stirre from those parts, till the Gene∣rall Tilly were gone out of them; and that for feare of his attempts, or the peoples desire of alterations. But the Count of Tilly being now in the end of November past beyond Norimberg; his devided army gone towards Bavaria and the upper Palatinate; and the Subjects of Fran∣conia withall, in an indifferent posture of quietnesse: then begins the Swedish Marshall to looke about him. Tilly in his late march from the King towards Norimberg, had with small labour recovered the townes of Mergentheim, Winshim and Rotenburg from the Swedish: these Townes therefore, so
soone as Tillyes backe was turnd, are in the first place set up∣on. The City of Kitzing (a good Towne, some twelve Eng∣lish miles to the East of Wurtsburg) is by the beginning of De∣cember brought to composition:Kitzing takes the oath of fidelity. This Towne, anciently be∣longing unto the Marquess of Onspach, wa Anno 1629. taken from them by the Emperor, and given to the Bishop of Wurtsburg. upon the fourth of which month, it takes the Oath of Fidelity, unto the King and Crowne of Sweden. This (that I may tell you once for all) is the forme of Oath generally tendered by the King, unto the Germanes: and this is the clause that stickes in their stomakes most, and makes a many of them to boggle at it; in that (namely) they sweare not unto the Roman Empire, but to the Crowne of Sweden; as if hereafter they were to be meere Provincialls of that Kingdome. Whether this were solely the impulsive, or but the assisting cause onely, I cannot tell: but this is sure, that the Kings broad Seale and Commission for the said Oath, was the same night privately torne downe from the doore of the Guildhall or Statehouse, where it had beene affixed. This Act discovering, that there were some Imperially affected in the Towne, and casting a jealousie upon all; the Cittizens are therefore generally disarmed. Winshaim, in the next place,Winshaim take in a garrison. a free City upon the small River of Aisch (some tenne English miles to the South-East of Kitzing) accepts of a garrison of 400 Swedish. More Westerly also, and towards the head of the said River, and neere unto Rotenburg, is Gebsattle (as I find it written) pre∣sently upon that, likewise taken. The Towne of Mergen∣theim, seated more Westerly upon the River Tauber; is now about the middle of December, againe set upon. Here did the Tillian garrison make some resistance at the first: but the Marshall Horn fetching more men and Cannon out of Wurtsburg; first of all defeats 800 new-come Imperialists, who had thought to have forc't a Quarter, and to have thrust themselves into the Towne.Mergentheim recovered. The garrison after this being more roundly besieged, and for two or three dayes battered; perceiving by the defeate of the former, no more succors likely to relieve them: they on Fryday, December 16. come to a composition. The next day, having obtained Souldi∣ours
conditions, of Armes, Bag and baggage, &c. they march out towards Nordlingen: whereabout their Generall Tilly then was. The Imperill City of Rotenburg upon the Tauber, in which Count Tilly had also left a very good garrison of Altringers people; is dayly now infested by the neighbour Swedish, out of Winshaim and Gebsattle. Those of Winshaim, keepe their gates open both day and night, to be the readier to goe out upon Partees against the Rotenburgers:enburg bloc∣ up and the Tillians of the Towne wanting Horsemen (as it appeareth) were cut short by that meanes of those excursions and Cavalcadoes, which they were formerly wont to make out upon the Coun∣try. The Towne being thus (in a manner) blockt up by the Swedish; generall Altringer (then with Tilly at Nordlingen) prepares to relieve his souldiors within it, or else to get them out of it. For this purpose, had he already drawne some of his men together in the upper Palatinate; with whom, and with eight Peeces of Ordnance, he put himselfe upon his march: threatning, that when he had done with that Towne, to goe further and fall into the Duchy of Wirtenberg also. d yeelded.But his men had yeelded before he could come; and Gusta∣vus Horn, to be before-hand with him, was gone to besiege Hailbrun; the first good Towne that way-ward, of all the land of Wirtenberg. Vpon this newes, Altringer in the end of the month retired backe againe over the Danuby towards Ausburg: where I find him the seventeenth of Ianuary fol∣lowing. He gone, the Swedes left by Horn in Franconia, flye out as farre as Guntzenhausen; a good towne at the end of the forest, a little South of Onspach; in the way towards Norimberg and the upper Palatinate. This Citty of Hailbrun is an Imperiall Towne, but of the Protestant Conversion: and is the place, where the Princes of that Vnion used heretofore to keepe their Diets.Guntzenhausen aken. It stands in the Duchy of Wirtenberg upon the River Neckar; within eighteene or twenty English miles of Heidleberg. Into this Towne, had the Imperiall Commissary Ossa about the end of
November before, thrust some tenne Ensignes of Lorrayners: which were the Duke of Pfalzburgs owne Regiment.Hailbrun bes∣ged. For the maintenance of whom, was there a Contribution of 4000 Gilders a month, laid upon the Gentlemen of the Country: and the Townsmen charged to find them Bread, Wine, Salt, Firing, Candles and House-roome. Towards freeing of this Towne, Gustavus Horn now converts his forces. Vpon Tuesday night, Decemb. 20. he all on the sudden and in the darke, encompasses the City: to which he the next morning gives summons by a Trumpet. The Lorrayners answer was lowder then the Trumpets demaund; for they set their Canno∣niers to make it. Horn falling to worke with the spade, and to bring forward his Approaches, he a little after dinner, dispatches two Trumpets more with letters unto the Burgo∣master and the Townsmen. The Contents were, to per∣swade them to get the Lorrayners out of their Towne; and to doe their best to dispatch them quickly too: for long he would not tarry upon it, and loth he was to use extremities to a Towne of his owne Religion; which they should doe well not to put him to. The Lorrayn Governor labours, on the other side, to hold the Cittizens in their obedience to the Emperour; and encourages then to resist the Swedish. But they being carefull to save their houses from spoyling by the Cannon and Granadoes, and from being plundered by the Swedish, if they should be taken by Scaladoe; refuse to manne their walls, or to joyne with the Lorrayners. Horn by the next morning, had brought his Lines as farre as the water∣mill, a little without the Walls, wherein some sixty or seven∣ty Lorrayners were lodged. The mill being blowne open with a Petard, is entred by the Swedish: and the execution begun among the Lorrayners: but by the mediation of a French Captaine of Dragooners, then serving among the Swedish, was the slaughter stayed. Before this mill the Swedish casting up a Brest-worke and a Battery: sorely beat upon the Fort or Cittadel of the Towne, lying right over against it. Per∣ceiving after a few houres, that his Cannon would make a
breach fit to be stormed, he once againe demands up the place by a Trumpet. The garrison by this time, iealous both of the Townsmens fidelity, and of the weakenesse of the place (which indeed is no strong piece) beginne to shew a willingnesse to capitulate:taken. and their conditions being accepted, halfe of them march out, and the other halfe take oath for the King of Sweden. Horn enters to keepe his Christmas in the Towne: and the first Holy-dayes being over, and in the neerenesse of the Kings army, no more neede of him in those parts; leaving five hundred muskettiers in the City, and Colonell Schmidberger for their Governour: he with the rest of the Army, returnes backe againe into Franconia. His first worke there, was a preparation to fall into the Bishop of Bambergs country:rn prepares goe into nberg. who had by this time more apparently broken his former faith unto the King, and recei∣ved of Tillies garrisons into his strongest Townes of Bam∣berg, Forcheim, and Cronach. More of the Tillians and others, beganne now to assemble about Hasfurt upon the Mayn; there to be mustered and entertained into the Bishops service. Gu∣stavus Horn, after his comming backe from Hailbrun, goes first unto Winshaim; to which place he gathers all his forces together, that had beene engarrisond, betweene that and Ro∣tenburg. Thence goes he to Iphoven, a small towne but one Dutch mile to the East of Kitzing; where he holds a generall muster: and to which place he had brought his Cannon along with him. Here I find him, Ianuary 14: which was in the time of the 14 dayes Truce aforesaid. And hereabouts (as I collect) might the Kings letters for a Cessation of Armes (da∣ted at Hoest 4 dayes afore) come first unto his hands. And from these parts, (having little else to doe) went he unto No∣rimberg, to giue order there for the Fortifications of the City. Here was it agreed,es to see imberg. that Henry William Count of Solms should bring his Regiment out of Norimberg, to ioyne with him a∣gainst Bamberg. This is the Count, that had so resolutely de∣fended Norimberg against Tilly, in recompence of which ser∣vice,
the King had honoured him with the Earledome of Swartzenberg in the Forest of Duringen. Horn made no long stay in Norimberg; seeing that some few dayes before the end of the Truce, I find him at Schwein∣furt upon the Mayn, full sixe leagues backe againe beyond Iphoven, and upon the edge of the Bishoprick of Bamberg. Hither now cald he all his Army; and hither did Ernestus Duke of Saxon-Weymar, whom the King had left Governour of Konigshoven (sixe leagues to the North of Schweinfurt) come to ioyne with him Duke. William of Saxon-Weymar should likewise have come to him. That some of this Dukes forces that had beene left about Erfurt, were already sent unto his brother Ernestus, I beleeve: but that himselfe was in the end of December passed by the Duringer-waldt, as farre as Maini∣gen towards Horn; and that he had 4000 horse and 8000 foot with him, (as the short and falseI find the Co¦tinuation of th Arma Suecica to be little el then an abbre¦viation of the Corrantoes hu¦dled together, without much iudgemēt. Lik as in this plac where for a se∣cond error he puts Memmin∣gen for Mainig Horn fals into Bamberg. Arma Suecica sayes) I be∣leeve not: seeing he had but 1500 horse to bring unto the King afterwards at Donawert. But whether it were, that Duke William were at this instant diverted upon the taking of Passages in Voitland, to keepe the Tillians from comming out of the Vpper Palatinate into Misnia, (his cosin the Ele∣ctor of Saxonies country) as I heare it by some excused; or that he was still about Gottingen in Westphalia, which I iudge rather: or what-ever else were in it: Horn, certainely, com∣plaines to the King of it, That those Saxon forces which he so much relyed upon; were not time enough sent unto him, be∣fore that Tilly beat him out of Bamberg. Gustavus Horn being gone by, there was a conspiracy de∣tected in Wurtsburg for the bringing in of Tilly againe. The intercepted letters desire Tilly to come with all speed, for that now was his time to take both Towne and Castle a∣gaine very easily; the most of the garrison being now drawne out towards Bamberg. This caused some of the Citizens to be laid hold of, and the place to be better guarded afterwards. No sooner were the 14 dayes of Truce expired, but Gusta∣vus Horn falls into the Bishoprick of Bamberg: which he
might have sooner done, for that the King had refused to grant any Neutrality at all unto that Bishop. The countrey was much affrighted at his comming; and the Bishop sends for aides unto the Count of Tilly: making meanes unto Co∣lonell Slammersdorff of Norimberg, to take off Horn, if it were possible. Horns first designe was upon Hochstat; a pretty Towne upon the river Aisch, betwixt Kitzing and Forcheim. Towards this, he upon Saterday, Ianuary 28. sending a small Partee or forlorne Hope before; they were set upon and bea∣ten backe by 50 Imperiall Horse: who being come out of Bamberg to seeke their adventure, had disposed themselues in close ambush in a small Dorp upon the way. More of the Swedish now comming in to the reskue, the Imperialists are forced to flee the next way into Forcheim. Horn bring∣ing his men before the Towne, beating it a little with nine Peeces of Cannon, and by a casuall shot wounding the Maior;ochstat taken. the garrison (who were three hundred men) the next day give up the place: the most of them also be∣comming souldiers unto the Swedish. But before the yeel∣ding up, out of Forcheim comes the Imperiall Colonell D' Espagni, with some five hundred Horse and as many Foote, hoping to relieve it. Three Cornets of the Count of Solms his Horse, being on the other side of the river on which the Towne standeth; were now resolutely char∣ged by D'Espagni. Solms his men sending to call in the Bo∣hemian Baron Kochtitzki, the Imperialists retire upon it; not making head at all, till they came within a mile of For∣cheim. Hereabouts the five hundred Imperiall Foote finding an advantage; dispose themselues into an Ambush: part thereof being in a Dorp, and part in a Church-yard; where they waited for the Swedish. Hard it went with the Swedish, at the first Encounter; divers common souldiers, two Lief∣tenants, three Cornets, two Rit-masters, and fourty or fifty Horsemen were either slaine or spoyled. The Lord Kochtitzki (their Colonell) being after a while shot in one of his armes, and in some danger; was bravely reskued by his Lief∣tenant-Colonell:
and his men, now all enraged, charging more fiercely upon the Imperialists, beate them after a while out of the village; kill divers both of Horse and Foote; and keep a great many prisoners.The Imperi∣alists forsake Bamberg. This defeate of D'Espagni being known to the garrison of Bamberg, they immediatly fall to pillage the City and to forsake it: retyring themselues into Forcheim, as into a place much stronger. Vpon Wednesday, February 1. Gustavus Horn sends five Cornets of Horse, and two Ensignes of Foote, to demand up the City of Bamberg, the chiefe Towne of the Bisho∣prick, though not the strongest. Tis seated upon the North∣easterly banke of the Main, over which it hath a bridge. The Citizens being guilty of the weakenesse of the place, and the day before forsaken by their garrison; begin to en∣ter into capitulation with the Swedish, absolutely agreeing to yeeld up their Towne unto them. Iust whilest this was a doing, five hundred Boores of the Traine-bands of Cronach and thereabouts, thrusting themselues on the contrary side into the Towne, fall presently aboord with the Swedish, laying lustily at them to beate them out againe. The Townes∣men perceiving this, they strike in with their Boores like∣wise: and whereas there were some more of the Swedish, by this time come before the wals; they shut to their gates against them, with Cannon and Musket shot letting fly amaine a∣mongst them. This continued untill midnight; by which time the Swedish Horse within, beginning to prove too hard for the Boores; and those without, now also breaking in, terribly affrighted the perfidious Townsmen with a feare of having their throates cut, every Mothers sonne of them. But they now throwing downe their Armes in the Market∣place, and running to hide themselues where they could:Bamberg wo by the Swedis the Swedish being indifferently appeased by the pillage of their houses, scorne in cold blood to meddle with a Citizen. Thus fatall hath it beene, to those of this City and Bishop∣ricke; to breake their faiths unto the King of Sweden. Newes of all this is sent immediately unto Gustavus Horn
at Hochstat; who comming into the City, takes up his lodg∣ing in the Geierswer, and leaves the Bishops Palace for Duke Ernestus. The Country hereupon to avoid plundering, send to Bamberg to make their agreement; out of whom, one or other, Gustavus Horn drew a present ransome of 400000 Rix dollars. February-fill-dike (as if he feared to lose his good name) began now so naturally to play his part; and the season here∣upon proved so rainy;orn hindred y the raine. that Horn was not able, (especially with his Cannon and Carriages) to stirre any where abroad into the Country. The chiefe service he could doe, was this, that his Horse upon a faire day now and then, fell out against those of Forcheim. This one accident, hindered the King of Sweden, of finishing the conquest of the Bishopricke of Bamberg. The Bishop hearing of the taking of this Towne; flees with all speed towards the upper Palatinate. February 3. he went to Ʋilseck; the next day to Amberg: and in the end of the moneth, unto Ratisbone, and so into Bavaria. It was his chance upon the way, to meet with Lieftenant-Generall Cratz and the Count of Sultz; who with 3000 men, and some pieces of Ordnance, were come from Amberg and Weiden, to relieve Forcheim: which they had heard (but falsely) to be besieged. They were already advanc't as farre as Averbach and beyond it; within some thirty English miles,atz comming gainst Horn, turned backe gaine by the ing Bishop  Bamberg. or lesse, of Forcheim. Here understanding by the Bi∣shop, that Gustavus Horn was too strong for so small a number; they retire their forces backe againe unto Aver∣bach. This was upon the third of February: which very day the Bishop went forward unto Ʋilsech, sixe English miles be∣yond Averbach. Gustavus Horn was faine to containe himselfe within Bam∣berg all the rainy season: able to doe no other service, but to fortifie the Towne a little; which was not indeed to be made sensible. No iniury at all did he unto the Clergy of Bamberg: except this might be mistaken for an offence; To have endea∣voured
the saving of their soules, by causing the Protestant Religion to be publikely preached in their Cathedrall. Towards the end of the moneth, it began to freeze; so that no sooner were the earth and ice become hard enough to beare his Ord∣nance, but he prepares for the siege of Forcheim.While Horn provides to go against For∣cheim, Tilly comes against him. From which designe how he was taken off by the Count of Tilly, we have before told you. Since, now, that we have twice before made mention of the Generall Tilly; it shall not be amisse, in this very place, to bring up his Story from the Battell of Leipsich, unto this mee∣ting of his with Horn: and then leave him a while againe, till he be ready for his second and finall overthrow. The first part of his Story, might (tis true) have beene brought in before the first mention of him, when in October he drew neere un∣to the King: but for that it would have too much broken off the Kings Story, I thought better to put it here all together.
Generall Tillyes Proceedings. NO one Act of this brave Chieftaines hath made him so much spoken of, (and with respect too) as that misfortune of his at the Battell of Leipsich. Vulgar people dye, and are forgotten: but this shewes how great a part of the world, and how principall a personage this man was, who still gave occasion to the first question of Newes, Is Tilly yet alive? To satisfie the Rea∣ders that he was not dead, (no nor never lay by it) we will here present you with the Diary or Iournall of his first shif∣tings up and downe. And these be the Gifts of his Progresse. He was defeated at Leipsich, September 7. 1631. From whence turning himselfe to the Westward (like the declining Sunne) and keeping along by the River Sala; he flees first unto Hall:The way of his flight. where he gat his wounds dressed; and whence together with the Counts of Furstenberg and Pappenheim, away the next day hee hasted. Bending then a little to the North-West-ward; to Ascherleben hee hyes: where upon Fryday, September ninth, hee arryved. Hence wrote hee unto Generall Altringer: and this was the Copy of his Letter. His Letter un∣to Altringer.My Lord, I am now arryved at Ascherleben: where I have a purpose and resolution to r'allee as many of our scattered and dispersed troopes, as we can possibly get together againe in this DukedomeOf Bruns∣wicke.. I now write this my fourth letter unto you, to acquaint you with my desires: and earnestly withall to require you, that you keepe your selfe in a continuall ready∣nesse, and stand upon your guard with your whole army, in the best manner that you can. We cannot yet learne, which way the enemy is likely to turne his Armes; he may perhaps
make towards you: for which reason I could advise you, that for your better safetie and securitie, you would hasten to joyne your selfe unto those troopes of ours which are already in Hessen; and altogether to assault the Landtgraves forces, as lively as possibly you can. I desire you, that as time will give you leave; you acquaint me with the newes of your parts, and the order of your proceedings. Your letters may be conueighed to me by the way of Halberstat: whereabouts I am as yet, and am likely for a while to continue. Ascherleben, September 9/19. 1631. Your very well affectioned, Iohn, Count of Tilly. Hence goes he onwards into the Dukedome of Bruns∣wicke, unto Halberstat: which is full fourescore English miles from the place of the late battel. Here finds he 18 troops of his owne horse, which had beene gotten thither before him. Now (in Brunswick-land) was Tilly at home, (as it were:) for hereabouts had the Emperour bestowed divers lands and Lordships upon him, which had belonged unto Christian late Duke of Brunswick and Bishop of Halberstat, whom Tilly had ouerthrowne. Vpon the Church doores all herea∣bouts, sets he up his Si quisses and his Patents:Tilly gathe his army a to give notice unto such of his Colonells and Captaines, as were yet fleeing they knew not whither: where they might find him, and such fragments of their owne troopes, as were already heard of. Perceiving himselfe not yet safe enough hereabouts, for that some of the Swedish Horse were even now skowring the coast up and downe, even upon the frontiers of this Bruns∣wick-land and Magdenburg; so nettled he was at the newes of it; that even old and wounded though he were, yet upon Tuesday, Septemb. 13. (the sixth day after the battell) away from Halberstat he speeds for life. The (new) Administrator of
Halberstat, Iohn Reinhard Metternich, he takes away with him; and all the Souldiors of the neighbour garrisons. Thence scapes he to Osterwick, foure leagues further: and so along in the Bishopricke of Hildesheim. Bending here a little more southerly; unto Alfeldt (tenne or eleven leagues further) he comes,e continues s flight. upon Satterday Septemb. 17, just tenne dayes after the battell. In which time, (allowing him the neerest way, and by a line too) he had gone full seven score English miles of ground. The reliques of his army had runne as fast as he too; so that well might it be called a flying march. But to make it more possible to beleeve; namely, that his Foote should have gotten thus farre in this short time; you are to take notice, that they had beene well lightned of their Armes and Luggage: so that hither they recovered, all light and unarmed. Being here out of Gun-shot, he now makes his second stay, for the gathering up of more remaines of his army. Hence after a while sloaping a little to the South-West, to Huxter he goes in the Bishopricke of Corbey in Westphalia: whither he recovered, Septemb. 25: having first laid a bridge over the faire River of Weser, for the passage of his people. Here begins he to forme an Army againe; to augment which, he hath a re-enforcement of 3000 Foote, and 2000 Horse (as some write) out of the diocesse of Cullen: which might indeed easily enough come up to him thorow the County of Waldeck. Here also he recruits his old shatterd Regiments with some few levyes;ly formes a  Army. and hither from Hamelen (a Towne some sixe leagues to the Northward of Huxter; and on the same side of the Weser) came there twelve peeces of Can∣non, and such other necessaryes of warre, as that Magazine afforded. All these hee had before sent for, to meete him there. It is a very good place for an army to be formed in; for hereabouts are abundance of pretty fine Townes, a rich Country, and which had not of late been rifled. By this time, was he said to have an Army of 10000 men together: which supposing to be true; then it plainely appeares, that he never,
hitherto, had re-assembled full 5000 of his old army. This observation is to be made good by this argument: that the 5000 which were sent him from Cullen, and these other new levyed men too; are all to be discounted out of those ten thousand. Perceiving a likelyhood of some stirres hereabout (which did indeed breake outBy the risi of the Duke Lunenburg an the Bishop o Bremen, and the Landgrav of Hessen. a little after that) he leaves the Count of Gronsfelt in that new made leaguer with part of the forces, to be his Lieftenant in the parts upon the Weser. Within two or three dayes after, himselfe with the greatest part of the Army, marches unto Warburg in the Bishopricke of Pader∣born; which standeth upon the river Dimel, that parteth this Bishoprick from the land of Hessen. The reason of his draw∣ing towards these quarters was, to meete with Altringer, Fugger and Mansvelt, whom he had written unto: as also to be neerer to the Count of Sultz; who was on the other side of Hessen, betwixt Fulda and the Mayn. And these were the forces which Tilly mentioned in his Letters to Altringer, to be in the land of Hessen. The Duke of Lorrayn also with his Army, was now upon the march thitherward; and unto all these, had Tilly written to come and meete him. Having perfecter notice at this place of the Kings being gone beyond Erfurt towards Franconia; and that he had left pursuing of him: he turnes more Southerly upon it. Keeping himselfe therefore upon the very edges of Waldeck, and Hessen (a small River being his guide) he comes first unto Gudersberg, two miles West of the River of Fulda: which his men plun∣der and burne. Thence more Southerly still,Tilly falls into Hessen. unto Fritzlar in Hessen, twenty English miles from Warburg: which the Landgrave had newly taken from the Elector of Mentz.Takes Fritzlar This was the last day of September. October the second, forward he moves againe: spoyling Bercken the same day, a Dutch league from Fritzlar. This he did, to flesh his souldiors up∣on an enemies countrey. That night, was there a Partee sent to Bischehausen; a small open village, a league beyond that. Hither had the countrey Boores driven their cattell; for that
the village is on three sides fenced by two small rivers, which meete at it. A troope of the Landgraves Horse, had the poore people also for their protection. The Tillians flye upon this booty, beate the Boores and their guards; and begin to drive away their cattell. The garrison of Zigenhaim (a good strong towne of the Landgraves, some five English miles to the South of that) comming time enough in to the rescue, beat off the Tillians againe. Both parties being re-inforced by their owne; some 300 are slaine on one side or other; and Tilly being onward on his march, those of his were faine to leave the skirmish, and follow after the army. Thus the fray parted, the Tillians marching off, with the Hessens cattell. The next day, Tuesday, October 4, going on stil Southerly; he effects what he so much desired,e ioynes with Altringer, &c. the uniting of his army with Altringer and Fugger: with whom the Count of Mansvelts forces were now also conioyned. To fetch up whose Story, let us now goe backe againe, and so goe with them along alltogether. This Henry Otho Lord Fugger, is one of the Fuggers of Auspurg, who are the greatest Family of Merchants and Bank∣ers of all Europe. As for Altringer, his good parts meerly had preferd him: a thing rare in the Empire, where Gentry is so much stood upon.The Story of Altringer and Fugger. The sonne he was of a Towne-Clerke, or such like Pen and inckhorne-man, which kind of vocation is too much dis-respected in Germany. His education was first in the Ʋniversities: and after that, in the Chancery at Prague; where he was first a Clerke, and then an Advocate. His rare learning, (for he hath one of the best penns of Ger∣many) and his sharpe wit, preferred him quickly from that place. Applying himselfe unto the warres; he was (to omit the rest) with Command employed into Italy, in the late warres of Mantua: which being ended, he returned with his army into Germany. How he pieced in with Fugger, and how up∣on the hearing of Tillies defeate at Leipsich, they both retyred thorow the Duringer Forrest; I leave to be read in my First
Part. Some 6000 men, they were both together said to have at that time: with whom they first of all retired unto Isenach. About Fulda lay one of the Counts of Mansfelt (of which there be 5 Families) with whom they now conioyned. Their army they more encreased, with some new levies of such poore and young people, as they could in that haste and feare, ramble up together. Altringer, upon the receipt of Tillies letters, beginnes to turne that way towards him. Keeping the river of Werra close upon their right hand, they upon Tues∣day, September 27. arrive at Munden,They march ioyne with T in the Northern edge of Hessen-land; where the river Fulda falleth into the Werra. Thorow this Towne, they were marching from 8 to 4 the next day, and were reported to be 54 Cornets of Horse, and 82 Companies of Foote; some 10000 or 11000 men in all perchance: of which, a many were observed to be boyes and raw souldiers. About halfe a league without Munden, they the same day pitcht their Campe: expecting that Tilly should thither have comne unto them. Tilly, to the same end, was some 2 dayes since, comne as neere to them as Warburg; some 18 or 20 Eng∣lish miles to the North-East of Munden. The armies now hea∣ring one of another, and that the Landgrave of Hessen was with his forces, at that time, neere unto his owne Towne of Cassel upon the river of Fulda; they determine both together to fall into his Country; Tilly on the West side of the river Fulda, and Altringer upon the East; to spoyle that first, and then to conioyne their forces. This last, they the 4 of October thorowly performed. Being united, they might altogether make up some 18000 men, Horse and Foote; but ill cloath'd and arm'd, God knowes. Their first march was to Grebenaw; a walled Towne some 4 English miles from the river Fulda, which runneth thorow the middest of Hessen. Here they pitch, and rest some night or two, to consult and order their businesse. Thence goe they to Schlicz: a good towne, so named of the river it stands up∣on. Hence, October 6 to Fulda, a great Abby where they
againe stay and muster. I take no notice of Gallobelgicus his nū∣bers; who as he allowes 18000 men to Altringer alone, so he affoords 182 troopes of Horse unto both together, beside a very great number of Foote also. Gallobelgicus (I perceive) goes by Geometricall proportion, makes London measure now and then, and tels sixescorce to the hundred: he gives too much credit (I meane) to great reports every where.at forces ly now had. A hundred eighty two troopes of good Horse, (Tillies were very good) and a full hundred to each troope, will come to 18200 men: which (had Tilly had the leading) would have gone neere at that time, to have over-runne all Germany. The King of Swe∣den was but very weake in Horse at the Battell of Leipsich; nor had he as yet very much encreased them: and had Tilly now had but halfe so many Horse as 182 troopes; he would never have turned his head from the King of Sweden. A hun∣dred eighty two Cornets and Ensignes of Horse and Foot to∣gether, might be the list of all their Armies: and might make up 18000 men; which Gallobelgicus allowes Altringer alone. And these two numbers might confound him. But this by way of discourse. Here having newes of the King of Swedens beleagring of Wurtsburg, the Imperiall Generalls consult how to levy the siege; but hearing againe of his taking the Castle, and of the other Townes he had gotten upon the banks of the Mayn:lly goes to∣rds the Mayn they make the more haste to conioyne themselues with the Lorrayn army. Marching with good speede, thereupon, unto Aschaffenburg upon the Mayn, some three dayes march from Fulda; hither October 10 came the Duke of Lorrayn to see the Generall Tilly. The next day, is Altringer sent o∣ver the Mayn towards these Lorrayners: so that upon Mun∣day,ynes with c Lorrayners. October 17, was that coniunction made also. More of this, we have before told you, in the Story of these Lor∣rayners. Whilst here (about Aschaffenburg) he lyes: he October 16. sends 3000 towards Werthaim, which were defeated: and so are three Regiments more of his about Rotenburg,
October 21. as we have before told you. In this Interim too, he sollicites Hanaw: and being denyed, he passes the Main,Takes Baben∣hausen. and takes in Babenhausen Towne and Castle, belonging unto the Count of Hanaw Buxviller: but empawned unto the Elder Count of Hanaw. The Lorrayners being comne within three leagues of him (which is neere enough for vniting) part of his forces about that very day, roave up and downe as farre as Franckford on the Mayn: many of them went into the very Towne, more being without the Ports; a great part of them very poore, and as yet unarmed. They came now as friends or Neuters, or Passengers to the Towne: for Tilly had not yet sollicited Franckford to take in a garrison:Sollicites Franckford. nor till five or sixe dayes after. At which time he requesting, and the Towne denying; he goes by Selingstat towards the Bergstraes: which is that part of the Palatinate on the same side of the Rhine with him. All along hereabouts (namely in the land of Darmstat and the Bergstraes) for certaine dayes he lay: and verily beleeved it was, that he would have gone along the Bergstraes to Manheim and Heidleberg, and there have staid for the defence of the Palatinate.Goes into the Bergstraes. Some of his men (if not himselfe) were advanc't that way as farre as right against Oppenheim, in the beginning of November: whenas judging by the taking of Hanaw, that the King would also come downe towards Franckford, and so hazzard to coope him up into the Palatinate; he all on the sudden, about the fouth or fifth of November, turnes backe againe towards the Lorrayn army at Miltenburg. And here,Turnes backe into Franconia. the Mayn croo∣king away many leagues to the Northward; he leaving it up∣on the left hand, goes directly unto Oxenfurt: where the Mayn comes about as low againe, as at Miltenburg. What he did in the way; and what passed at Oxenfurt, we have be∣fore told you in the Kings Story. Here the King and the Count of Tilly part againe: and Ossa, who had beene Commissary to the Lorrayn Army be∣fore, goes now along with Tilly towards Norimberg: a little before the end of November, comming backe againe
from thence,Ossa goes a∣ong with Til∣y. unto his charge, the Lorrayners. Ossa by ver∣tue partly of his Commission (which was Imperiall) and part∣ly by vertue of some of Tillyes forces; takes in the Imperiall City of Rotenburg upon the Tauber,nd takes Ro∣enburg. which the Kings men had before taken. Twelve thousand Dollars he drew from the Magistrates; nor could hee hinder his souldiours after∣wards from plundering of the City: which I impute not unto the Injustice of the Generalls, but unto the hunger and unrulynesse of the Souldiours; who having had no pay in a long time, could not here be so well governed. With the same sawce, they served all the Dorps and smaller villages, thereabouts. And now, it seemes, was the Army devided; not mar∣ching all together in one grosse: for part of it at the same time tooke in Winshaim,nd Winshaim. an Imperiall City towards the North: and another Division, went to Guntzenhausen: al∣most forty Euglish miles from that, towards the South: both Armies meeting againe about Norimberg. Those that tooke Guntzenhausen, went thence unto the Imperiall City of Weissenburg, about foure or five English miles more to the South-East, where Tilly left a small garrison. About an English mile from which, and upon an hill on the North side;Tilly takes Weissenburg. stands the strong castle of Wilsburg, belonging unto the young Marquesse of Onspach, Pupill unto his Cosin the Elector of Brandenburg. This being the strongest Passe of all those parts, the Marchionesse Dowager (Mother unto the Yong Lord) is mainely laid at by Tilly, to cause her brother the Count of Solms (Governor of the Castle) to deliver it up into his hands, with all the Ordnance and Ammunition in it. And this, though not presently; yet he after a while wrung from her: into which he put the young Count of Pappenheim (Cosin to Generall Pappenheim) whose Castle is a neighbour unto it. Nor yet did the Lady find any whit the more favour for it: seeing Her Sonnes owne Towne of Onspach,and rifles the Marquisate of Onspach. with the Villages of the Marquisate, were by the Tillians taken and plundered, and above 5000 head of great
Cattell gotten away from her Country Subjects. Some vil∣lages, both here, and in the County of Hohenlo, were fired also. Yet was all this, but some of the civilest: most Souldiers (if enemies) would have done as much. The next is barba∣rous: for comming to the Cloyster of Haibron, (twelve Eng∣lish miles from Norimberg) where some of the Marquesses of Onspach (who are of the Electorall house of Brandenburg) lye entombed: the sacrilegious soldiours breake open the vault, and rob the dead corpses of the Marquesses, George Frederike, and Ioachim Ernest, of the Iewels, Rings, and other rich ornaments, with which they were entombed. Hence went the Generall Tilly unto Swabach; within seven or eight English miles of Norimberg. This goodly Ci∣ty of Norimberg, was the Passe that Tilly all this while aymd at; and which he hoped to enforce to a composition with him. Making his head-quarter therefore at this Swabach, which is on the South of Norimberg; he sends out other of his forces to take in Altorff, Lauff, and Hersbruck, all on the North and East of it.Tilly sets do before Norim¦berg. Having thus surrounded the Coun∣try about it, he begins, November 18. to bring his army neerer to the walls, as if to besiege it. Having thus shewd them his power, he sends withall his Messengers into the City, first to have such a proportion of bread &c. given him, and then, to have some Councellors and Doctors sent out to treate with him. The Doctors went to Swabach and there dined with him: unto whom were these demands in the Em∣perors name propounded. 1.His demanThat the Magistrates should deliver the Count of Solms into his hands; as an officer belonging unto the Emperors ene∣my, the King of Sweden. 2. That they should licence all their forces, and suffer their soldiours to serve under his Colours. 3. That they should stand to their promise lately made, and renounce the Conclusions of Leipsich. This if they yeelded to him in, he promised to pay them honestly, for all such provisions, as he should demand of
them: and if not, then would he force them to it. The Do∣ctors receiving these demands, promise an answer unto his Ex∣cellency the day following. And indeed he had it; for the Count of Solms, (whose body he so much desired) made a pr∣sonall tender of himselfe before Tillyes trenches, by a resolute sally the next day: where, with his Regiment of Swedish horse, hee defeated that of the young Prince of Anhalt, and tooke himselfe, with some thirtie of his officers, prisoners. This Iohn George Count of Solms, with his brother William Henry, had each of them a Regiment in the Citie; the first of Horse, and the second of Foot; both newly levyed for the Kings service. Here were also two Counts of Hohenlo: and another Regiment of ColonelFive Regi∣ents sayes e short and lse Arma ecica. Slammersdorffs: so that they had a garrison of some 3000 Horse and Foot: which the Burgers with their sonnes and servants in the towne, could well make up 10000 able fighting men. Some Engineers had the King of Sweden newly sent unto them; who with such haste and skill perfected up the Workes they had begun before Tillyes comming, that they now much cared not for all his threat∣nings. Tillyes approaches went on but slowly; as if he had in∣tended to skare the Citie, rather then besiege it. And indeed it was too big and strong; every way too well supplyed, for Tillyes rawe and ill provided army to meddle withall. Hee wanted both victuals and ammunition for such a siege; be∣sides which, winter was too neerely a comming on, to sit downe to it. Tilly surely was too wise to make a Worke of it. Yet some bravadoes, for his honour sake, did his men make against it: which were with losse daily repulsed by the sallyes of the Counts of Solms and others. Hee lost Slabata a Colonell of the Crabats, before the towne; with many Of∣ficers and Gentlemen of worth moe. Perceiving now his men to begin to runne away into the towne (which they daily did, by tens and twenties in a company:) and that there was no o∣ther contribution to be expected but powder and shot (if hee liked it: raises his  from No∣erg.) he sends to Altringer (who then commanded be∣fore the towne, to draw off the troopes, and to bee rising.
Leaving therefore some 2000 dead, and wounded, and sicke, and halfe starved men behind him, either in the trenches or neighbour villages; he upon the 22 and 23 of November, dis∣lodges with his Army. That which made this sudden rising of his seeme the stranger, was, That it was done in the night: and in such haste too, that his men left some of their baggage-wa∣gons behind them. And if this may be excused, as being done for want rather, then for haste or feare; for that namely they wāted wagon-horses: yet surely his men wanted not stomakes for the sheepe and other victuals left behind them ready dres∣sed, (as I find from 2 severall hands written) & upon the tables too: which verily argued some needlesse feare or haste in them. At Rot, a Towne some seven English miles to the South of his Head-quarter of Swabach, lay part of his store of Gun∣powder: which being charg'd upon the wagons, and ready now to march after the army, was by negligence set on fire, and 12500 weight of powder blowne up; some peeces of Ordnance spoyled, with other mischiefe done to the am∣munition. The Count of Tilly hearing of this mischance, Now sayes he (with a deepe sigh) doe I evidently perceive all my good fortunes to begin to faile me,Tillyes heart begins to mis∣give him. and every thing (me thinkes) goes awkwardly with me. The man perchance thought of Magdenburg (or might have done) at the same time. This was reported in Norimberg by one of the officers of Tillyes Ordnance; who had very good meanes to know it. Count Tilly now perceiving his Army (this deare and dead time) too great to be kept together;He devides his Army, and puts them into gar∣rison. which would be need∣lesse too, no enemy being neere; devides his forces thereup∣on: part whereof he kept with himselfe; and part he sent another way, with Cratz and Altringer. The Division reser∣ved to himselfe, marcht from Swabach first of all to Rot; where the powder miscarried: and where he lodged 2 nights to get all things fit againe. Thence went he in the end of the moneth to Donawert upon the Danow; where the Duke of Bavaria met him: and so to Nordlingen in Schwabland, where he staied. The other halfe that went with Altringer
and Cratz, were put into garrison neerer hand: as in the towns of Lauff, Hersbruck and Altorff, hard by Norimberg; and some in Sultzbach, Amberg, and Newmarckt; all Townes of the Ʋpper Palatinate. Colonel Cratz (who having beene Ge∣nerall of the Ordnance,Cratz made Field-Marshall vnto Tilly. was now made Felt-Marshall) took up his garrison at Amberg, the chiefe City of the Vpper Pa∣latinate; whither all the Officers were to resort for order unto him; that they neede not iourney to the Duke of Bavaria or the Generall Tilly. The Count of Sultz, lay with his men about Weyden upon the river Nab, to the North of Amberg. Merodi and Breda, with their Regiments; were put into A∣verbach, Grafenwerd, and into the Townes and Dorps be∣tweene them. All these townes are on the Northside of the Vpper Palatinate, and towards the Bishoprick of Bamberg. The Generall Tilly engarrisond his men in the Territory called Ries next unto Donawert: and about Giengen in the Diocesse of Elwang, and in the Iurisdiction of Haidenhaim in Schwab∣land, upon the frontiers of Wirtenberg, the next Westerne neighbours unto Nordlingen; where himselfe lay. In this deviding and lodging of his army, the provident Tilly had two respects especially. The King of Sweden had 2 Armies then on foote; of which, 2 of the Catholike Lea∣guers were in danger: the Bishop of Bamberg namely; who stood in doubt to be every day invaded by Horn:The reason why Tilly thus de∣vides his army. and the Duke of Bavaria, in feare of the King himselfe. To guard the Coun∣tries of these 2 Princes, had Tilly to the most advantage thus disposed of his armies. Those forces that he kept with him∣selfe, were for the safeguard of Bavaria; and the Frontiers of Schwabland and Franconia: against whom, if the King should come the neerest way, thorow the Dukedome of Wirtem∣berg (in which Country he had already some townes and friends; and there at this present, some forces a levying for him) then lay Tilly at Nordlingen right in the Kings way to oppose him. The other troopes were laid in the Vpper Pala∣tinate, so neere unto Bamberg; that if Horn should fall in there, they might strike in, time enough to the reskue. And these
were the 12000 men, with whom Tilly put Gustavus Horn out of Bamberg afterwards. Along with Tilly,Saxon-Lawen∣burg made Ge∣nerall of the Ordnance. went Rodolph Maximilian Duke of Saxon-Lawenburg; now upon Cratz his preferment, made in his place Generall of the Ordnance. The Duke conveighing his Gunns into Donawert, staid him∣selfe there as Governour of the Towne, untill the King beat him out. A thousand of his Horse and 500 Foot, he would faine have thrust upon the Imperiall free City of Ausburg neere to Donawert, to be billeted among them for the 3 win∣ter moneths. This the City put off, by sending some victuals to the souldiers. This goodly Protestant City of Ausburg,Popish practises upon Ausburg. was much pra∣ctised upon, to be wholly gained to the Catholike party. The better to bring about which plot, had the chiefe Officers and Magistracies of the City, beene by the Emperors authority and private working, remooved from the Protestants, and con∣ferred upon the Papists. The Duke of Bavaria (their next neighbour) likewise, pretending I know not what dangers, had by the Papists meanes skrued in some of his new levied Boores. Thither, thereupon, comes Altringer; to take order for the Militia in that City, and Bishopricke, and in the Lord∣ships of the Fuggers. Hitherwards in the beginning of Ia∣nuary following, he remooves all his owne Regiment out of the Vpper Palatinate, which he enquarters about Auspurg. Altringer presently upon this, hearing that his men which he had left in Rotenburg in Franconia, were now endangered by Gustavus Horns people; prepares to relieve them. Much feared he was likewise in the Duchy of Wirtemberg, which beganne to arme against him. But Rotenburg was taken, and his expedition stayed. About this time of the yeere, the Count of Furstenberg,The Count of Furstenberg re¦signes his charge. who had not beene with Tilly since the battell of Leipsich, gives over following of the warres. Pappenheim had beene taken off by the Leaguers, and employed into the Lower Saxo∣ny. Tillyes selfe was resident for the most part in Nordlingen: whither Altringer went now and then also. In the beginning
of this Ianuary, Tilly goes to Donawert, there to meete his old Master the Duke of Bavaria. And there being a likeli∣hood of some motions upon the frontiers of Bohemia and the Ʋpper Palatinate: Tilly makes a iourney from Donawert un∣to Amberg. Two thousand horse he was to take along with him, and his Foote and Ordnance he sent to Weiden, upon the very Westerne frontiers of Bohemia, whence they were to march onwards vnto Egra: towards which towne, the Saxon forces began now to turne them very strongly. The Imperiall ColonelThis is he at destroyed aswalk: as you ay see in our first Part. Gotze, Don Balthazar, and the Felt-Marshall Die∣penbach had requested Tilly to this: hoping to drive the Sax∣ons into the midst of them. But this plot, Arnheim prevented. Tilly about Ianuary 10, returnes to Nordlingen againe. Ianuary 18, he takes 13 Peeces of Ordnance out of Wilsburg Castle, which (as we told you) he had wrung from the Marchionesse of Onspach: and these he sends unto Ossa, for the furnishing of Constance and Lindaw. Neither Tilly, nor his armies, stirred much abroad after this, till the Frost began about February 20: about which time he goes to that part of his Army in the Vpper Palatinate. Febru∣ary 22. He is at Newmarckt, one of the fairest townes of all this Palatinate; and thither all his Horse out of their severall Quarters assembled. Thence goes he to Altorff: where he lodges, Febr. 24. himselfe, Altringer, the Baron of Cronen∣burg and other chiefe Colonells, quartering themselues in the Castle. Here is an Vniversity: the Students whereof were courteously enough used by the Souldiers. Hence marches he away not farre off from Norimberg: whither he againe sends in the Emperors name and his owne, to be of courtesie furni∣shed by them with some provisions. Now was his march directly intended against Gustavus Horn; towards whom he led 12000 men, and 22 Peeces of Ordnance: besides some of the Bavarian Boores, which the Duke their master had put into the Army to learne something. February 27. Tilly enters into Forcheim, the strongest towne of the Bishopricke of Bamberg: whence the next day he went against Gustavus
Horn. The story whereof having before told you; we shall leave him about Hasfurt in the said Bishoprick, till he voids it of himselfe, upon the Kings comming against him. So that the other part of Tillies Proceedings, you are to looke for in Our relation of the Kings march into Bavaria. Whereas, there∣fore, we have heretofore mentioned the Duke of Bavariaes meeting to conferre with Tilly; his ioyning of some of his men with the Tillians: and for that both the Armies were shortly after this put into one body; it shall not be amisse, here to bring in the preparations made by this Duke also; who hath beene so great an Actor and Sufferer in this Germane tragedy, especially seeing that the Scene is next to be laid in his owne Bavaria. This Prince hath by many beene taxed,The Duke of Bavariaes sto (and by some of his own subiects too) how iustly I dispute not: to have beene, if not the plotter and Incendiary; yet the promoter and Boutefeu of a great part of these present troubles. A crafty wise man he is; witnesse those subtill conveiances of his owne ends, for 12 yeeres together: whereby he hath made himselfe both rich and potent. The skill he is said to have, of imposing a Reser∣vednesse upon his owne expressions; and the same art of pallia∣ting his pretences, which Statists call Policy; though in Morality it bee, but a Magnificent dissimulation. These, with some other Cabinet Doctrines, hath he learned at the Iesuites Lectures: whose Disciple he is, and in the highest forme too. When after the defeate of the Catholike Army at Leipsich, and the comming downe of the Conqueror among the lands of the Leaguers; the Princes of that Confederation were put to the end of their Counsels: the Duke of Bavaria is the man, upon whose greatnesse and credit in the Empire, the hopes of that side were pitcht, for the setting of all right againe. He,He summons his people to defence. to give good example to the rest, sūmons al his subiects generally, all that were able to beare armes (tagg and ragg) to be ready to stand upon the defensive. Some of his Boores he armes too; who for that, when they were Day-laborers, they had beene
used to stopping of gaps; now when they are become souldiers, he employes them (most naturally) to the stopping of passages. These he layes upon his Frontiers. By the end of October, had he gotten some 10, or 12000 of them arm'd and trained: and was resolved (as twas given out) to have sent them to the Em∣perours Army in Bohemia, against the Saxons. This expediti∣on was arrested by the newes of the Saxons taking of Prage; and He put unto new Counsayles. The danger growing neerer upon his countrey, by the King of Swedens taking of the Bi∣shopricks of Wurtsburg & Bamberg; the Duke procures a Diet of the Catholike-Leaguers: which for the more honour unto him whom they so much relyed upon, was held at Landshut in Bavaria, and in November. Here doe the Princes resolve, up∣on the levying of a new Army at their common Charges: whereof his Highnesse the Duke of Bavaria, was to be Ge∣neralissimo;s appointed Generalissimo of the Leaguish forces. and his Creature the Count of Tilly, Generall, as before. To this Army of the Leaguers, was his Imperiall Ma∣jestie pleased likewise, that some of his Forces should be conjoyned: so that both Imperiall and Leaguish forces, went henceforth to the making of one Army. The Duke hereupon reenforces his owne levyes, for which Donawert is the Rendezvous. By this time (as it appeares) had His Highnesse beene sollicited by some of the contrary party, to come over to their side: the greatnes of the King of Sweden, able to doe him wrong; the oppression of the Princes of Ger∣many, whom that King sought but to deliver; the ambitious rising of the Emperour and House of Austria, now ayming more at Monarchy, then at the propagation of the Catholike Religion; and the Dukes owne disliking of divers of the Em∣perours actions in that kinde; were urged for some of the ar∣guments to draw him on, and to breake off both with the League and Emperour. I suppose that the French Ambassador then resident with him, was one of the Orators to perswade with him. It seemes likewise, that some hopes of prevayling were conceived; yea and some speeches too, given out to that purpose. But the Duke now taking regrett at the hearing of
it, and sorry that his honour should be traduc'd, by the mista∣king of his constant purposes to the other side and cause: hee immediately thereupon sets out a publike Manifesto or Decla∣ration of his resolution; which,Set out his Manifeste. (to shew the earnestnesse of his intention) was penned in a high and sharpe streine: and by the furious undiscreet zeale showne in it to the Saints and Ro∣mish religion; the spightfull pen-and-inck-horne termes a∣gainst the Protestants: the quotations of Scriptures, and some such other Characters: the Readers will collect that the Dukes Confessor had a hand in it, as well as his Secretary. Tis well worth the reading: but being something long, I have referr'd it till the end of the Kings Story; that wee might not here make too long an interruption. To goe on. About mid-December the Duke procures ano∣ther Diet at Ingolstat:A Diet at In∣golstat. where himselfe was present about the twelfth of that moneth. The Dyet continued untill after Christ∣mas: and in it was the Proposition made among the Leaguers,He sends one Ambassadour unto the King and another t the Emperour at the same time. upon what Termes (by meanes of the French King,) they should desire, and accept of the Neutralitie. Now are their Ambassadors dispatched unto the King of Sweden, then at Mentz. They treated, as a distinct party from the Emperour: and for that the Duke of Bavaria was the chiefe person; the negotiation was in his name, or he (at least) was the first man named in it. The craftie Duke (that hee might have two strings to his bowe) privately sends another Ambassadour (his Chancellor Donnersberg namely) unto his Imperiall Majesty at the same time: of whose negotiation, these were the Requests or Pro∣positions made unto the Emperour. 1. That Caesar would be pleased not to take it ill, that the Duke his Master had no more potently hitherto assisted his Majestie in these Warres; seeing it lay not in his power,His propositi∣ons to the Em¦perour. to represse the King of Sweden. Yea, and that by the Archduchesse he had beene advised not to meddle with that King, without sufficient preparations: but so long to spinne out the time, un∣till the Army of the Romane Catholiks could be ready to assist
him. Furthermore, his Duchy of Bavaria was so weakely by nature situated; as it was no wayes sufficient to hold out against such a Power, as that King had at present. 2. He very well hoped, thatHe meanes Vallenstein. ou see what ood blood ere yet was, etwixt these o. That man, whom at the in∣stant request of the Electorall Colledge in the Diet of Ratis∣bone 1630, Caesar had cashiered from his Generalship; hee would not now call to the place againe, without the know∣ledge of the same Colledge. And notwithstanding that the Duke his Master for his part had beene constrained to winke at some things, by reason of the present danger; yet he hum∣bly intreated in the meane time, that if a Generall must of ne∣cessitie be sent into the Empire, the Imperiall Army might neither passe thorow, nor be sent into his Duchy of Bavaria. 3. And because things in the Palatinate seemed to foreshew an alteration, (the King being already Master of so many pla∣ces there) he humbly requested of his Imperiall Majesty, that that part of the Archduchy of Austria calledupra Anisum. For the kes charges  the late arres of Bo∣mia: which e Emperour ting againe, d in Lieu of m granted  Duke those ces in the latinate. Ober-Ens, which had before beene * empawned to him; His Majesty would now please to returne againe unto him. 4 Hereupon he promised to assist his Imperiall Majesty to the uttermost of his power; and to keepe off all molestations from the Archduchy of Austria. For which purpose, he had already blockt up the passages upon the Danuby with his Boores, and made all provisions for the defence of Ober-Ens. The Duke being gladly entertained by the Emperour here∣upon, and having made his advantages of the Treaty of Neu∣trality with the King, (of which wee before told you) still continues his warlike preparations. About the end of Ianuary, and beginning of February; hee sends some forces towards Amberg in the Vpper Palatinate: sends men o the Vpper latinate. intending to keepe some 5 or 6000 men thereabouts. When Tilly was afterwards driven that way, he then mixes his new-levyed Boores, among Tillyes old Legions: of whom, when any numbers marcht in a body by themselves; Tilly was faine to send some of his old souldiours along to bee their Keepers,ynes with lly. and to stave them off from ravaging of the Countrey. When (after this) the King
was gotten into Bavaria, faine then would he have treated to compound the matter: but neither would the King lose more time, nor trust him that was too much governed by the Iesuites. The first overture to the Treaty,Would treate with the King. was made by the French Ambassador: and the second, by the Duke of New∣burgs: both times as by mediators or third partyes, to save the Dukes honour. But most eagerly was the King pressed to it, by the French Ambassador, then resident with the Duke: who angred his Majesty now and then, with his importu∣nitie. After his army was beaten at the Lech, his chiefe rendez∣vous and retreate, was Ingolstat: where when the King was on one side of the Danuby, the Duke and his army were upon the tother. There,Retires to Jn∣golstat and R¦genspurg. had he gotten some 14000 men to∣gether againe: with whom, when the King rose from In∣golstat, then went he to Ratisbone, in Dutch called Regens∣purg. Thereabouts he keeps for a while: and invites Wallen∣stein to joyne with him. Those of Regenspurg complaine, of the ill disciplining of his army; whom His owne presence and justice, in executing divers plunderers, could not yet reduce into good order. To draw the King the sooner out of his Country; he sends his Lieftenant Generall Cratz, to take in Weissenburg: himselfe in the meane time continuing about Ingolstat and Regenspurg. Hither when Cratz was come againe, Bavaria marches with his whole Army into the Ʋpper Palatinate; where, upon confidence of Wallensteins being at his backe; hee about Schwandorff, thrusts him∣selfe before the Kings face, just betwixt him and Bohemia. In which posture, we for this time leave him to expect Walenstein, and turne againe unto the King of Sweden.
The Kings March up into Bavaria. WE left his Majesty of Sweden lately providing for his going against the Generall Tilly: drawing his old Regiments out of their garrisons, and put∣ting new levyed men into their places. Of the old troopes,hat forces ere left in the latinate. were the Rhinegraves Horse, Colonell Hogen∣dorffs Brigade of Foote, and Colonell Ʋitzthimb with his 600 men at Franckford; onely left for the guard of the Duke∣dome of Mentz (for so in the Army it began now to be called) and the Palatinate: over all which parts and forces, that wise Statesman the Swedish Chancellor Oxenstiern was to command in chiefe: whose charge moreover was, well to waite up∣on and guard the Queene of Swedens person, then left in the City of Mentz. From which Towne the King sending the Army before, March the fourth, himselfe set forward the next day, together with the King of Bohemia, Prince Augustus of Sultzbach, &c. March 6. the Army encamps a mile beyond Franckford. Thence by Steinheim, to Aschaffenburg, where they passe the Mayn: and whence March 7. in the morning they parted.e way that e King tooke. That day went his Majesty before the Army thorow the Speshart forest, unto Lohr, thirty English miles from As∣chaffenburg. Here he staid all the next day too; going the next (Thursday) morning backe againe up the Speshart Hill, to meete his Army: who that night marcht up to Lohr also. Fryday, March 9, the Army before day brake up, and
marcht to Werenfelt on the Mayn; a league to the North of Carlstat. This day came in thirty sixe troopes of horse of the Duke of Saxon Weymars. Within a day or two, comes the Generall Banier also; whose way out of Magdenburg, was thorough Mansfelt, Iseleben, and Sangerhausen: and so by Erfurt thorough the Duringer-waldt, into Franconia. Next day, March 10, their Majesties of Sweden and Bohemia, going tenne miles further to the North-East; come to Arn∣stein to meet with Gustavus Horn: who next day comes from about Schweinfurt and Geltersheim, unto them at Tettelbach, tenne miles further. Thence went the King onwards with three Brigades of the Army, unto Kitzing; and Colonell Hepburn with other two, unto Oxenfurt; foure English miles from Kitzing. This was upon Munday, Mach. 12th. March 15. Gustavus Horn went before with the Vant∣gard to Winshaim, twelve or thirteene English miles fur∣ther: whom the King and Generall Banier, the next day followed. Here at Winshaim, all the three armyes of the King, Gustavus Horn, and Sir Iohn Banier; together with the new levyed Regiments drawne out of Franconia, were put toge∣ther and mustered: which all together made not above 14000 Foote. The Horse were thought to be some 120 Cor∣nets: but they being advanced towards Norimberg before, and in severall places now dispersed (because of the enemy) were not at this time drawne together. These might per∣chance be some 10000 or 11000 men besides, so that all to∣gether,How strong King march up. might make up an army of twentyfoure or 25000 strong, and no more: which is farre short of 45000, as was given out every where. From Winshaim the King went directly Southward to Dunkelspiel, about thirty English miles further: his intent being to follow Tilly into Bavaria; whither at first it was beleeved he would have gone. This was, March 19. But finding now that Tilly retreated from him towards the Vpper Palatinate; the King turnes faces a∣bout to the right, and marches directly towards Norim∣berg.
For the Generall Tilly, having hitherto stayed himselfe about Hasfurt in the Bishoprick of Bamberg; (all the time namely that Gustavus Horn was about Schweinfurt and Gel∣tershaim) now understanding the King of Sweden to be com∣ming against him; and finding himselfe too weake to abide the encounter with him that had before beaten him;lly retires m the King, he pre∣sently thereupon remooves himselfe towards the other part of his army in the Ʋpper Palatinate. Vpon Munday, March 12, he calls a Councell of warre at Hasfurt: the same day re∣mooving with his army unto Bamberg. His Quarter-master-Generall being dispatched with directions unto Cratz, in the Ʋpper Palatinate: was slaine by some Swedish Horsemen be∣twixt Norimberg and Lauff; and his letters sent unto the King. Tuesday, March 13. Tilly goes forward as farre as Forcheim, (16 English miles from Bamberg) where all his forces in those quarters met with him. Drawing out all the souldiers, and leaving the Bishopricke to shift for it selfe; he upon Thursday, March 15 goes to Erlang, mid-way betwixt Forcheim and Norimberg: where he that night makes show of his army in full Battaglia. Thence marches he to Norim∣berg, where in the Emperors name and his owne, he desires of courtesie to be furnisht with some provisions. Colonel Gallas, Colonel Holck; and some Horse of Don Balthasars, had he before sent for out of the hether parts of Bohemia; where they as then waited upon the Saxons. These came to Cratz first,ching into Ʋpper Pa∣ate. by the way of Amberg; whence they all together went by Weydhausen and Averbach to meete with Tilly, at his entrance into the Vpper Palatinate: into which Tilly pier∣ced farther still and farther, after that Norimberg had this se∣cond time denied him. Those forces of his, that had hitherto laine about Nordlingen and Donawert; came now also to∣wards him as farre as Hochstat: he likewise drawing towards them, by Lauff, Altorff, and Newmarckt: whereabouts hee stayed and fortified, expecting there the Kings motions. This was about March 18, or 19. And this middle part of the Palatinate, was the best guard that Tilly could lie at: for should
the King have desired to have marcht into Bohemia, then was he right in his way to stop him: and if into Bavaria, then could he be there before, to keepe him out. The King being at Dunkelspiel (or Dinkelspuhel) was then within 30 English miles of Donawert; and might without op∣position have marched thither, whither he made so much haste within a few dayes after. It may seeme something strange,Why Tilly wen into the Pala∣tinate. that Tilly marcht not thither before him. But this was Ba∣variaes policy; who had newly sent a command unto him, that he should by no meanes retire into Bavaria, for feare of drawing the King of Sweden in thither after him: and of lay∣ing the field of warre in his country, which he had rather should be in the Prince Palatines Dominions. By this device, thought Bavaria both to save his owne country, and to force the King of Sweden to spoyle the Palatinate; which he would be glad enough to see ruinated. Therefore did Tilly play thus like the Lapwing, to draw the King from his own nest. His Maiesty now perceiving, which way Tilly retired from him; alters his march (as hath beene said) and faces a∣bout directly towards Norimberg.The King en∣campes by Norimberg From Dunkelspiel there∣fore marches he unto Furt; a pretty towne some 3 English miles to the West of Norimberg, where, upon Tuesday, March 20 he arrived, and encamped. That night was his Maiesty ex∣pected to have comne into Norimberg: out of which City when multitudes of people came flocking to his Leaguer, Then sayes the King (laughing) I perceive I must needes see Norimberg. This City is one of the greatest and richest of Germany; and the chiefest Passe of all those countries. It had condiscended unto the King, when he most stood in need of it; twice opposed and denyed Tilly, since that: and there∣fore they might well expect, the King should honour them with his presence. He made his entrance into it, about 10 in the forenoone, March 21. The morning was observed to be rainy and lowring; but no sooner were the 2 Kings feete set upon the bridge, but the Sunne began to make a faire day of
it: which divers tooke notice of, as a cheerefull presage of more halcyon dayes a comming. I need not tell, how welcome his Maiesty of Sweden was; how solemnely received, or how nobly he behaved himselfe againe. The King of Bohemiaes person likewise, was as much desired to be seene, by his own Subiects of the Vpper Palatinate, next neighbours unto No∣rimberg: whose gracious deportment unto them againe, I must here also passe over.His entertain∣ment in Norim∣erg. The King of Swedens first comple∣ment to the Magistrates was, to ackowledge their good will towards his service; and to thanke them for their bountifull entertainement of his Field-Marshall Horn. At table, his Ma∣iesty fed, (like a souldier) upon the substantiallest and plainest meates onely; scarce touching a bit of any of the rarities, or forced dishes. After dinner, gave he audience unto some Pro∣testant Lords of Ausburg, comne thither to him from those of the Religion of that City: who presented him with 2 faire horses. After that, followed the Norimbergers presents: which were, foure very great Peeces of brasse Ordnance, with their furniture. Two Globes of the world of a reasonable bignesse, all of silver; and filled, one with new Ducates; and the other with new Gold-Gilders: together with sixe wagons of Oates, Fish, and Wine: which (in lesser quantities) is the ordinary and generall present of Germany unto Princes and Ambassa∣dors. With these Presents, there is (of course) an Oration ever presented: unto which of the Townes, the King (who is an excellent Speaker) presently returned this following answer. The Kings Oration at Norimberg.I doe graciously accept of, and thanke you for this Pre∣sent, but withall I doe assure you, That the most acceptable gift you can bestow upon me, is your constancy for the Evan∣geliacall and common cause. From which I here pray you, that you never suffer your selves to be withdrawne; and that you neither yeeld unto feae or hope, neither to faire promises, nor fierce threatnings; neither to pleasure, nor to vanities; nor yet to any other particular passion or affection, which men are usually subiect unto: or by which they are wrought upon,
and perswaded: and in these dangerous times especially, where Mammon the Prince of this World so much domineereth. With-stand you therefore, all avarice, and love of riches: wherein the enemy, I know, will not be wanting, but will every way attempt you: they will promise, they will threat∣ten, they will doe their very uttermost, to entangle you in their springes. But for this, your selues and all the world well know, what subtill and powerfull enemies we have against us; and how strictly they be leagued and banded together, for the rooting out of all the Evangeliacall States and Princes. That way are all their devices, actions, and endeavours driven: to that Butt, aime all their attempts and their designes: and to that purpose, is all their mightines and great power employed: and in a word; All they commit, and all they omit; all their thoughts, and all their wishes, tend wholly to our destructi∣on. True it is, that outwardly they make show of suing for peace: but it should be such a peace, as that you, your State, and all other Protestants whatsoever, would be utterly and assu∣redly ruined and undone by it. God hath preferd you to be Governours, hath put into your trust, many thousands of soules; and it is so populous a City which you rule, that I have scarcely seene the like of it: all which depend wholly upon you, and wholly doth obey you: and I doe not doubt but you will so rule them all, as you hope to give an account of it before Gods great Tribunall, and before all Christendome. You are of noble Families, your An∣cestours have, time out of mind, beene of honourable reputa∣tion in the world: walke you therefore in their worthy steps, and follow you the goodnesse of their examples. As good Patriots, doe you your duties at this time; and consider withall what God might suffer to come to passe, if you neg∣lecting his help, should now give over your selues into the hands of your enemies. How, thinke you, would they use you and yours? God hath already suffered you to see many things; hath already laid some troubles upon you; so that you have had your share in these miseries, by which God hath
shewed us our sinnes and our deservings: but yet withall hath God still saved, defended, and most powerfully preserved you. So that I cannot enough wonder, and must acknowledge it to be a visible assistance and worke of God; that the enemies hitherto have beene so blinded, and so kept backe; that they have not all this while gotten this and such other Cities, which (as the world truely thought) they have had these 2 or 3 yeeres day, fully in their own powers. Truely God hath mar∣veilously preserved you; as he hath also bin pleased to call me to this worke: for sooner should I have thought the last Iudge∣ment would have comne, then that I should come into No∣rimberg; and (as you your selues sayd) leave so farre behind me mine own Dominions, good subiects, and whatsoever else is loving and deare unto me; and to bring along with me so many brave Worthies to expose their lives, as I doe mine, for the restitution, safety, and preservation of the common Evan∣geliacall cause, and the liberttie of Germany. With this purpose I doe intend (God willing) to goe on, and to doe whatsoe∣ver shall lye in my power, and as God by his special grace shall conduct and enable me, both for you and all the rest of our friends: and I will, Ile assure you, both keepe and performe whatsoever I have heretofore promised, either by my Am∣bassadors, my Deputies, or my Letters. Consider you therefore, I desire you, the consequence of this businesse, and for the mercy of Gods sake, remaine you constant; be not mooved at any thing whatsoever: but rather encourage you your neighbours, and such Townes especially as depend upon you. I have not said thus much all this while, by reason of any doubt I have of your faithfulnesse and honesty, but rather to make you, who are already quicke and willing, more willing and quicke yet, by this spurre as it were of my words. God will not every day send you such a Preacher as I am, who am now here, with a desire to helpe and comfort you: to doe you all good, and to further your cause, so farre forth as God shall strengthen and enable me. Have patience a while there∣fore,
and suffer a little more yet, remaine constant, performe your duties at this time, and God Almightie; who hath hither∣to beene with you, and so marueilously shewed His helpe un∣to you, will assuredly give you his Grace also: that your City shall further flourish and encrease, your renowne shall bee spred all the World over: and wee all together shall honour, laud, praise, and blesse our Lord God, both here and for ever. His Maiesty getting intelligence the same afternoone, of Tillyes sinking deeper still and deeper into the Palatinate;The King a¦ters his purp for followin of Tilly. with a purpose ever as the King came neerer unto him, to hitch further still and further towards Wallenstein (who was then heard of upon the Frontiers of Bohemia and the said Pala∣tinate) the King upon these and such other reasons follow∣ing, quite againe alters his former resolution for the further pursuing of him. 1. The first reason was this.His Reason That seeing Tilly would not be fought withall single; he thought it no policy to drive him up to Wallenstein: which two if they should have joyned with Bavaria, and then all three have turnd againe upon him; they might possibly have beene too hard for him: especially in that place, which they knew and not he. 2. By this meanes, he should for the time, have laid the seate of the warre in his friends the Prince Palatines dominions: which would utterly have ruin'd them. 3. Bavaria being still entier and untoucht, supplyed his ene∣mies both with men and money: whereas were but the field of warre removed thither; himselfe should get his share of that, and cut so much of it off from the enemy: yea and the enemyes part of it too must of necessity be destroyed, by cal∣ling in Tilly to defend it. 4. This would utterly defeate the Duke of Bavariaes project,
(which the King by intercepted letters came to understand) that he would not have Tilly for this reason come into Bava∣ria; and that he had desired of the Emperour, that no army might be sent into, or thorow his Country. 5. It would kill the very hearts of the Bavarians, to see an enemy in their owne Country. For tis commonly seene, that people who are valorous enough abroad, and to keepe out the warre; are danted and amazed to see it brought home un∣to them. The firing of the beacons (where any are) or the rin∣ging of the Bells awck, (where that is used) will hardly draw them together to make head: and their hearts are quite done, notwithstanding all encouragements of fighting pro Aris et focis: for the people will give one halfe, to save the tother; the Cityes will yeeld; and the enemy in a short time, will be as strong as the Prince himselfe, in his owne Country. 6. Should hee not now hasten into Bavaria; hee could not have gotten in thither at all; or at least-wise neither so soone, nor so neere a way. There was a Fort now a building at Do∣nawert; which should he stay till it were finished, hee must then goe by Ʋlm many a league about, to get over the Da∣nubye. Vpon these reasons (among the rest) His Majesty now turnes directly (almost) backe againe; and that with expedi∣tion too: going the same night out of Norimberg unto Swa∣bach; eight English miles to the South of it. Tillyes Forces were at the same time about Newmarckt and beyond it; be∣tweene twentie and thirtie English miles to the East of Swa∣bach. For the discovering of whose strength and lodging, the King immediately sends out some strong Horse-Partees: who upon Fryday, March 23, defeating some of those Tillians: re∣turne presently againe unto the Kings Army. Vpon our Lady Eve, the Kings forces come to Pleinfelt, Weissenburg, and Oetingen; three pretty townes betwixt Norimberg and Dona∣wert: upon the top of an hill, some English mile to the North
of this Weissenburg,See for these townes, either in the South erne edge of the Map of Franconia; o better in the Western edge of the Map, of the Ʋpper Palatinate. stands the faire and strong Castle of Wilts∣burg, the chiefe Passe and Command of all that Countrey: into which the Count of Tilly had put the young Count of Pap∣penheim (Cousin to the Generall Pappenheim) for Governour. To him the King sending first of all, requires to have it peace∣ably restored againe unto the Marchionesse of Onspach and her children; if so be he expected to have his Fathers Lands and Castle of Pappenheim, (the very next neighbours to that place) to be well used. The message being answered by the Cannon, up goes the King the same day towards the Castle, which with eight troopes of Horse, and some sixe hundred Musket∣tiers, hee presently surrounded. Some of these Muskettiers are brought within Musket shot of the very walles; who with their continued volleyes were to amuse the enemy, untill the King had round about taken his full view, of the Fortifi∣cations of the Castle. Finding the place to be strong,The King leaves Wiltz∣burg Castle. and Tilly to be neere, He concludes with himselfe, That it more con∣cern'd him to leave the designe, and to march with expedition unto Donawert; then to lose his time about the strength of that Castle; whilest Tilly might in the meane time have finisht his Fort, already begun upon the hill before Donawert. Lea∣ving therefore three hundred men under Colonel Sperreuter in the towne; hee marches with the Army directly the same day unto Donawert: where, according to his intelligence, he finds the already begun Skonce but halfe perfected. This continued expedition of his in the march, was of such consequence; that had he but stayed three dayes longer, whilest that Fort had beene made defensible; he might have beene en∣forced to have marcht about as farre as Vlm for his passage: where he had all this ime imagined that he must indeed have passed over the Danuby. And thus if any Army were ever said to have runne post, this of the Kings now did: even all the way from Mentz unto Donawert. March 26 in the morning, His Majesty takes in the towne and cloyster of Kaishaim,Kaishaim take foure English miles short of Do∣nawert: unto which Citie he the same night marched. This
Donawert hath sometimes beene an Imperiall towne, though now at the Kings comming, in possession of the Duke of Ba∣varia; to whom it came by the occasion of its having beene proscribed of late yeeres, by the Emperour Rodolphus. It is seated in the Circle of Schwaben, upon the Northern banke of the famous River of the Danuby or the Danow: which gives the name to it. This towne, and the bridge it hath over the Danuby, are the Key and Passe into that part of Schwabland beyond the River, first; and thorow that into Bavaria, by the river Lech. There were some 1200 Foot, 500 Horse, and 500 of the Bavarian trayn'd Bands, at this time within the Citie:and onawert be∣ged. the valiant Rodulph Maximilian Duke of Saxon-Lawenburg, (who had reskued Tilly at the Battell of Leipsich) being their Governour. The before-spoken of, now a building Fort; was upon the top of a little hill, on the Northwest side of the towne. The hill reached from the very walles of the Towne, unto the Danuby: the Fort it selfe being betwixt the towne and river; and within Musket shot of either. It was not as yet able to doe the Kings folke any annoyance; it had no batteries finish∣ed: by it therefore did the King thinke fittest to approach. On the bottom of the hill, close to the rivers side, was there a handsome Suburb, and thorow it, a Port into the Towne. In this Suburb, the King about nine a clocke in the morning, March 26, first of all causes 500 good Muskettiers to be lod∣ged. His next worke was, on the same side of the hill, to raise up a Battery, and to mount twenty Peeces of Ordnance upon it: from whence he so flanckered the bridge, both with his Cannon and 500 Muskettiers; that the same men were able both to annoy the Towne, and to disturbe all passage over the said bridge, inward and outward. The Kings small and great shot, continue playing all this whole day after, up∣on the Port, the bridge, and a great Storehouse likewise on the side towards Bavaria; in which there were two troopes of horse, and some Foote of the Tillians lodged. About nine at night the King beginning to perceive, that could he but
flancker the bridge on the other side of the Towne also, he might utterly cut off by that meanes, both their reliefe and retreate; he instantly, to this purpose, sends Colonell Hebron with his Brigade, round about the Towne over Harburg bridge, (five English miles from Donawert towards the North) which standeth upon a little River that runneth tho∣row Donawert into the Danuby.Hebron sent to besiege the towne on th other side. Sir Iohn Hebron having pas∣sed this bridge, marches downe to the West side of the Towne; where having a little after midnight, silently dis∣posed his men in covert along in the gardens and most advan∣tageous places under the Wall: he so orders the matter therup∣on, that no man could passe either over the Danow bridge, or out at the Western Port, but he must of necessity fall under his advantages. Those within the Towne, now perceiving (to their terror) that they were neither able to resist the King, nor to stay the expectation of reliefe; thought a little before breake of day, to have under favour of the darkenesse marcht out of the Towne over the bridge, into that part of Schwabenland towards Bavaria. This designe of theirs, was hindered by Colonell Hebron; who now flanckering the bridge much neerer then the King on his side did, gave them such uneasie passage: that though Saxon-Lawenburg and some few with him got safely over, yet the rest that would have followed, were by those volleyes so cut downe; that their dead bodyes even covered the most part of the bridge; and foulely encumbred the whole passage of it. The rest yet with∣in, seeing their retreate that way to be cut off; made a salley out at the West Port, upon Hebron: and were to their losse repulsed. The King thundered all this while upon the other Port with his Cannon; and they within, still fearing his entrance that way; were resolved once againe to venture the forcing of their passage thorow Hebron; who they knew to be the weaker. Boldly sallying thereupon, they were by Hebrons Brigade so courageously the second time entertained: that betwixt three and 400 of them being cut downe, and 400
taken prisoners:Hebron enters the towne. Hebron in the height of this heate, at the same time enters that Western Port also. There were of Eng∣lish Voluntiers that waited upon Colonell Hepburn in this action (and with the formest) my Lord Craven, Master Ni∣cholas Slanning, and Master Robert Marsham. Sir Iohn Hepburn being thus gotten in, and having first cut in pieces all resistance; his souldiours fall immediately to plundering: where many a gold chaine, with much other plate and treasure of the enemyes, were made prize of: they having wanted leisure before, for the conveighing away of their riches. By this time, was the King likewise entered at his Port; who immediately gives command,The King also nters the owne. that none of the Burgers houses should any more be plundered, (which some of the Souldiors had already begun to doe) onely what they could find of the Bavarian Souldiours, should be lawfull booty. All things after a while being quieted, the King sendeth for Sir Iohn Hepburn; unto whom, before the King of Bohemia, the Palatine August, and divers other great personages, he ascribes the honour of this action: as being the man who had first counselled him, that he might be sent about by Harburg bridge; and for having had so good successe, with so little losses. The Count of Solms his Foote Regiment, was put into the Towne for garrison; and Colonell Schneidewin left Governor. Order was also taken for the free exercise of the Protestant Religion, to be restored in the Towne the Easter following. Donawert being thus taken upon the 27 of March; (which for all the dayes in the yeere was the Duke of Bavariaes Birth∣day) about tenne a clocke, the same morning, are there 500 Dragooners first, and twelve Cornets of Horse after them, sent out with all speed to pursue those of the enemyes troopes, that betweene five and sixe in the morning had escaped over the Bridge, with the Duke of Saxon-Lawenburg. These Horse and 500 Dragooners being dispatched away, Colonell Hebron with his Brigade marches over next of all; with or∣der
to lodge himselfe by the aforesaid Store-house, at the South end of the bridge. Here he immediately raises up a very large Halfe-Moone, for the guard both of his men and the bridge, should the enemy now fall up∣on him. The Dragooners and Horse aforesaid, advance all along a goodly champion country, towards a Castle of the Fuggers; which was some 3 English miles from Donawert, and another from the Towne of Rain. Within it, were 400 souldiers and 12 Peeces of Ordnance; and about it, was a very deep Graff or moate.A Castle of the Fuggers taken. The defendants now perceiving the Swedish-troopes thus to approach them; and finding by the example of Dona∣wert, no expectation of reliefe: they had thought at first to have quit the Castle, and to have made their retreat over the bridge at Rain. These the Dragooners now intercepting, kill 200 of them upon the place; the Horsemen making prisoners of the residue. The Swedish Horse-Partee, was commanded by the Grave von Hochtuitschy (as I heare his name pronounced) which I suppose should be the Bohemian Baron Cochtitscky, who had beene at the Battell of Leipsich, and with Gustavus Horn since that, at Bamberg. Vpon the Danuby, (some 15 or 16 miles to the East of Do∣nawert) stands the towne of Newburg: from whence Wolf∣gang William, (one of the Princes Palatines and cosin to the Elector,) hath his title of Duke of Newburg. He had here∣tofore beene a Protestant: but since he was turnd Papist, and becomne one of the Catholike-Leaguers; he had much hindred his Mother and 2 brethren, in the exercise of their religion: which see complaind of, in the Diet ofSee pag. 24 of our First Part. Leipsich. The elder of these 2 Brethren, Prince or Palatine Augustus of Sultz∣bach, (often heretofore mentioned) now desires the King to send him out with 1800 horse, and 2000 Foote, to the town of Hochstat and other places, in the Duchy of Newburg: which had beene preserved from Popery,Hochstat taken. by the courage and authority of their Mother, the old Duchesse of Newburg. This towne of Hochstat, does Prince August now seaze up∣on:
and full of ioy were the people, to be thus freed from their feare of the threatned Popish persecution. From this towne, Ʋlm, and Lawingen, was the Kings campe so long supplyed with Provisions, untill their entrance into Bavaria. A little after this time,and Lawingen. was the said Lawingen taken by the Swedish forces, that lay about Ʋlm. It is seated in a most fruitfull plaine, having the Danuby on the South, with a bridge over that: and belonged unto the said Wolfgang William, the eldest Duke of Newburg. And thus was he begun withall for having shewed himselfe an enemy, by relieving of the Impe∣rialists, after he had treated a Neutrality. March 30 hath the Generall Banier, a great mind to take in Newburg also: for which purpose is there a strong Partee of Commanded men drawne out of the whole army:An Aenslaught upon Newburg miscarried. one Rott being taken out of every Company. They might make about 3000 Foote, and 1000 Horse; and were divided into eight troopes. All these marching away upon the North-side of the river, (the towne standing on the South,) find the place too strong to be in so short a time surprised. Generall Banier, upon hope of prevailing by the terror of the King of Swedens name, directs his letters into the Towne: which not taking, he was faine to turne backe againe into his Quarter. The King was something pleasant with his Generall, for having lost his paines: and askt him, if he thought to take in the towne by a skurvy letter? The towne was voluntarily afterwards forsa∣ken by the Tillians, after the Kings victory at the Lech. Had Banier at this time taken in the towne: the King by that bridge had gotten into Bavaria. The Generall Tilly, (whom about the 18 or 19 of March we left about Newmarckt in the Ʋpper Palatinate) having notice of the Kings making towards Bavaria; was by this time come by the way of Ingolstat bridge, into the said Duchy of Bavaria.Tilly comes in∣to Bavaria. By the beginning of Aprill, hath the King drawn all his army also an English mile out of Donawert, unto Nor∣theim, namely, some 2 miles more from the river of Lech: which divideth the Circle of Schwaben from Bavaria. Tilly
now perceiving the King to have the mysterie of getting of bridges; breakes downe that, in his power, over the Danuby betwixt Newburg and Rain; and that other over the Lech at Rain also, which is more then Musket shott beyond the towne. This Rain he fortifies; and the better to keepe the King from passing any where over the Lech, he layes his army all along upon the Bavarian shore of it, betwixt Rain & Aus∣burg. The length it reacht, was neere upon, if not altogether, sixteene English miles. Not that his Army was then so bigge, as in one continued body to reach out sixteene miles together; but that severall Companies and Regiments, were layd here and there scatteringly at a distance; with some Guards and Sen∣tinels now and then betweene, all the way from Rain unto Ausburg. The King perceiving, how Tillyes maine intention was to keepe him out of Bavaria; sees no better means how to get in∣to it, then by forcing a bridge over the Lech aforesaid. To find out the most aduantageous place for that purpose, and in the providing of necessaryes for the bridge, are the first foure dayes of Aprill employed. In the meane time, comes Duke William of Saxon-Weymar from about Erfurt in Duringen, with those 10000 Foote, and 1500 Horse, which hee should before have joyned with Gustavus Horn in Bamberg. The Duke, Aprill second, marching thorow Donawert; conjoynes them the same day unto the Kings army: then en∣camped about Northeim. The next day, Aprill third in the afternoone; was there a Trumpet brought blindfolded into the Kings presence: his message (as I find it written) was to require Letters of safe-conduct for the French Ambassador, then resident with the Duke of Bavaria. The Duke, perchance, would faine have treated: but I doe not find that the King was very forward to suffer himselfe to be the second time abused with that stale tricke of entertaining such a Treaty, as he might suspect to be intended, meerely to delude action. Whilst some are employed about finding out this best place
of advantage for the bridge; the King gives order unto the SwedesThe Swedes nerally one h another,  all Carpen∣: and the , being a ne, simple  droyling e of peo∣ are more for the e, then for Sword: not∣standing have here d so much, e great oyts of  Finlan∣ The les and nders, ly, are not est souldi∣ of the Ar∣ tis the  and Ger∣ that have t: and e both ner, done arts also. his Carpenters, and unto the Fins, his Pioners; to breake downe the houses of the neighbour villages; and to bring such timber, plancks, and boords, as might be fit for a bridge-worke. The place appointed for the working of the bridge, was at Oberendorff; a small Dorp some halfe an English mile from the very point, where the King intended to lay it over. The place resolved upon, was betwixt Rain and Thierhanbten; just upon a point of land: made so, by the crooking or bending of the River. The ground on the Kings side, was a pikes length higher banckt, and playner withall, then that on Tillyes: which was both lower, and wooddy. There was a tryall made first of all, to lay a floate∣bridge; but the River would not endure that: for notwith∣standing it be not above thirty or forty paces over at the most, yet by reason of the straight course of it, the streame sets very swift and violent. All the materials being now prepared; the King about nine at night, upon the fourth of Aprill, advances some 1000 Commanded men, unto the place aforesaid. Two houres af∣ter, they begin to worke a running Trench round about the crooked banke of the River, that the Muskettiers out of that, might with more security give fire into the Wood on the other side of the River. This Line or Trench, had a great Battery at each end of it, for halfe and quarter Cannon: toge∣ther with many lesser Batteryes betweene, all along about the Point, for the smaller field pieces to play upon: which were every-where intermingled with Muskettiers also. Whilest the Pioners are thus a working, the King in divers other places (both above it and below) gives false fires and Alarms, both with Muskets and smaller fielding peeces, for to amuse the enemy; that till the morning they could not imagine where to find him. ost fa∣ Story, of ings pas∣ he riverBy sixe on the Thursday morning, Aprill 5. was this worke finished, the Cannon mounted, the Arches or Tressels for the bridge, with the planckes and other materialls, all
brought; and ready to be laide into the River. These Tres∣sels, were to have great stones or weights tyed unto their legges, to sinke them withall; and were to be no longer, then to reach just unto the bottome of the River, so that the planckes were to lye even almost with the very Water. The longest Tressels were about foure yards long: which were for the channell of the River. By that time it was day-light, Generall Tilly begins to perceive the Kings designe,Tilly opposes the King. and falls to worke against him in the Wood: whose Pioners when the King heard chopping downe the trees, he gave order im∣mediately unto his men, to give them a Salvee or a Good mor∣row (as he cald it) both with their Cannon and their Muskets. About 8 a clocke the same morning, the King in two small Boats that he had, sends over the Swedes and Fins his Pioners and Carpenters, unto the other side of the River. The de∣signe was, to have them make up a small Halfe-moone, with a Stocket or Pallisadoe unto it: which should both answer that small worke that Tilly had made for his Muskettiers to lodge in, almost right before the said point of the River: and to cover the Bridge withall, from the greater shot; which this Halfe-moone still latched. The Fins and Swedes laboured upon the worke, and made good the place; till that about 4 a clock in the afternoone, both it was finished, and they relieved. The King all this while, is diligent in laying over his bridge, and Tilly as busie to raise up Batteryes to beate it downe a∣gaine. The King himselfe stird not all that night, nor the next day, from the very end of the bridge: nor the King of Bohemia from him, for the most part. Tilly upon the edge of the thicket, close unto the River, raises up a Trench first, to lodge his Muskettiers in, as we told you: and about Musket shot further within the wood, gives or∣der for the making of a very great Worke: that if the King should put over his bridge, he might by power of that Worke, and by cutting downe of the trees about it; have beene able (at least) to have hindred his further passage. The small and great shot, goe off incessantly on both sides all this while; and
they continue thus with extreme hot execution upon one an∣other, till about eleven a clocke at noone the same day. About which time, the Generall Altringer with the shot of a Field∣peece (which grased upon his temples) was spoyled and car∣ryed off in the Duke of Bavariaes owne Coach. Whether hee dyed of the blow, shortly after, was not a great while known in these parts: though now it be sure he is indifferently well recovered,ltringer unded, and with Walenstein. Some say, that hee be∣came crazed in the braine upon it: for mine owne part, I would be loth it should be so: for then hath that shot, spoy∣led one of the best Head-peeces of Germany, one of the nea∣test Schollers of the Empire. and Tilly mortally.The Bavarian Captaines found this so hot a service; that Tilly himselfe was enforced to come up to the point, and into the very face of the danger, to give directions: where with∣in halfe an houre after Altringers mis-chance; he also received a Musket shot in the thigh a little above the knee, which proo∣ved a mortall wound unto him. This fatall accident of this brave old Generall, did so amaze, not the Common souldi∣ours alone, but the Duke of Bavaria himselfe also; (who now staid behind in the groave with the Infantery:) that so soone as ever the sad newes was brought unto him, not∣withstanding he were Generalissimo over the whole Forces; yet he instantly tooke horse upon it, Duke of ia flees, posted with all speed into Ingolstat; not staying so much as to give order, either for the continuing of the begun designe, or for the marching away of the army. Tilly being carryed off, and the Duke gone: the after∣noone is spent on the Kings side, as the forenoone had beene; which was with uncessant thunders and volleyes of small and great shot. Among the Bavarians, those that under∣stood of the spoyling of their two Generalls, and the flight of the Duke,and men by  after . by degrees and disorder, they one after another retreated from their Charge: whilest others that knew not of it, stoutly maintained the encounter. Little dreamt the King of it all this while: whose men still continue their
working. By foure in the afternoone, is the bridge finisht:The King fi∣nishes his Bridge. as 2. houres after, the little Halfe-moone and Pallisadoe also are, on the other side of the water before the end of the bridge. This done, the Kings owne Company of his Life-guards is sent over the bridge, for the manning of the Halfe-moone; for feare the enemy should have fallen upon it. In the begin∣ning of the night, other of the Bavarians begin to retire, and to draw off their Ordnance; and that in such haste, that they forgot to command off their Out-guards, which lay all along upon the side of the River. The next morning, the King sends over a Partee of some thirty Scottish Muskettiers commanded by Captaine Forbes, to see what the Bavarians were doing in the Wood; for that he had lately heard no more of them. Here could Forbes find but two Horse-Sentryes upon the edge of the Wood; whom he tooke prisoners: who when they were brought unto the King, protested that they were ignorant of the re∣treate of the rest of their fellowes. But to returne a little backe. The King not knowing of Tillyes wounding, or the Dukes fleeing; durst not adventure that evening to put his forces over the bridge: but spends the rest of the night in drawing up his army before it. This be∣ing done, order is given unto the Infantery or foote, to march over in the first place: and of all them Sir Iohn Hep∣burn with his Brigade was to have the honor of the Ʋant∣guard; The King understanding by Forbes of this great and unhoped for newes; he alters thereupon all his former inten∣ded resolution: commanding the next morning, Aprill sixth, 500 Horse first, and 300 more after them, to passe over in∣to the Bavarian forsaken Quarters.The King, sends after Tillyes The first 500 being ad∣vanced thorow the Wood, and into the plaine beyond it; there cut downe a many of the Bavarian straglers, that had beene too slow in following of their fellowes. Some other Swedish troopes are instantly also commanded towards Rain; which though Tilly had left reasonably well fortified, yet this former feare amongst his party, made it nothing so re∣sistable
to the Swedish. They presently entring the Towne, find some wagons, and many horses, ready laden with the ene∣mies goods; which are made good booty: but the Towne pay∣ing 30000 dollars to the King, taken. are freed from pillaging. This was the first Towne, that the King tooke in Bavaria. There was it understood, that both the Duke of Bavaria, and the two wounded Generalls, parted the night before towards Newburg; whither they first retired: and from thence with as many of their Army as were then comne to them, unto In∣golstat. To returne to the King and his Leaguer. The rest of that Fryday, Aprile sixth, is spent in the marching over of more Horse, and of three Brigades of Infantery: together with most of the Artillery. The Infantery already marcht over, en∣campt that night upon the edge of the plaine, a little without the Wood: the rest that were left behind, sitting downe just before the bridge. And now for that such as are skilled in the Arts of war, will desire to be satisfied with the reason, as well as to heare the successe of the Action (in which oftentimes Chance may have as great a share, as Wisedome:) we will therefore affoard them a briefe discourse upon the Kings great Iudgement, as well as we have done the relation of his fortune. The reason of the Kings putting over his bridge at this place was, that hee might have the better conveniency, both by flanckering it on either side to defend it from the annoyance of the enemy;e Kings rea∣s for the oyce of the ce of his dge. and that being as it was, just upon the Point: it could not be touched by Tillyes batteryes, which were on each hand of the bridge, though he very often removed his Can∣non to that purpose. For notwithstanding Tilly had (with as much judgement and advantage as possibly might be) raised his Batteryes, not cloase unto the Rivers side, but at a di∣stance from the banke: yet were all his shot so kept off by the round and sudden shouldering away of the banke of the River at either end, that his Ordnance could not possibly come to beare upon the bridge; but that either the bullets fell short and
were latcht by the little Half-moone, or hill upon the high banke above the bridge; or else flew quite over the whole leaguer. As for the raising of a Battery right before the face of the point; that could not Tilly on the sudden come to doe: for besides that he was hindered by the wood; the fury of the Kings both small and great shot, would at so neere a di∣stance have spoild him as many men, as had adventured upon the service: and the Kings Batteryes being first up, would not suffer Tilly to mount any of his Cannon right before him. And yet for all this, there appeares to be more then a hu∣mane direction in it: seeing the King was made constant a∣gainst all the minds and judgements of his greatest Comman∣ders. For when the day before, he asked the advice of his a∣blest Generalls; and they, notwithstanding they saw him so farre already engaged in the action, as he could not come off with his honor; had freely (all of them) professed their utter dislike of the designe: yet did the King plainely tell them, that he continued against all their reasons, constant unto his owne purpose. Yea, there appeares not onely a more then humane direction, but a benediction also, in the easinesse of the attaining of the passage: which very much exceeded all the Kings owne hopes of it. For when the day before he percei∣ved Tilly to begin to worke against him; he apprehended so much danger in his owne designe, that should he loose but 2000 men in winning of his passage, he should thinke (as he confessed) that he had made a thrifty purchase of his en∣trance into Bavaria. When the next day (in like manner) that himselfe being marcht over with the Horse,The Kings judgement of the difficulty and conse∣quence of the action. had with his owne eyes perceived how sufficiently Tilly was providing to entertaine him; he blest himselfe for his good successe in it: saying to the King of Bohemia, and divers of his Com∣manders then about him; That this dayes action was neere of as great a consequence, as that of Leipsich. And so indeed it is worthy to be esteemed by all souldiours. When Cardinall Pasman (the Emperours Ambassadour with
the Pope) had the first newes brought him of this victory, and of the manner of it: hee to his friends pronounced A∣ctum est, There is an end of all: which some interpreted to be meant of the Empire, and of the Romish religion. Caiaphas (you know) did once prophecy. All this, as it gives us cause to admire Gods great providence, in creating such a place as this crooking of the Lech, (and God surely had a purpose in it:) so it wonderfully likewise commends the Kings judge∣ment, for so suddenly and so solidely apprehending the advan∣tage of it. And yet, for all this, had not the King escaped so cheape, as with the lives of two thousand brave men; had not He that directed Davids sling-stone into Goliahs forehead; gui∣ded one bullet unto Altringers forehead, and another into Tillyes thigh-bone: had not this brave old Count beene thus spoyled, the King had found but an unfriendly well-come into Bavaria, from that second and greater Worke, which Tilly had laboured upon, from sixe in the morning to eleven, but not yet finished. That worke I meane, which is before mentioned in the wood. And yet would there have falne out another diffi∣cultie, which the King could never till then come to know of. Thus. Suppose he had peaceably passed the bridge; & Tilly had let him doe it without disturbance: yet would not the place, (hee being over) have suffered him to have charged the Ba∣varians, with above two Brigades in front; and that, by rea∣son of advancing thorow the Woods, necessarily in disorder too; neither of which two could possibly have beene avoy∣ded: As for the Bavarians, they could have answered him from the Plaine, with sixe Brigades in front; and by advantage of the plaine ground, all in order too. They might also have had the advantage of their already planted Batteryes; especi∣ally if that great one had beene perfected: when as the Kings on the other side of the River, must necessarily all this while have beene silent, or have shot into the enemy, thorow his owne people. And this is the Story of the Kings bridge over the Lech: the description wherof we have thought worthy to be here in
Figure imparted unto you. A Peece it is, though not of so curious an Architecture as that of ten dayes worke over the Rhine, wherein CaesarLib 4. de Bell Gallico: circa medium. so much pleases himselfe in the large and accurate description of it: though, doubtlesse, it will proove as famous. Wee by this also see, what the losse of a brave Generall is. Constantinople held out manfully against the Turkes, so long as Iustinian the Generall was unwounded: but he fainting at the losse of his owne blood, and going from the walles; and the Emperour after him, (as the Duke of Ba∣varia now did after Tilly) that famous Citie was at that as∣sault conquered, and the Easterne Empire too, presently after it. And this is the Action of Thursday the fifth of Aprill, a day almost as famous as Wednesday, the former seventh of September.
The Explanation of the Letters in the former Figure of the Bridge. A The King of Sweden: and the King of Bohemia by him. B The Bridge. C A Trench or Brestworke; in which the Kings Musket∣tiers were lodged: betwixt the severall Batteryes of the great Ordnance. Which Muskettiers, are represented by the small stroakes, made right forwards. D Divers little Field-peeces. E Plat-formes or Batteryes for the Kings greater Cannon. F The Halfe-moone with its Pallisadoe or Stocket, beyond the Bridge; and for the guard of it. It was scarcely bigge e∣nough to lodge a hundred men in. G A little Vnderwood, or low Bushy place. H A place voyd of Wood: which was a Bache, sometimes over-flowne. I A Brestworke, for Tillyes Muskettiers. KK Tilly and Altringer: or the place where they were shot. L The high Wood, where the Duke of Bavaria stood. M Tillyes great Batteryes to shoote downe the Bridge. N A small riveret running thorow the Wood. O Tillyes great Brestworke; not yet finished. Begun at sixe in the morning; and left off when he was shot. P Some Horse-guards of Tillyes: layd scatteringly here and there all along the river, from Rain to Ausburg. Q The Kings Horse-guards, and Horse-Sentryes. R A hole in the earth, or casuall advantageable place; where∣in some of the Kings Foot were lodged. S The Hill behind Tillyes great Worke. T. The fashion of the Tressels, or Arches for the Kings Bridge.
Vpon Saterday, April 7, that part of the Cavallery which had marched over the day before, advanct further into the country, under the command of Gustavus Horn;Horn sent abroad. and the In∣fantery yet on the further side, marcht over to the other troopes already in Bavaria: with whom, in the plaine be∣fore the wood, they were all drawne up into Battaglia. This done,The King goes towards Aus∣burg. and the King with his whole Army now come over into Bavaria, and a small garrison left hehind him in the town of Rain; he marches forward towards Ausburg. Order is likewise given to the Cavallery yet left behind, to advance onwards upon the Schwabland side of the Lech (where they yet were;) and to bring the greater Cannon along with them; which the King as yet durst not adventure over his new made bridge. That same Saterday night,Takes Thier∣haubten, the King takes and lodges in, the Towne and Cloister of Thierhaubten, a pretty Towne on the East side of the small riveret Aicha: which is the same that runnes along by the Lechs side, thorow the Wood where Tillyes late Quarter was. The next day the Vantguard of his Maiesties Horse,and Friedberg. tooke in the Towne of Friedberg: the Magistrates bringing out the keyes to them. Whilest the King was upon his march towards Aus∣burg, there came an Ambassador to present himselfe unto him. His message was, to excuse the Duke of Newburg, con∣cerning his admitting of Tilly into his Towne and Countrey; and to iustifie it to be no breach of the Neutrality.An Ambassador from the Duke of Newburg. The King gave him a round answer. That they had deceived him, promi∣sing much both by letters and Ambassages, and keeping no promise: but giving leave rather and aide unto the enemies, to passe and repasse; sending him Ordnance and Ammunition: receiving his garrisons; advancing forward, helping and fa∣vouring him in all things: nothing respecting my letters, (saith he) but threatning my Trumpet and shooting at him. The Ambassador being much perplexed at this answer, with a trembling voice, and more humbled posture, replies; That he had letters from his Highnesse his Master: whereunto his
Maiesty very suddenly returned, Your Master is like you, and you are like your Master; you doe nothing but devise toge∣ther, how to deceive us Protestants: but I hope to pay you for it. The King went onwards againe; and the Ambassador having letters also unto Prince August, desires his mediation unto the King,Bavaria offers to treat. for the admittance of a Bavarian Ambassador one Spierinck: but no answer would the King vouchsafe un∣to it. At length the King sent him word backe, that he should cause 200000 pound of bread, and 300 tunnes of beere, to be forthwith delivered unto his army: and if for the time to come they would shew themselues true friends, they should then expect his Maiesties further pleasure and declaration to∣wards them. Soone after this, the King receives tidings of the enemies finall quitting of Newburg Towne; and that they had broken downe one of the Arches of the bridge, for feare of being pursued: and carried away 6 Field-peeces, and some powder and shot along with them. Hereupon is Colonell Landsberger with five hundred Horse,Newburg taken. dispatched a∣way to take possession of that City: to repaire the bridge; and to suffer no body, (especially of the Councell or chiefe Magi∣strates) to goe out of the gates of it. Sunday, April 8 about 5 at night, the King arrived at Lech∣hausen,The King besie∣ges Ausburg. a small Dorp within lesse then 2 English miles of Ausburg. This famous City, 10 English miles distant from Donawert, is seated in Schwabland upon the river Lech, over which it hath 2 bridges into Bavaria. Tis one of the greatest and rich∣est of Germany: and hath this honour aboue all the rest, that it gives title of distinction to the Protestant Religion: which, ever since it had by learned men beene agreed upon at this towne, hath beene called the Augustane Confession. The hin∣derance of the exercise of which Religion in it, had beene complained of by theSee the Diet of Leipsich, pag. 24. Leaguers of Leipsich. Since which time, the priviledges had likewise beene infringed; Popish Magi∣strates and garrisons put upon them; and the Protestants disar∣med. Thus then, the King, who professes himselfe most prin∣cipally,
to be the friend and Patrone of all the wronged Im∣periall Cities in generall; had more especiall reasons to deli∣ver this above all the rest: for if Iudea of old, were accoun∣ted an holy Land; and the warres for the recovery of it, Ho∣ly warres: and that principally for reverence unto the Law, which first went out of Sion:Esay 2.3. then was there a good degree of piety also in this endeavour of the Kings, for the deliverance of this City. The King at his comming before the towne, found 4500 souldiers in it: which by these degrees came up to this num∣ber. Vnto their former garrison, are 1500 Bavarians thrust in, March 15. The Lord Otho Henry Fugger being Governor, brings 4 Companies more of the Fuggers souldiers, into the Suburbs of St. Iames. March 25 are 2 other Bavarian Com∣panies put in. April 3 both Tilly and Altringer come into the towne, to take order for the souldiory: and Colonell Breda, then preferred to be Generall, hath order to strengthen his gar∣rison with 600 Foote, and 400 Horse more. In the end of March, were the Protestant Citizens disarmed: their Armes be∣ing fetcht from house to house by 40 muskettiers. And this was the present state of the City. The King being encamped at Lechausen, first of all beates in their Out-guards, which those of Ausburg had laid thereabouts. They thereupon burne downe their bridge be∣fore Lechausen; raise up a worke to keepe the King from com∣ming over there, and shoote incessantly at his people. He sending out some Dragooners to answer, and beate them off; pitches his campe immediately in the plaine Campagnia, at such a distance from the wals of the City of Ausburg, as a Can∣non might even almost range her bullet at randome to it. The rest of the day, and the Munday following; the King labours about the laying of 2 bridges over the Lech: one above the Towne, and another below it. This same Munday, he like∣wise causes some intercepted packets of letters to be opened; by which he understood the present constitution of the City: the double feare that the garrison had; that is to say, of the
Protestants within, (should they recover their Armes) as well as of the enemy without the Citie. Some prisoners af∣firmed also, the hopes they had of Tillyes or Cratzes com∣ming to relieve them. The King exceeding loth to deface this faire Towne, which his care of it had rather receive up∣on faire delivery, writes his Letters the same day unto them. The Contents were,The Kings Letters to the Towne. An admiration of His Majesty at the Townes-mens behaviours in these Warres; that whereas they needed not to have meddled, yet had they sundry times recei∣ved in his enemies. For which, although hee had just cause to requite them, by destroying them and their Citie; yet giving way unto his naturall clemency, (which tended alwayes to preserve all he could from their owne destruction) He there∣fore did now make proffer unto them of his Grace, if so be they did presently discharge their garrison, and declare them∣selves for his Majesty. The Cities Answer.The Citizens answer was, They were extremely perplexed that His Majesty had conceived any offence, at their receiving a garrison into their Citie: which they protest to haue beene done, not to oppose him, but that they had beene enforced to it by their obedience unto the Emperour. And had His Maje∣stie preuented that Imperiall command, and offered them a Swedish garrison first, they would neuer haue refused it. And whereas the licencing of their garrison, was a thing aboue their power: they humbly besought His Majestie to make them some gracious offer, and aduise them to depart qietly. A faire Answer. Together with the Kings Letter, did Gustavus Horn (now come backe unto the Kings army) send this word unto the Governor of the Towne,Horns Letter to them. that he supposed him to be a Gen∣tleman, who desired to shew himselfe no lesse prudent and profitable, then resolute and couragious for his Masters ser∣vice. And therefore he thought him farre enough from so dangerous an ambition, as might induce him to hazard so re∣nowne a City of the Empire: whereby instead of preserving it with reason, he should lose it rather and overthrow it,
by a too late repentance, and a course unevitable. And if he trusted upon the numbers of the people, yet he could not be confident upon the strength of his Fortifications: and as the valour of his men had as yet gained no renowne, so could he no wayes expect any succours from the Duke of Bavaria; who upon the last defeate received neere Rain (where he lost both his highlyest esteemed Generalls Tilly and Altringer) had no greater care at that present, then to save his owne head. Therefore doe I (saith he) offer my selfe to intercede for you with the King my Master, to make a faire and a rea∣sonable accord with you: wherein, (were I but once assu∣red, that the Towne would be forthwith freed of her garri∣son) I doubt not to prevaile with him. To the Townes-mens answer, the King thus replyed.The Kings re∣ply to their Letter. That he was glad to heare they were not willing to hazard their flourishing estate; nor to make conjunction with his enemyes, or opposition against him: but yet did he once more advise them to discharge their garrison, which hee knew well enough were no way able to withstand so numerous a people as the Burgers were; much lesse to fight against such an Army, as himselfe now had. Yet neverthelesse in favour of the City, would he not refuse them some equitable agree∣ment, but was willing to condiscend unto some reasonable conditions with the said garrison. This gracious answer received, the Popish magistracy now calling in the Protestants;The Citizens second Answer. cause them (which they knew would have more Credit with the King) to witnesse with them unto his Majesty, that the garrison had beene forced upon them, by the earnest commandement of the Emperour; and that by threatnings mixt with promises, had the abso∣lute command both over the souldiours and the Citizens, beene put into the hands of that present Governor. Where∣fore, seeing the discharging of the garrison was not in their power, and that they feared, the Governor would not out but upon faire termes; unlesse which were granted, the bu∣sinesse might runne to such extremities, as might tend to the
destruction of so noble and flourishing a State. Therefore did they most humbly beseech his Majesty to consider, that all the Protestants being now disarmed, and disabled thereby to assist the well inclined Catholikes, in any forcible attempt against the garrison: he would let this be an argument unto him, to grant so gracious conditions unto the said Governor, as might induce him to depart presently. And so by the boun∣ty and Clemency of his Majesty, should their City be preser∣ved from the threatned ruine and desolation. All this moved not the Governor nor his garrison; there∣fore had the King other arguments to perswade them. All this time went his two bridges on, which were no sooner finisht, and the King ready to march over, and to bring his men to approach the walls; but they who had thundered all this time with their Ordnance, as if they intended to worke wonders; send out to the King to desire a calme parlee, ere ever they came to shot of Musket.The garrison parlies, and yeelds. Tis best treating (you may perceive) with a mans sword in his hand: and to joyne an armed Orator in Commission with a Gowned. The next day, Aprile tenth, the Bavarian garrison of 4500 Horse and Foote, march forth of the City; being all for the most part, new levyed people. The King himselfe now asking them whether they would forsake the Emperor, and serve him; 500 of the old souldiours presently came over and tooke pay of him. The rest marcht away with complete armes, and were convoyed unto Landsberg. Into their roomes, did the King put 24 Companies of Foote, and foure Cornets of Horse which were enquartered round about within the City, next unto the walls of it. The Count of Hohenlo or Hollock was appointed Governor, and yong Ox∣enstiern had the Command over the Militia. Wednesday, Aprill eleventh, the King being yet in his Quarter at Lech-hausen, commands the Catholike Councell, the Protestant Deputies, and the Guards of the City (which last were all Papists) to appeare before him. The Romane Catholikes he displaced, restoring the Protestants to their for∣mer
offices. The priviledges were still continued unto the Towne, without any diminution of their Charter. Whilst the King was at this siege,Some Boores appeare, and are dispersed. some 2000 Boores (or thereabouts) having gotten together in the Woods and Mountaines, were now comming downe towards Ausburg. The King hearing of their approach, does them the honour to goe out in person against them with a Partee of 500 Horse; before whose comming the Boores were already fled, and dispersed: Captaine Hobb had taken fright at the sight of certaine small troopes of Horse, ere ever the King could come neere him. These Countrey people being displeased with the new contributions; r'allee more of their fellowes together upon the same quarrell. All assembling towards the end of the month about Schrobenhausen, (mid-way betwixt Ausburg and Ingolstat) overlay and kill some fiftty Swe∣dish Souldiours; and not kill them onely, but like Boores in∣deed, mangle and misuse them, savagely cutting off their noses, &c. In revenge of which and other the like prankes; the Swedish burne 200 of the Boores Dorps and houses. The Boores having now no houses to goe to (such is the mi∣sery of the warres) runne with open mouth and stirre up their Cosins and neighbours of Schwaben and Tirole: the event whereof we shall anon tell you. Vpon the fourth of Aprill, betwixt eleven or twelve at noone, his Majesty made his Royall entrance into Ausburg: where the first thing he did, was to goe into Saint Annes Church, which had formerly beene taken from the Prote∣stants. Being here accompanyed by his Majesty of Bohemia,The King en∣ters the Citie. and waited upon by Palatine August, Duke William of Saxon-Weymar, Iohn Duke of Holstein, Christopher Marquesse of Ba∣den, with many Princes, Lords, &c. He was entertained into the Church with the Organs and Quire singing. After which was sung the 103 Psalme: and then followed the Sermon, preached by Doctor Fabritius the Kings owne Chaplaine, upon Psalme 12. verse 5. The words were fitted to the occasion. For the oppression of the poore, for the sighing of the
needy: now will I arise (saith the Lord) I will set him in safety from him that puffeth at him. After the Sermon, followed a most solemne Thankesgiving for the victory.Makes his Thanksgiving. Many teares were shed, and many a heart leapt for joy, at this Exercise. After the Sermon and Thankesgiving, was Te Deum, or We Praise thee O God, sung in High Dutch; the Organs playing as before: the like being done throughout all the Churches of the City. From thence, both their Majesties, &c. went to the great market place, called The Wine market: where there was a guard made of some souldiours, whilest the Citizens tooke their Oath unto the King. It was read by Philip Sadler, Councellor of State and Secretary. The Contents were. 1. To remaine faithfull and loyall to his Majesty, and the Crowne of Sweden. 2. To further the good and wel-fare of the same; and to hinder and prevent all prejudices and domages of it. 3. To doe all those things, and performe all those Duties to his Majesty: which Subjects owe unto their naturall Prince, and lawfull Magistrate. So helpe them God, both in soules and bodies. Heereupon, the new Councell of the City being sent for, and the King consulting awhile with them apart: went to his lodging at the Lord Marquard Fuggers house, where dinner was provided for him. After dinner, followed the Presents; which received, his Majesty went to the State-house and the Storehouse; wherein besides plenty enough of all military provisions, he found a magazine of Armes (all moderne fashioned & good) sufficient for 30000 men, as they of the Towne have written it. The King gives order to have the Towne new fortified; to have foureteene Skonces and Bastiles built about it: and the City to be restored to the exercise of their owne Augustane Confession. The King goes owards Jngol at.Ausburg being taken order for; the King Aprill 15. leaves the City, and marches by Friedberg unto Waho: which (as I take it) the Mapps write Aicha, as one Relation also
doth. This Aicha is a walled Towne, and 10 English miles on∣ward of his way to Ingolstat, whither he was now march∣ing. Hereabouts was the King met by an Ambassador from Duke Albertus of Bavaria, second brother unto the ruling Duke Maximilian. The Ambassador humbly presents unto his Maiesty, that his said Master Duke Albertus, had alwaies hitherto behaved himselfe as a quiet Prince, having never been a partaker in all these differences. For which reason his hope now was, (which favour he also craved) that his Maiesty would spare his poore Children, Subiects and Country; and not trouble them with any military charges or molestations. To all which the King replyed, That the King of Bohemiaes Mo∣ther and Brother had not beene spared, by the other party; notwithstanding they had no wayes engaged themselues in these warres: but on the contrary, all their estates had with∣out all iustice and reason beene taken from them. The Gen∣tleman perceiving the Kings resolution by his answer, re∣turnes with it to his Master: who presently packs up, and retires with his Lady and Children into the neighbour Bi∣shoprick of Saltzburg: whither the Duchesse of Bavaria, wife to the Duke now in action, was with-drawn beforehand. Duke Albertus is glad after this, to send another messenger unto the King, to compound for the rating of the contributi∣ons of his Country. The next day, April 16. the King continues his march to∣wards Ingolstat: with his whole Army both Horse and Foot, now put into Battaglia; the Cannon marching upon their right hand. In this order he still advances, till he comes with∣in sight of Ingolstat: where by reason of a certaine Morasse, he is enforced to quit that forme of marching. Leading them therefore forward still, (according as the place would suffer him) he comes within 2 English miles of the towne: where for that night in plaine Campagnia he encamped. The next day he advanc't further; passing in the way by 3 or 4 bridges, over some little brookes that runne that way into the Danuby. Passing on therefore beyond Stinne, till the Vantguard were
comne within musket-shot almost of the very walls of Ingol∣stat:The King lies downe before Ingolstat. he close by the gallowes bridge began to cast up a Re∣doubt and a Halfe-moone, upon that side of the bridge, namely, which is neerest unto the Towne. The reason of the Kings approaching so neere the walls, was; because of a hope he had upon some Correspondents in the towne, by whose meanes he trusted to have it rendred. This day and the next, were spent in working: not at the Gallowes bridge onely, but in casting up a regular Trench for the safeguard of the whole Army, which was now brought within Cannon shot of the Towne. This Towne of Ingolstat (which hath an Ʋniversity of Ie∣suites in it) is one of the very strongest pieces of all Germany. It belongs unto the Duke of Bavaria; notwithstanding the Danuby be betwixt it and his Country. The Approaches to∣wards the towne, be troublesome; and the Fortifications about it, very good. Two bridges it now had over the Danuby; one within the towne, and another without it; which last is the same we called the Gallowes bridge, right before which, the King was encamped. This was guarded with 2 great Works, on the same side the King lay on. The Duke of Bavaria, was by this time marcht quite tho∣row Ingolstat:The Duke of Bavaria lies en∣camped be∣yond the river. and lay now encamped with his whole Army on the other side of the Danuby: hard by the banke of it, and so onwards towards Ratisbone. So neere the King, that hee might well discerne them out of his Leaguer: though he could not come at him. They of the towne, shot very fiercely all this while with their great Ordnance, into the Kings Trenches: with which first and last, they kild him some three hundred souldiers. The first night after, (which was Thursday, April 19.) some of the Towne issuing out,A sally made a show of themselues by one of the Forts neere the Gallowes bridge. The King upon sight of them giving out a wish, that he had some brave fellowes which would undertake them: divers troopes both of Horse and Foot presently making out,beaten in. beat them backe into the said
Halfe-moone, and enter it pell mell together with them. But the piece being open behind, no sooner were the salliers recei∣ved that way into the towne; but that the Ordnance from the walls beat the Swedish out againe: it being not to be holden,and the Swedish beaten off. by reason of that lying open behind unto the Towne Ord∣nance. On Friday morning, April 20, the King going out to give some directions to his Horse-guards, that lay before one of the enemies bridges a little without the towne;The Kings horse shot un∣der him. had his Horse shot under him with a Cannon bullet of 14 pound weight. The shot tooke him about the hinder skirt of the saddle; with the force of it turning both Horse and King over and over. The King with this tumbling up and downe, having onely hurt his legge a little; was quickly gotten upon his feete againe. The first word he spake after it to the Squire of his body that then waited upon him, was, How could they possibly come to hit me? I thought I had beene in covert. Mounting forthwith upon his Squires horse, he comes riding off unto his Quarter. The same day the young Marquesse Christofer of Baden (otherwise called Durlach) had halfe his head shot off, as he was commanding his troops close by the same place,The Marquesse of Baden slaine. where the Kings horse was shot. Iust the same houre of the Marquesses death, dyed the Generall Tilly within the towne:Tilly dyes. and that of the wound received at the Lech, after the taking of 4 Splinters out of his thigh. There was a mortall enmity of old, betwixt Tilly and this Marquesse: which caused the King to make observation, How fatall one place and houre, proved to 2 such enemies. The Marquesses death, made the King more apprehensive of his own danger and delivery: the meditation whereof, formed it selfe into this religious Orati∣on, publikely uttered by his Maiesty before divers of his chiefe Commanders in the Camp before Ingolstat. The late and unfortunate death of the Marquesse of Baden (whose fall I am most heartily sorry for,The Kings ora∣tion upon his escape. because of those rare vertues that were eminent in him, not unfit to be pub∣lished to the world) and that thundering Cannon shot withall,
doe put me in mind that I am but mortall, and subiect to the same mischances, which the meanest of my subiects are liable unto. It is an universall decree, which neither my Crowne, my Birth, nor my Victories, are any wayes able to reskue or exempt me from. What therefore now remaineth, but that I wholly resigne up my selfe unto the providence of the Al∣mighty? who though he may please to call me out of this world, yet will he not for all that, abandon this so iust a cause, as I have now undertaken for the re-establishment of the Germane liberties. He, doubtlesse, will raise up some o∣ther more wise, more couragious and valiant then my selfe; who shall put a period unto this warre. I know that the good successe which it hath pleased God to affoord me in my enterprises, hath made some to enuy me: who also labour to perswade the simple, that I endeavour nothing more then mine owne profit; by the robbing and spoyling of others. But I in this case call all those Princes to witnesse, whom I have againe re-established into their own rights and inheri∣tances: and those Creditors also, of whom I have borrowed such hugy summes of money, as at Franckford and else∣where: yea and the dangers too, which I daily expose my Person unto; whether or no I have left mine own kingdome, and those that are Dearest to me in this world, for any other end, or with any other intention, but onely to pull downe the tyranny of the House of Austria, and to obtaine a solid and a settled peace unto all men. This Oration of the Kings was here interrupted, by the ioy∣full acclamations of the Auditory, and the cheerefull promi∣ses of their best assistances: all of them with teares beseeching his Maiesty, to be more carefull in time to come of adventu∣ring his Royall Person; and to continue his first resolutions: as they for their parts there vowed, to persist in their fidelities. Vpon Sunday, April 22. had the Danish Ambassador his Audience of the King. The French Ambassador Monsieur de St. Estienne, resident with the Duke of Bavaria, was come
from Munchen to the Kings Leaguer, to mediate the condi∣tions of a peace. That night went the King of Sweden unto Newburg;The King goes to Newburg. whither he was accompanied by the King of Bo∣hemia, Prince Palatine August, Iohn Duke of Holstein, &c. They tooke a particular view of the Fortifications of the Towne; of the Church, Colledge, and Magazine. There they lodged that night; and returned very early next morning unto their Leaguer. The King having beene 4 or 5 dayes already before Ingol∣stat, and perceiving now his correspondency to faile him within the towne: he having at all no purpose of making a long siege of it, resolues to rise and goe towards Munchen. Vpon Munday therefore April 23 first sending abroad Gusta∣vus Horn with sixe thousnad men,Horn sent to spoyle the Country. to make some spoile up∣on the Dukes Countrey; he gives order to his army to be rea∣dy for their departure. The next day, Tuesday 24.The King rises from Ingolstat. The whole Army rises: of which, this was the order. First, are some Horse sent away before; and after them the Baggage; and then the Cannon and Infantery. The rest of the Horse, together with 600 Swedish Muskettiers, were left behind with the Ge∣nerall Banier, to make good the Retreat. The last men still left behind upon the Point (that is, in the Halfe-moone and Redout by the Gallowes Port) were no soo∣ner drawne off; but the Towne garrison, (even before the Swedish were gone full musket shot from the place) by de∣grees possesse themselues of the Kings Works: for now one comes stealing and peeping in, to see if all the enemies were gone; and then comes another or 2; and so more, one after another. With this, doe the Towne Horse sally likewise,A sally repulsed by Banier. (about some 12 troopes of them) and upon an advantageable place, which was iust upon the passage of the second bridge, and when the Forlorne Hope of the Kings Horse (who still man'd the Reere) were to passe the said bridge, doe they fiercely charge the Forlorne Hope aforesaid. They giving the Alarme thereupon to the next Body of the Reere; Generall Banier instantly faces about towards the Sallyers, with his
Cavallery: bringing forward some of his Muskettiers with∣all, to me the enemy giue something backe from the Passe. Banier being thus returned backe againe ouer the Passe to∣wards the enemy, they retire skirmishing: till they had led the Swedish on to a second place of aduantage, at the Morasse afore mentioned. Here making Halt or a stand; Banier so presses upon them, that hee beats them from this aduantage also. Banier hauing passed ouer beyond this place, and with three troopes of Horse onely; the Ingolstadians retreat with their whole Body to a third aduantage, more then Mus∣ket shot from the Morasse: where they on both sides conti∣nue skirmishing betwixt the two Bodies, for the space almost of a whole houre together. Banier perceiuing they would no more come on, retires backe againe in order; without any more difficultie, marching after the King to Geisenfelt: a walled Towne some two Dutch miles from Ingolstat, onwards of the way to Mos∣burg.The King odges at Gei∣nfelt. Here the King for that night encamps with his whole Army; having spent the afternoone, in doing the Funerall Rites unto the Marquesse of Baden. The King thus retired from Ingolstat; those of the Towne make diligent search for the carkasse of his horse, which they had shot under him, and He had caused to be buried. The Horse being found,Those of Jn∣olstat dig up he Kings dead horse. and digg'd up (which no doubt was a sweet finding) his hide was very curiously taken off, stuft with straw, and hangd up in Ingolstat for a Trophee, they triumphing over it very gloriously, and insulting upon the Kings Rising. The horse was a white ambler, which the King very much delighted in: it was his Ronsarte, his Bucepha∣lus, on which he used to ride about his Army: and yet did he never thinke, his horse should have beene so much made on. Now much good doe it my politike Masters, the Fathers of the Iesuites Colledge of Ingolstat: for their deepe device no doubt it was; our Parliament House knowes them for old diggers. Yet they wrought but for a dead horse,) as the pro∣verbe is. And this is all, which they had for their brave,
and worthily renowned Generall, Iohn Tserclaes Count of Tilly: who dyed the same day in Ingolstat,Tilly dyes. that the Kings Horse was shot under him. The King can allow them a Horse for a Generall, at any time. Twas a brave Palfrey indeed; but (me thinkes) they might have had a better project with his hyde, then stuft it: had they but made a Drumme of it, the sound of that, would (no doubt) have driven away all the horses of their enemies. But now they have stuft the skinne, what will they doe with the bones? They should doe well to use them as the Turkes did Scanderbegs bones at Lyssa: which they digd up, and set in Rings and Iewels. Certainely there was vertue in that Horse, virtualis contactus (they knew) had coueighed it into him. But their spight chose rather to use this horse, as those of Breda did the Boate, by which their Towne had beene taken: they whipt the boate up and downe the streets, and then hangd it up for a Trophee. But we have enough (too much will some say) made our selves merry with the Iesuites; who before the King of Swedens comming into Germany, laught in their sleeves at all the world besides. The next day (which was Wednesday, Aprill 25) the King marches from Geisenfelt to Mosburg upon the River Iser;The King comes to Mosburg. which is some 20 English miles to the South-East of Ingol∣stat. Hither did Gustavus Horn come againe unto the King: who in his passage backe from burning part of the Country villages, that would not readily give him money; had easily brought the two walled Townes of Hohnwart and Pfaffen∣hoven, to a composition. By this time had the Abbot of Saint Georges (in the way towards Munchen) sent in his ex∣cuse;Protestant Churches and Schooles resto∣red. that he was not able to build up againe the new Church of the Protestants, which had beene lately taken from them and broken downe: but he was willing and ready to deliver them up his owne Church, so that he might keepe but one Chappell for his owne use. The Abbot of Saint Maurice, he also sent word, that he was willing to build up the Prote∣stants Church againe, which they lately had in his Iurisdiction.
Thus both Churches and Schooles were againe restored un∣to the Protestants in those parts of Bavaria: yea and their Armes, (though much empaired) which had before beene taken from them. About Aprill 27, are Gustave Horn and Sir Iohn Hepburn, sent with 3000 Horse and 5000 Foote; to take in Land∣shut:Horn and He∣bron take in Landshut. a very dainty little Towne upon the River Iser (though the glory of it be chiefely in two Streets) some eight English miles to the North-East of Mosburg. At the first comming of the Swedish forces before the walls, one of their Liefte∣nants of a troope of Horse, with some few others of his Cornet, were shot from an Ambush in the gardens. That mor∣ning, had some 1300 Bavarian Horse (after a very hard march of nine Dutch miles together) put themselves into the Towne: so that they seemed yet to be resolute upon the re∣sistance. But so soone as ever they perceived the grosse of the 5000 Foote, to be come up, they retreated out of the Towne unto the further side of the River Iser; breaking the bridges downe behind them. The Towne paid 100000 Dol∣lars to the King for its ransome; and gave Gustavus Horn 20000 besides, for a gratuity. Landshut being thus taken, and Sir Iohn Hepburn (for the time) left Governour, Gustavus Horn went backe againe to the King; who two dayes after the taking,Land sperg ta∣ken. comes and lodges in it. The day before this, was the handsome Towne of Landsperg upon the River Lech, taken by Colonell Slammersdorff with 300 Dragooners: sent (as I collect) from the Governour of Ausburg. After Landsperg, were the two good Townes of Fuessen and Schonga; both more Southerly and higher up the Lech taken also. In Landshut, the King staid some five or sixe dayes. Some of the reason for which (besides the refreshing of the Army) may be a thought the King had towards Ratisbone or Regens∣purg: whence (as tis written) divers had sent to sollicite him to come thither. And indeed the whole Country be∣twixt Landshut and Regenspurg, for foure Bavarian Leagues together, was all the way open. Some Partees are about this
time sent that way ward, who had divers skirmishes with the Bavarians, that had comne out of Ratisbone. For the Duke of Bavaria and Cratz (now Generall in Tillyes place) were gone by this time from Ingolstat into Ratisbone: which Towne, now surprized by the Duke, was also foulely plundered by his souldiors; whose reason for it was, As good they doe it, as the Swedish. But the King now under∣standing Wallenstein to be about Passaw, upon the frontiers to∣wards Bohemia, and that though upon a military emulation, he had never heartily affected Tilly; no nor the Duke of Ba∣varia neither, since he had at the Dyet of Ratisbone wrought the Emperour to cashiere him: yet now for the common causes sake, and upon Cratz his entreaty, (who had beene one of his Colonels last yeere in Pomerania) he might (as the King judged) be drawne to doe something for Bavaria. His Majesty thus misdoubting the worst; esteemes it not fit for his designe, to adventure one against two; and resolves withall to passe no further to the North or North-East at this time. Purposing now to tickle Bavariaes Minniken string; so soone as ever he had received his money from Landshut, Hee, May 4th, turnes backe againe towards Mosburg, and thorow that unto Freising: a City and Bishops See upon the same River, two Bavarian Leagues onwards of the way to∣wards Munchen. Here lay he all night, May fifth:The King goes to Freising, the Towne paying 50000 Dollars for its ransome; and the whole Bishopricke quietly yeelding to a Contribution. May sixth, the Army removes againe towards Munchen; 18 miles South of Freising, and upon the West of the Iser. This Munchen (pronounced Minniken) is one of the neatest of all Germany: and the Dukes curious Palace,and so to Mun∣chen. with the Iesuits sumptuous Church: a second Escuriall, as some terme it. It had beene the Nest and Office of Receipt for the richest and eatest pillages, that the Duke himselfe, or his Gene∣rall Tilly, have for many yeeres warres together, gotten from the Protestant Princes. The Duke of Bavaria was still about Ratisbone: and there much troubled with sore eyes,
caused by the smoake of his owne Country. And yet out of a hope to see himselfe once againe Master of this Palace, had he beene so carefull to preserve it, that he had sent a com∣mand unto his Chancellor to deliver it over, when-ever the King should make towards it. The Deputies of the Towne likewise, had beene at Freifing with the King, May 5th, and had made tender of 200000 Dollars for theyr ransome: which would not be accepted. Vpon Munday in the fore∣noone, May 7th, the King shewed himselfe in faire Battaglia before it: although by that time he were come within a Dutch mile: the Deputies had againe met him, and there presented the towne keyes unto him, with a promise of 300000 Dol∣lars. The chiefe condition which they requested was, that their garrison might march out without disturbance: which was indeed in the Kings power to have hindered, his Horse lying every where up and downe in the Country. The King enters the towne the same day; accompanied by the King of Bohemia, Palatine August, and 3 of his Regiments, taking up his lodging in that sumptuous Palace: the rest of his Army be∣ing enquartered in and about the City. The next day, the King went to see the Magazine and Ar∣mories; where great store of armes and ammunition were found, but no Ordnance: at which the King not a little won∣dering; espied by and by divers of the carriages; by which he guessed, as the truth was, that the peeces were buried un∣der-ground. These dead ones (as he cald them) he caused the Boores with ropes and leavers, to raise up without a miracle. There were 140 faire Peeces of brasse Ordnance; and in one, 30000 pieces of gold, said to be found. Among the rest, were 12 eminent ones; by the Duke called the 12 Apostles: though surely the Apostles were never such sonnes of Thunder. Some peeces had the Palsgraves Armes upon them; which caused the King of Bohemia both to sigh and smile, at the sight of them. But the Kunst-Cammer, or Chamber of Rarities, was the thing that affoorded most entertainment: where the beholders admired rather, then lookt upon, the incomparable varieties
and curiosities, both of Art and Nature. The Iesuites Church, was a piece of admiration also: and the Images among the rest, made by Brouse that famous Artist; together with the manufactures, and silver works of divers kinds. The King went into this Church, iust when the Iesuites were at their Masse: and the Father Rector comming towards the King, his Majesty entertained a discourse in Latine with him, a∣bout the Lords Supper. The King after this, calling the Citti∣zens together; askes them whether they would hereafter fight against him, or pay the Contribution from time to time, that should be imposed upon them? They much complaining of their Dukes avarice and former hardnesse towards them, and especially for his now forsaking of them; faintly pro∣mise, what they durst not deny: wholly to submit them∣selves to his Majesties good pleasure, and to take oath unto him. On Wednesday, May 9th. the King held a generall Mu∣ster before the City: himselfe (to shew some content to the Bavarians) drilling and exercising his souldiors: teaching them especially how to give a Charge or Salvee; some upon their knees, others behind them stooping forward; and the hindmost ranke standing upright, and all to give fire at once, the hinder man over his foremans shoulder. The next day, May 10th, was Ascension day: on which the King caused the first Protestant Sermon to be preached, in the Castle: the King himselfe (as tis written) giving order for this Psalme of Doctor Luthers. Rejoyce yee now O Christians true, Your hearts now leape for joy: Now sing without annoy, What wonders God hath done for you, &c. After dinner; the King went to Saint Maryes Church to see the Popish ceremonies, in celebrating the Feast of the Ascension. That evening whilest the King was at supper, were some twenty Bavarian horsemen brought in prisoners to him. These, with a thousand, others, had beene sent out of
Ratisbone to fall on the sudden upon the Swedish garrison of Freising. Here having timely been discovered, they were pro∣vided for; and had such Wellcome and Entertainment as vsu∣ally the Warres afford, which is, to beate their Ʋisitants out a doores againe. They could tell no certainty as yet, of any likelyhood of their Dukes joyning with Wallenstein. And herein they said trueth: for Wallenstein (it seemes) purposing to play his owne game, was now going towards Prage; which he tooke shortly after. The King pleasantly said to these Horsemen. You now suffer what you would have made others to suffer: thus you see, none is forbidden to strike a∣gaine, that is first strucken. By this time hath the King word brought unto him, of Commissary Ossa (lately made one of the Emperours Gene∣ralls) his comming out of Alsatia, with 7000 men after him. Part of these, were some of Ossaes and the Arch-duke Leopolds (the Emperours brothers) old Army; part were brought by Harincourt from the Duke of Lorrayn;The King oes to deliver brach from ssa. and part were come out of Italy by the Ʋal-Teline passage. The Boores of Bavaria, Schwaben, & Tirole, were also up in Com∣motion, and Ossa was now become Head unto them. Ossaes chiefe charge, was, the defence of Leopolds Country of Alsa∣tia; of the Austrian Lands in Tirole (of all which Archduke Leopold is Administrator) and of the Circle of Schwaben. This Ossa about this time, marches up to Bibrach; a weake Imperiall City in Schwabland towards Donawert, about five English miles South of the Danuby, and eight from Mem∣mingen. Hither had he secretly beene invited by the Burgo∣master and the Popish Clergy; and upon this Towne, two assaults he made: but so well did the Cittizens put him off, that he both times lost his labour, and 400 men into the Bar∣gaine. That which added shame unto his losse, was; that no small part of the slaughter was made by women: these Ʋi∣ragoes with scalding water, stones and such feminine wea∣pons, beating his men from the walls of their City, and en∣couraging their husbands. The King having notice of these
proceedings of Ossaes; gives order with all speed for the marching away of 5000 Horse, and about 4000 Foote: himselfe likewise immediately following to goe along with them. Leaving Munchen therefore, and Colonell Hebron Governor in it: he taking his way by Ausburg (where he was about May 20) marches directly towards Memmingen. Here he first of all layes a bridge over the River Iler: which running from hence towards Vlm, falls thereabouts into the Danuby. Ossa hearing of the finishing of this bridge, retires with so much speed to the Quarters hee came last from, (which were towards Lindaw and the Bodensee neere the Mountaines) that he left his Ordnance behind him. Ossaes Cor∣respondents were carryed prisoners into Ʋlm. The King having thus delivered Bibrach; leaves the Army thereabouts, under the command of Duke Bernard of Saxon-Weymar, himselfe with some few guards returning towards Ausburg; where he was about May 27. Here receiving the newes, that Wallenstein had advanced towards Prage and taken it, and forced the Saxons out of Bohemia: and that Cratz withall, was gone from about Ratisbone and Ingolstat, and falne with his forces into Bavaria first, and into the frontiers of Franconia and Schwaben after: and had there taken Weissen∣burg: (which is the Passe betwixt Ausburg and Norimberg:) He out of his care to this last named City, which so much con∣cernd both his honour and his designes; resolves to leave Bavaria, and to goe with his Army into those quarters. Speeding backe therefore againe unto Munchen;The King drawes his for¦ces out of Ba∣varia. he gives order to those troopes which had till now beene left therea∣bouts; to march with all speed towards Donawert: where the rest from about Memmingen, should meete and joyne with them. Cratz, indeed, with 2000 Foote, and the valiant Baron of Cronenberg with his Regiment of Horse (which was the flower of the Army:) upon the hearing of the Kings going towards Bibrach, were falne againe into Bavaria. Their designe, was to recover Munchen; and from Ratisbone, they
were already advanced as farre as Pfaffenhoven: where getting advice of some Swedish troopes that were comming to en∣counter them, they faire and timely retired into Ingolstat. The Kings hearing of their making towards Munchen; was the cause that he made thither, so soone as Ossa was skared from Bibrach:atz takes issenburg, when Cratz and Cronenberg hearing of the Kings coming towards that way, they goe the cleane contrary, unto Weissenburg. This Imperiall City we have before descri∣bed, in the Kings march up to Donawert: but in what Pro∣vince or Circle of the Empire it is placed, the Geographers and Mapp-makers themselues doubt of. Some 24 English miles it is to the North-West of Ingolstat; and in it, had the King left some forces: and by it, was the strong Castle of Wils∣burg, with a Tillian garrison. Cratz now layes siege to Weis∣senburg; and the Swedes stand upon the resistance: but more Gunns being brought out of Wilsburg Castle, and bent against them; they parly and yeeld. What quarrell was pickt, I know not: but sure it is, that the Swedes refusing to turne to the Bavarian party, had all their throates cut. The Towne is also plundered, the chiefe Citizens and Preachers carried away prisoners, two Gates of the City burnt downe to the ground: and then newes being brought of the Kings com∣ming;d forsakes it. the Bavarians forsake all againe, and hye them backe into Ingolstat. In this Interim, had Duke Bernard of Saxon-Weymar so well behaved himselfe; that in the pursuite of Ossa, he had light upon one of his bravest Regiments, (which he had put into a fortified place) consisting of 2000 men, and conducted by Hannibal Count of Hohen-Ems: all which he had utterly rou∣ted and defeated; taken the Count, with 400 prisoners, and 8 Ensignes.ernard Wey∣ars good ser∣ce. The Count was sent prisoner to Isne first, and to Ʋlm afterwards. This feate had Duke Bernard done, time enough to meete the King at Donawert. His Maiesty now about to leave Bavaria; takes the best or∣der that he might, for the quiet of the Country behind him. Garrisons he left none (except in Rain onely,) because there is
never a towne defensible in all the whole Duchy. To supply which defect, was the Generall Banier left with some 8 Re∣giments about Ausburg: and divers Waine-loades of Priests, Iesuites and other chiefe persons brought into safe custody within Ausburg, to be pledges and hostages for the fidelity of the Bavarians. Against the Boores, the Leopoldish and Os∣saes forces in Schwabland, Tirole, &c. was Duke William of Saxon-Weymar left with 12000 men, about Memmingen.What forces the King left behind him. At Vlm, was Sir Patrick Ruthven Governour; who had a small Army also. And Duke Iulius, Administrator of the Duchy of Wirtemberg, having about the 20th of this moneth beene at Ausburg with the King; had promised him to levy 8000 men to second his forces, and to observe the motions of Archduke Leopold and the Generall Ossa. To prevent (last of all) the com∣ming of more forces out of Italy to the aid of Ossa; the King, much about this time, writes his letters unto the Switzers: who upon the receipt of them, going from their Diet of Lu∣cerne, unto another at Baden; resolue there to give no more passage to the Spanish thorow their country into Germany. This was the Kings letter. Srs: Being enformed how that the King of Spaine doth labour by all possible meanes,The Kings let∣ter to the Switzers. to perswade you to grant him a free passage out of Italy, into these parts of Germany against Vs; for the advancement of his pernicious and uniust designes, and for the favour and furtherance of our enemies and their pro∣ceedings: I have thought good to exhort and admonish you most lovingly by these presents, to remember with your selues, That your Common-wealth hath ever hitherto most gloriously flourished, and renownedly maintained its liberty, against all opposers whatsoever; and especially against those of the Houses of Burgundy and of Austria: which 2 Hou∣ses, have striven oftentimes to deprive and barre you of your liberties. Yea of that liberty, namely, which is the best of all the rest, the freedome of your Consciences: this would they have taken away from some of you, and the liberty of Go∣vernment
from you all. I would desire you likewise to be mindfull of that good Correspondency, which I have al∣waies hitherto maintained with your State: for which rea∣son I cannot but forewarne you, that you become carefull hence-forward, to remaine firme and constant within the termes and bounds of Neutrality, and of that good agreement and correspondency, which yet is betwixt us; no waies yeel∣ding or affoording, either passage, favour or assistance, unto the enemy. Otherwise if you doe, I shall then be constrained to begin before them, and to commence warre against you, which should it so fall out: tis your selues then, that by your owne faults have drawne it upon your owne heads; together with such ruines consequently, desolations and calamities, as usually doe accompany it. But I have conceived much better hopes of you: as for mine own part, I doe hereby assure you all in generall, and each one in particular, of my best love and affection towards you. Signed, Gustavus Adolphus. This letter became a bush against the Spanish, which help∣ed the Switzers to stop the gappe against them, thorow the Alps out of Italy. A Secretary is also about this time sent from the King,Strasburg ac∣cords with the King. unto the faire and Imperiall City of Strasburg upon the Rhine in Alsatia: neere the wals, and thorow the Iuris∣diction whereof, Colonel Harincourt had lately brought his Lorrayners unto Ossa. And this City now, after some delibera∣tion, is drawne also to the Kings party: and that much upon the same termes, which the great Cities of Vlm and Norimberg, had heretofore accorded with him. This was something to∣wards the security of the lower Palatinate also; on the hither∣most side whereof, this Strasburg lyeth. And thus hath this victorious King of Sweden, either con∣quered or drawne to his party, all the middle part of Germa∣ny:
himselfe in Person having runne thorow it, from the Northerne or Baltick Sea, even to the very Alps almost and mountaines on the South, next unto Italy: a Course of full 500 English miles together. And now turnes he backe againe.The largenesse of the Kings Conquests. The breadth he beares in these last mentioned parts, is halfe the Circles of Bavaria and Schwabland; even from the river Iser in Bavaria Eastward, all overthwart to the Danuby and beyond it, towards the West. In Bavaria, could he march 50 or 60 miles square every way. Along the Lech from Do∣nawert to Fuessen, North and South; full 80: and along the Danuby from the gates of Ingolstat (to account no further) on the North-East, unto Vlm and beyond it, on the South-West; as much more. In Bavaria all was his own: not all that is in the Mappe of Bavaria (for that containes a tenth part of the Empire) but all the lands of the Dukes of Bava∣ria, were either conquered, or under Contribution: no power or place being left, (except Ratisbone, where the Duke with his Army now was) being able to resist any 2 Brigades of the Kings, should he but have sent them thither. Nor was there here any considerable appearance of resistance, at the Kings comming out of the Country. As for that portion of the Circle of Schwaben betwixt the Lech, the Danuby, and the line or Degree of 48 in the Mappe, (which 3 make a complete Triangle) it is wholly the Kings; and quietly now too: especially since Ossaes late repulse from Bibrach: which touches upon the outside of the Degree 48 aforesaid. How now all this part came to be the Kings, and in what estate he left it now behind him; we shall briefely tell you. A Conqueror must keep, as well as winne: and ei∣ther leave no enemy at his backe, or a force sufficient to op∣pose him, that he may not be able to disturb the Master of the Field, in his future proceedings. And then may a Country be indeed said to be conquered. This Portion of the Circle of Schwaben came thus to be the Kings. Divers of the Imperiall Townes in it being Protestant, (as Ʋlm, Memmingen, Kempten, &c.) having once assented
unto the Conclusions of Leipsich;The Story of the Actions about Ʋlm and Schwabland. notwithstanding they had beene enforced in part to renounce them, by Eggon Count of Furstenberg, Generall for his Imperiall Maiesty for this Cir∣cle: yet after the King of Swedens prevailing about these parts, they eftsoones recovered their former resolutions. Of all these Cities, Ʋlm upon the Danuby being the principall, the Ad∣mirall Gally as it were; she carried the Lanterne unto all the rest; which way she led, they followed. About the end of October 1631. 12 Imperiall troopes comming that way out of Italy, desired (imperiously enough) to have a reliefe from this City, of 10 Dollars for every Horseman, and 6 for a Footeman: and when threatnings were added, the Vlmers beat them out of their Territories into Leopolds Country, and made the Archduke keepe them. The King a little after this, sollicites them unto his party: and Colonell Rhelenger is pre∣sently sent upon it, (as Commissary for the King,) to agree with them. He in his iourney thither, lighting upon a Wagon-full of Monks and Fryers; made them pay a ransome of 40000 Dollars. In Ianuary after, the Common-wealth of Vlm pub∣likely declare, what they had privately before resolved, to stand to the Conclusions of Leipsich, and levie 450 new men upon it. The same does Memmingen also. Now doe the Pro∣testants every where about this time, begin to resume more courage: and for the defence of their liberties and Religion, divers of their Cities (as Norimberg, Strasburg, with some of Wirtenberg) assemble in a Diet at Hailbrun, which Gustavus Horn had lately taken.Vlm accordeth with the King. In February after, Ʋlm accepts of a Swedish garrison; and beginnes to fortifie; towards the rivers side especially. About the beginning of March, that Gallant old Cavalier Sir Patrick Ruthven, a Scottish Gentleman, (lately made Sergeant-Major-Generall of the Army) is sent from Mentz to be their Governour.Sir Patrick Ruthven made Governor of Vlm. Sir Patrick Ruthven presently begins to make some new levies for an Army: by little and little, getting some 6 or 7000 men together. Hee first demands the resolutions of all the chiefe Cities and Townes about him: whether they would
be Friends, Foes, or Neuters: stand either for the King, or a∣gainst him. One of the first townes he began withall, was Kurchberg upon the river Iler; some 4 English miles to the South of Vlm. This towne having the honour of an Earle∣dome, the King (as I find writing for it) bestowed upon the Conquerour. But of this I can say no more. At what time the King lay betwixt Donawert and the Lech, (which is about 48 or 50 English miles from Vlm:His action.) Sir Patrick advances up the same river Iler beyond Memmingen, unto Kempten, (neere the river Lech) where there is an Abby: the first in order of all these of the Circle of Schwaben. Guntzperg, a faire towne upon the River Guntz, betwixt Vlm and Lawingen, is present∣ly likewise taken. From this towne, a little after this, are 8 troopes of Dragooners sent from the Kings army over the bridge at Lawingen; to rufflle the Cloysters in the neighbour Marquisate of Burgaw; to bring them under contribution; and to lye in waite for 500 Horse of Ossaes, that were to come from Lindaw. At this Guntzperg is there a faire Palace, of right belonging unto the Marquesses of Burgaw: though at this time the Archduke Leopold had invaded it. The lands of the Lords Fuggers, are now also brought under contribution. Erpach is likewise over-runne, belonging unto the Chancellor Von Vlm. The 500 Tillians who had beene left at Nordlingen, about 30 miles to the North-East of Vlm, presently forsake the Towne: upon the newes, namely, of the Kings passing of the Lech. In the beginning of April, Sir Patrick Ruthven puts some of his souldiers into Memmingen: out of which, he a little after that expels the Iesuites: whom he found com∣plotting with the Imperialists. About Leutkirken, others of his defeate some of Ossaes guards. Ravensperg and Bibrach, 2 other Imperiall Cities, declare for the King: and divers Lords and Gentlemen, daily send their Deputies unto our Governour of Vlm, to compound for their contributions. This if they did not, their lands were plundered. He a little after this, disarmes the Citizens of Elching and Weissenhorn, (both neere Vlm:) and takes 14 pecces of Cannon and 2
Murtherers, away from them. Presently after which, he sends, and defeates Schwendy (or Schweaden) and his Boores, (which, he being a Gentleman of the Country, had stirr'd up) and takes himselfe prisoner. Having thus advanced so farre to the Southward, the Bishop of Constance is glad to send to him to make his agreement. And thus is all the Country, for the while, cleered; even to the gates of Lindaw and the Bodensee, under the very Alps: which so continues, untill Ossa (now gone thence to the Switzers Diet of Lucerne, to procure passage for the Spanish out of Italy, over the Gotthart Alps) returnes about the beginning of May with his 7000 men, and besieges Bibrach, as we before told you. Whether Colonell Sperreuter, who tooke Dunkelspach and Elwang, on the Northside of the Danuby, were sent by him, or immediately from the King; I know not. After Slammers∣dorff had taken Landsperg: the towne of Mindelhaim, upon the river Mindel, betwixt the Lech and the Danuby, almost right against Landsperg, made also her composition. And thus (to be briefe) did all those good Townes, which you shall find in the Map of Wirtemberg, in the South-East corner: most of which Country is called Overland. Vpon the last Munday in April, Sir Patrick Ruthven de∣feates some Imperiall troopes, and takes 4 Ensignes from them. The Boores also rising the second time, againe incen∣sed by the Bavarian Boores comming amongst them, Schwen∣dies second provocation,See the Mapps of the Circle of Suevia, or of Wirtemberg, for these townes. (let loose upon his ransome) and the heartning on of Ossa and Harincourt; are againe defeated. A many of these Boores, first rise about Gensburg and the moun∣taines: who sending word to the rest, appoint their meeting place about Weingarten, some 30 miles to the South of Vlm. These in the beginning of May, comming up; surprise Wan∣gen an Imperiall towne, Ravensperg and others, betwixt Ʋlm and Lindaw. Against them, Sir Patrick sends 3000 men, ma∣ny of them Dragooners: who May 12 killing some of them neere unto Kempten, (25 English miles East of Wangen) make the rest sweare to goe home and follow their clodding againe,
and pay their contributions quietly. Others of them being bu∣sie otherwhere, 400 more are slaine about this Bishopricke of Kempten: which their neighbours perceiuing, goe and de∣liver up their Armes at Kempten. At Zippersriden, are almost 800 more cut in pieces, and (which was the way to coole them) are divers of their Dorps fired: which the poore wret∣ches seeing, went and cut their Land-lords throates, that had first stirr'd them up, and then forsaken them. Colonell Rhelin∣ger (who had done many other good services in these parts) affrights and disarmes 300 more of them, with a small Par∣tee of Horsemen. Rhelinger proceedes so farre, that Ossa be∣ing afraid of his falling into Tirole, is faine to send 2000 men thither, to ensure the passages. About the end of April, Sir Patrick Ruthven goes into the Duchy of Wirtemberg; where he receives an aide of 2000 new men, from Duke Iulius the Administrator. In his absence, the Lord Druches of Wald∣burg with other Gentlemen and some Abbots; began to stirre againe, in the further parts towards Weingarten: who did much trouble unto the Swedish souldiers in the townes next to them. To represse them, went the Swedish Dragooners that lay in and about Bibrach: who fell in among the lands of the said Lord Druches plundered the Townes of Wurtbach and Waldsee, neere unto Weingarten, and dispersed the Commoti∣on. The good Towne of Ehingen also, on the contrary side of the Danuby, to Vlm, and within 6 English miles of it, is brought likewise to a Composition:That part of Schwabland, brought by Sir Patrick Ruth∣ven, &c. under Contribution. as all this part of Schwab∣land by this time was. At this towne of Ehingen, whilest Lodowick Eberhard Count of Hohenlo, with one of the Kings Secretaries and some other Commissioners were, (having beene thither employed about taking the Citizens oath for the King of Sweden) they were all surprised and carried pri∣soners into Tirole, by a Partee sent out from Ossa, at the time of his being about Bibrach. To be a ransome for whose liberties, the King causes some great men of the Country to be laid hands of. The Imperialists that did this at Ehingen, and staid there; fell out and troubled the Countrey now and
then: and upon the first of Iune following, when the King was gone towards Norimberg; they drove away divers head of Cattel even from within 2 English miles of Vlm: there being at that time no Horsemen in the towne to make out af∣ter them. But these are since sent packing. Thus is all that country the Kings, by conquest: and for the keeping of it quiet, were the Armies of Duke William of Saxon-Weymar, and Sir Patricke Ruthven, left thereabouts: the Duke of Wirtembergs forces being at hand too; who is their very next neighbour upon the other side of the Danuby. And in this estate the King of Sweden left this Country, in the beginning of Iune; when he tooke his leave of it, and of Bavaria: whom when we have waited upon from Donawert to Norimberg; we will for this time conclude our Story of him. The occasion of his Maiesties so sudden parting out of Ba∣varia, we told you, was to relieve Weissenburg. Generall Cratz had now taken it;The King in his march from Donawert, upon a hope by that meanes to cut off the Kings retreat to Norimberg. The King in his way thither, cleeres (as his manner is) the whole Country before him. For whereas (to begin withall) the towne and Bishopricke of Aichstat,takes the Bi∣shopricks of Aichstat and Dillingen, 16 miles to the North of Donawert, had not all this while brought in their contribution, which Colonell Sperreu∣ter had heretofore made them to submit unto; the Kings soul∣diers now distraine upon whatsoever they can get for it. So is the Bishopricke of Dillingen likewise served: both are plundered, and disarmed, & the best Ordnance sent to Auspurg. Pappenheim Castle likewise,and the Castle of Pappenheim, 2 leagues to the West of Aich∣stat, (which belongeth unto the old Count of Pappenheim, who by inheritance is Earle Marshall or second Marshall of the Empire) was besieged, battered, and taken. This is hard by Weissenburg; to which the King so much hasted: and from which Cratz had as much speeded, when he knew the King to be so neere him. His Maiesty having nothing more in his way to delay him, marches immediatly towards Norimberg: neere which, namely, in his old Quarter at Furt, about Iune 7 he arriveth. What his
intention next was, appeares by his answer unto the Norim∣bergers, now inviting him into their City: which was, That he had rather a great deale see Wallenstein, then Norimberg. Against whom he immediately advancing into the Vpper Pa∣latinate, was not able to goe further, thorow a destroyed country: and hearing withall, both Wallenstein and Bavaria to be comming against him; he retires backe againe,finally encamp∣ing by Norim∣berg. and entren∣ches himselfe by Norimberg. Since which time, though the Armies have layne long neere one another; yet for that at the finishing hereof, there had nothing beene done betwixt them; I must leave that to a Third Part: and if you please, to a bet∣ter instructed Intelligencer.
Heere followeth the Declaration or Manifesto of his Highnesse the Duke of Bavaria; which we before mentioned and promised you. Received from a good Friend: and already translated by an able Gentle∣man. FOR as much as among the multitude of false rumours, that are promiscuously divulged, aswell within, as without the bounds and territories of the Empire; concerning those affaires that are now presented upon the stage of action, in this scene of Warre: those that ring low∣dest, (though with least semblance of truth or credibility) are such as deepely trench upon the candor and sincerity of my intention. The which seeme not so much to have beene first broached, by the inventers of fayned novelties; and such light spirits, as are enamoured with false curiosities: as to have beene set on foote, by the capitall enemies of my renowne and reputation. Such as have fixed the eye of their intention, upon a higher (though more igno∣ble and malicious designe) then to amuse the world, with the relation of unprofitable fables. In regard whereof I was forced to beleeve, That I could not neglect these injurious calumnies, without doing deepe wrong unto mine honour: and that I stand obliged, to avow and give a manifest decla∣ration to all the world, of the certitude and sincerity of my most private intentions. Which therefore I now resolve to
doe, by this publike Act and open Protestation: even as from the beginning of this warre I have endevoured to have done, by the cleare testimony of my publike and undoubted actions; a great deale more effectually, then I possibly can doe by waight of words, or by any tenor of verball pro∣testations. Now then, having first invoked and called downe upon mee, the direfull wrath and just vengeance, both of God and man; if in this serious businesse, I either faine or dissemble: I doe protest, that the most powerfull and soveraigne mo∣tives, that have beene the cheife conductors of all my actions (aswell in the times of peace, as in this of warre) have beene from their first origin and beginning, and at this present are, and by Gods gracious assistance hereafter ever shalbe; no o∣ther, then the zeale and fidelity, which I owe and have solemnely sworne to his sacred Imperiall Majesty, and the reestablishing of the Catholike, Apostolike, Roman Faith in the territories of this Empire; from many faire parts where∣of, it hath beene treacherously exiled; with no lesse impi∣ous Sacriledge, then cruell tyranny. So that in this, my de∣signes have not aimed at any other end, then the glory of God, and the discharge of my owne conscience. I put on armes, at the first commotion of the treacherous revolt in Bohemia; and have not yet laid them downe, in the preservation and defence of so noble and just a cause. And how I have comported my selfe in them, I need not remem∣ber: for all Christendome will beare record with me, that with just cause, this age hath given already, and all succeeding ages shall give hereafter; immortall thankes to the God of armies, for the glorious atchievements with which he hath blessed us. A part of which memorable exploits, his divine goodnesse hath beene pleased to execute by my weake hands; and his sa∣cred Imperiall Majesty hath received such satisfaction in my indeavours, that he hath beene pleased to affoord me a large occasion to receive much greater from him, in the heape of massy honours; wherewith he hath vouchsafed to recom∣pense
the weake services I have done to the state of this Em∣pire, and that of Gods Church; the advancement of both which, are linked and chayned together, in the inviolable bond of one common interest. Wherefore I verily beleeve, that no reasonable man (that doth not suffer himselfe to be wilfully coozened with malici∣ous conjecture, and groundlesse divination) can frame his judgement to conceive, that I would now change my first resolutions, and alter my designes: at such a time especially, as when I have so important a Subject, and binding obligati∣ons, to renew and reenforce them more then I could foresee, or imagine at their first undertaking. For if that be true, which now passeth for currant in a great part of the World: that the prime and chiefest ayme in this new combination and conspiracy, is to reinvest my Cosin Count Frederick in the dignity of his Electorship, and estate of his territories; from which he hath beene most justly throwne and dejected, for hauing falsified his oath and loyalty to his Imperiall Maje∣sty, by the religious bond of a sacred oath not long before con∣firmed to him; and rebelliously sought to dispossesse him of his Crowne and dominion: I say, if this be the true cause of these bloudy commotions (as they would make the world beleeve it is) then I am the man, against whom they should have discharged the gall of their intemperate fury. And therefore to imagine, that I would joyne in league and con∣federacy against them, that have no cause to take armes, but in defence of my right: is to presume against the nature of things, and to frame a dictamen, contrary to the principles even of common sense it selfe. And if there be nothing but this to rectifie, what concer∣neth it my Lord the Emperour, and the whole noble family of Austria; that I should rather enjoy the dignity of an Elector, then my foresaid Cosin; or that I should possesse a part of that estate, of which he hath beene so justly depri∣ved? Or to what end should they endeavour to prejudice the pretended restitution of them both, if I were pleased to yeeld
my consent thereunto? Verily it would seeme a pleasant and sportfull warre, that should be undertaken to force me to be more rich and powerfull, then I my selfe desired. But men may say (peradventure) that the King of Spaine also possesseth a good part of the Palatinate; which I grant he doth: but this is so farre from ingaging me to relinquish any part of my just claime, that it is rather a powerfull rea∣son more firmely to oblige me, to uphold and maintaine mine owne claime and just tytle; seeing him borne downe with the concurrence of so puissantThe French King. a Monarch. Where∣fore, if wee rest in the principles of reason and humane prudence, it can neither have likelyhood, apparance, nor colour of truth; that I should now be changed and become another man, then heretofore I have beene. And if any man have fancied so prodigious a change and alteration in me, for that they have knowne me lesse pleased with some designes & proceedings of the Austrian Family, in some cases, wherin the cause of Religion was no way interessed; he might from thence have groundedly collected, that in case the Cause debated, were onely concerning the raising of their particular greatnesse, and extent of their fortunes; there yet sur∣vived in my brest, sufficient sparkes of freedome and generous worth, to have opposed their wills, and contradicted their in∣tendments (I not judging them justifiable, rather then have made this strained and ridiculous inference upon it, that I fra∣med a resolution to band it with the route of their enemyes: they especially, being such, as with all the streame of their strongest endeavours, make profession to pursue and persecute the faith I professe. I know very well, in what esteeme and ho∣nour I am obliged to hold the race of thatThe House of Austria. renowned Fa∣mily, and I thinke also, that the higher exaltation thereof, may in time become prejudiciall to the reposeWell confest. and generall free∣dome of the Empire. But that which toucheth my heart with highest straines of just feare, and that whereof great and good Princes (in my opinion) ought to be most sensible, and (if I might be beleeved) is, that that illustrious Family (as ancient
and noble as it is) should by the world be conceived to have a straighter obligation, and greater interest in the defence of Religion, then concerneth other Princes that are truely Catho∣like.ine. Verily, this is all the jealousie I have of this glorious and Majestique Family. This is the onely point of honour, which I could find in my heart to debate and maintaine a∣gainst it. And if this Family shall alledge the plenteous showers of prosperity and temporall blessings; where∣with God hath heretofore, and doth yet most especially oblige them to the peculiar defence and patronage of his glorious cause: his Divine goodnesse forbid, that I should oppose my selfe to the honour and happinesse of so just and holy a fortune:igh. although there-hence should ensue the di∣minution, yea even the fatall ruine of me and all mine. A thought it is, unworthy to be lodged in the brest of a Christian Prince; to conceive, That the glory of Gods Church (which is inviolably linked with that of his eternall Majesty) should not likewise by him be esteemed the verti∣call and highest point of his honour; and that if these two could possibly be separated (as by a long and approued ex∣perience I find they cannot) yet the case is such, that I hold it for a most uncontrolled Oracle of certaine truth, yea and an approved Article of Faith, that all humane respects and con∣siderations ought to be even sacrificed, and nothing regarded by every generous mind, when the Cause of Religion and piety to God shalbe esteemed to require it. For certainely, no subject is so straightly obliged, to set aside and forgoe the peculiar affaires of his owne private estate, for advancement of the publike and common good of his King and Kingdome (when cause shall so require it) as all Soveraigne Princes are tyed in the supreme bonds of highest duty,Religiously said. to renounce whatsoever may in this World be deare unto them; when the glory of Him, of whom they hold their Crownes and Soveraigntyes, shall come in competition, and bee ballanced with it. I say not this, to brand them with notes of impiety, that
under pretence of humane policy and Principles of State,He handles th French tender have entered into a league and strait combination with heretikes, against the sound and Orthodoxe party: Let this be accounted for an error in judgement, or some deepe misfortune, rather then an hainous crime. I will frankly leave the whole world at liberty, to direct and accommodate it selfe, to such rules of Conscience, as themselues shall like of, and value to be upright and iust. Nor will I passe any rash censure upon their procee∣dings, but will force my selfe to beleeve,Neatly put of that God hath revea∣led some secret principles to them, which have hitherto beene unthought of in all ordinary Theologie. For my owne part, I will not hinder their being esteemed true Catholikes; seeing they themselues desire to appeare and be esteemed for such: onely this I will alleadge, (that the whole world may beare witnesse, that my inclinations and motions doe not runne levell in the same line with theirs) that in the light of my simple judgement, it is all one to become an Apo∣stata from the Religion of our holy Ancestors, and to foment and nourish their rage, that endeavour to destroy it. I have had no ancient Alliance with any person: who under the faire pretence of well-wishing, might seeme to have allu∣red me to favour this combination: and if I had, I should esteeme it no lesse lawfull to breake all bands of ancient amity with them in this case, then I doe hold it most unlawfull to contract any new ones. I am well acquainted with the forme and tenour of anci∣ent Oathes of Fidelity; which were customarily exhibited to Supreme and Soveraigne Princes, upon the solemne dayes of Inauguration and Installment: and I well remember that also, which I my selfe have taken upon like occasions. Nor doe I know any one point, which would not be directly infringed and violated, by the contrary practice in this confederacy; whereunto some would seeme to induce me, and impute unto me whether I will or no. To say that the warre now waged, no way concernethBelike the Catholikes The cause of Religion, but is meerely for the interest of tem∣porall
state and honour,emselues ave this opi∣on of the arre: and have ught it the rotestants. were wilfully to hoodwincke our selues, and to become voluntarily blind, in the affaires that concerne the estate of this Empire, and the universall good of Christendome. For, to take no notice of the insolent ru∣mors, with which the Protestant partisans have filled the world, since the Battell of Leipsich: to have no regard to the common Ballads and songs of ioy, which triumphant Here∣sie hath precipiticiously caused to be chanted in each corner of their publike streets and private families. To omit their glori∣ous boasts and vaine brags, That the Papists are reduced to such tearmes, as they are become iust equall with Protestants, in their undutifull attempts and treacherous complots: who knoweth not, that the most faire and plausible pretences of the King of Sweden, the Duke of Saxonie, the Marquesse of Brandenburg, the Landtgrave of Hessen, and other their confederates; have beene to hinder the restitution of Ecclesi∣asticall livings, decreed in a solemne Diet to be restored to the Church? And if this be no point of Religion, I know not what is. If I beleeve (as indeed I doe with all the powers of my whole heart) that the Catholike Church is the deare Spouse of Christ Iesus; can I put any maine obstacle, yea or so much as interpose the least diversion, to the execution of so just a Decree, without incurring the note and censure of horrible prevarication, yea even of detestable Sacriledge: uniustly thereby ravishing from Her, the lawfull endowments and revenues, of her ancient patrimony, and inheritance of her Children? Can I suffer, or rather can I have the heart to procure, (retaining still the name and quality of a Catholike) that the goods devoted and consecrated by our pious Ance∣stors, for the maintenance of Gods Altar, & for the ornament and due reverence of his divine worship; should wickedly be distracted for the levying and paiment of Lutheran forces: who wheresoever they prevaile, demolish and ruine the Altars themselues, banish the holy Sacrifice, trample the bles∣sed Sacrament under their prophane feete, massacre their Priests, and insolently triumph in the shame and spoyle of
this most sacred and spotlesse Dove? What? can this in any Catholike Language be stiled, the preservation of the liber∣ties of the Empire, which is indeed the maintenance of that bloudy tyranny, which frontlesse Heretikes desire to execute against the Church of God? And what were this, but by Communication both of Armes and Councels, to concurre to the setting up of Heresie: even in those places, which the goodnesse of God, and the wakefull vigilance of their Prin∣ces, had to this houre preserved as pure and unpolluted? And to speake more calmely and gently of the violent cruelties, that in the times of these warres, have beene daily practised, by the continuall outrage of mercilesse Heretikes; were but to mocke God, and abuse the credulity and patience of men. The Landtgrave of Hessen, hath he not demolished the Scutcheons of Armes of the Catholike Bishops and Princes,He meanes t Bishop of Cul¦lens Armes, which the Landtgrave tooke downe Nienbus, by Paderborn. in all those places which he hath brought under his subiection, and planted his owne in their roomes and places? practising that boldly, which the holy Prophet David so much reproo∣ved in the person of his barbarous forerunners. They have, I say, advanced their Armes by their Armies, in all those places they but seeme to have subdued. Their Ministeriall Preachers, with what loud voice have they made shew to give thankes to God, for the happy successe of their bloody victories? What furious Alarmes, have not resounded in Wurtsburg, in diminution of the honour of Gods Church? since with more then Turkish and barbarous cruelty, it hath beene sackt and pillaged, contrary to the law of Nations and Articles of agreement. Have not their Pulpits at all houres proclaimed, That the King of Sweden was sent from Heaven, as a particular instrument: to advance their new pretended Religion; and for the finall abolition and utter overthrow, of Idolatrous Papistrie, as they impiously mistearme it? A thing, which such persons as would colourably excuse the intentions of great Princes; might perhaps attribute to the in∣discreete and passionate zeale of the common people: unlesse
the direfull effects, (recorded and registred in lines of blood) did beare record, That all those disasters and publike calami∣ties, were derived from no other sourse and Fountaine. Cer∣tainely, it is not the House of Austria, which alone doth suffer in this their desperate fury; it is the Catholike Church, which they endeavour to rend and teare in pieces, by the cruell at∣tempts of their inveterate malice: It is God that suffereth; and howsoever they seeke to obscure it with Pilates princi∣ples; yet, in effect, it is Christ that is crucified. Wherefore, let the King of Sweden, and those of his faction; delude the world no longer with pretences, that they intend onely to abate the greatnesse of the House of Austria, and not to trample in the ruines of Religion. The battery and spoyle of Townes and Cities; the forage and desolation of intire Pro∣vinces; are not secrets that can be concealed. The barbarous Cruelties of the debauched Souldiers, with no mantle can be covered: and much lesse, the high-voyced out-cries of the swolne Ministery, will be put to silence. Truely the ancient histories of the Gothes and Vandals, of the Arrians and Saracens; who have crowned so many glori∣ous Martyrs with eternall Trophees, (whose ashes are yet re∣verenced, and whose memories yet flourish amongst us in everlasting Blessings) doe make no mention of greater Bar∣barismes, then are daily practised at this day, by their faith∣lesse posterity. We doe not reade, that in those dayes, there were any State-mysteries, or Reserved Cases,True: for the esuites have brought them n since. by whichHe touches he French King; who hath he Stile of most Christian: and is n league with he Swede. Christian Princes could be countenanced and secured, to joyn in Armes with them that were commonly stiled The very Scourge of God, and chiefe Captaines of Antichrists Con∣quests. Let all the world conspire and unite their endeavours, as much as humane policy can contrive they should doe; yet is it certaine, That the attempts of heresie shall never pro∣sper; except in the strength of our sinnes: and the Coun∣sels of their chiefest Favourites, shall neuer winne greater approbation from God, then that, which by the same inter∣pretation, may bee given to the successefull prosperity of
Turkes and Infidels. Miserable and unfortunate may they ever be, that ground their imaginary greatnesse, upon the founda∣tion of such unstable and distracted abuses. We have heard and read much, of the unfortunate disa∣sters of precedent ages; but truely in this one thing,The Bavarian Jesuites are an∣gry, that other have gone be∣yond them in their own trad of Statizing. these of ours out-strip and goe beyond them; that in those, there wanted these subtill and elevated Spirits, that forge distin∣ctions where none are; betweene affaires of State and Religi∣on. Neither were there then found many Christian Princes, that could lend an inclining eare, to such nice distinctions. Or, if perhaps, any such was then found amongst them, his memory is buried in obscure oblivion, or his name made o∣dious and hatefull to all posterity. God of his divine good∣nesse, sooner strike me dead with a fearefull Thunder-bolt; and blot my name for ever out of the memory of men: then permit it to be registred in the lists of funestious examples, of the fine niceties and subtleties of these miserable dayes of ours. If in the field, mine eyes should be cast upon mine En∣signes; and behold them there bearing the reverend Image of the glorious Mother of God: and should reflect withall, that they were mixed with their Standards, that would di∣spitefully spitNo good Pro∣testant wil do so. in her face: what repose and content is it possible my heart should find; seeing my selfe ingaged in such a strange kind of Alliance? With what confidence or assurance could I begge her succour, that is the most au∣spicious protectresse of the holy Church, and of the Prin∣ces that serve her, against whom I am banded? With what forehead, or with what vowes, durst I implore her inter∣cession, (without which notwithstanding I dare undertake nothing) when I see the victories I should atchieve, must needes proove pernicious and prejudiciall to Her honour, and that of Her deare Sonne? Is it possible I should pray for taking of Townes, into which I know the Conqueror will be no sooner entred; then with extreme violence he will pull downe the Images of the glorious Saints, tread under their foule feete, the blessed blood of our deare Lord Iesus,
which we beleeve to be piously reserved on our Altars? O you Catholike Princes pull off the maske of your counterfeit profession; or once for all, affoord us some solid ground, to iustifie your intentions; that in outward face appeare so ab∣surd and gracelesse. You cannot have the same desires and wishes in the Church, which you conceive in your Cabinets: for there, you cannot, without blushing, beg at the hands of God, and of his blessed Mother, and of the other Saints whom you reverence and in∣voke; you cannot, I say, without blushing beg at their hands the patronage and protection of such a cause, as (like the o∣ther heresies of our times, that have beene planted by fury and persecution of the faithfull) cannot subsist; but by the ruine of the Church, and finall extirpation of the religious and true worship of God. Rid your selues, if you can, from the maze of these, not onely intricate, but iust scruples; and make us capable of those other secrets, and mysteries, and principles, the which I ingeniously confesse, I have not strength of wit to conceive. And on the other side; in the truth which I have beene bred in, and to which I have beene moulded: I can find no difference, betwixt those that anciently bare armes in the service of Attila: in that time when in Rhemes heHe giues the French nation, an example of their owne. cruelly beheaded St. Nicasius: and those now, which by the hands of the Swede, doe massacre Gods Priests, expell his Bishops from their flock and residence, and sacrilegiously spoyle and destroy his sacred Temples. Certainely, what modesty soever these people may strive to counterfeit in their extortions; and with what disguise soever, they seeke to colour the face of their vi∣olence: being convinced by the evident testimony of their owne manifest tyranny, they cannot deny, but that they are of the rankeThey will de∣ny it, surely. of those Princes, of whom the Royall Prophet in these expresse termes long agoe foretold: That all their Prin∣ces concluded among themselues, and by expresse decree resol∣ved; They would possesse the Sanctuary of God upon earth, as goods appertaining to their owne inheritance, which is, in a
word, nothing else, but expressely to say: Let us maintaine our selues in the possessions of the patrimony of the Church: which long since we have confiscated, and appropriated to our selues; and which now is a part and member of our owne de∣meanes. And those that favour this wicked designe, under what pretext soever; though they seem to shrowd themselues, under never so colourable reasons of faire appearances: yet can they not faile to see themselues cleerely pointed at in the feare∣full predictions of the Prophet Obadiah: where their preva∣rication and loosenesse is branded with the note of eternall in∣famy, in the list of maledictions, which he bestoweth on them. What then, saith our Lord?Obadiah, verse 8. to 11. shall I not one day destroy the politikes of Idumea? Shall I not utterly subvert the wisedome of the mountaines of Esau? The strong and bold spirits shall trem∣ble with feare, that shall surprize them from the parts of the South; and this through the default of him, that will appeare so great a person upon the mountaine of Esau. By reason of the mur∣thers and iniustice, which thou hast committed against thy brother Iacob, thou shalt be shaken and crushed with confusion, and shalt perish everlastingly, in revenge of that day, wherein thou liftest thy hand against him. Then when those who professed a strange law, inforced the armies to passe under their yoake, and the ex∣communicate did even force the gates of their Cities, and were partakers in the spoiles of Ierusalem. And thouHe touches the French. also wert uni∣ted to that party, and wert no whit better, but more covert and concealed then they. O representation of our miserable times! not allegoricall, but most expresse and lively! O cruell and un∣naturall jealousie of Christian Princes! O heresie, more faith∣full to side it with their party, then the faithfull are constant to assist one another! I had rather say with the holy Prophet David, these words full of holy and religious zeale: Early in the morning, (that is, in the beginning of my thoughts and acti∣ons,) I had no other care, then to imploy my forces to the destru∣ction of sinners: Which by excellence, and in a ranke aboue o∣thers, all Heretikes are. Wherefore, the course of things passing in this manner; and my affection and sense of them, being such
as I have declared: it appeareth manifestly, that by no conside∣ration either of State or Religion; I could esteeme it either expedient or lawfull, to adhere to this faction; which were but to consent to the spoyle and rapine of the Protestant party: but am rather obliged, to commiserate and condole at their successes; and to oppose their progresse. And therefore I pro∣test againe and againe, before God and men: That I have now my sword in my hand to doe it; and that in this quarrell, I will most cheerefully hazzard my estate, my goods, mine ho∣nour, and my life. After which protestation, which heretofore hath beene, and hereafter shall be followed, with all sutable effects and actions, by which I am possibly able to approove and verifie the same: if yet there be any, that rest doubtfull of the inte∣grity of my intentions, I shall have no other esteeme nor re∣gard of him, then of one whom I account an obstinate calum∣niator, and my professed enemy.
The Elector of Saxonyes Proceedings. HIs Imperiall Majesty, after the Leipsich-losse of so goodly an Army, (which was one of the fairest Pillars of the House of Austria) seemes like a wise Architect of Fortune, to haue consulted especially upon the meanes; both how to shore up the side, by repairing of his own army; and to abate the stresse, by weakning of his adversaryes. It stood not either with an Imperiall or Austrian greatnesse, to goe lesse now, then when his army had beene victorious: nor so farre to satisfie so meane a Prince as the King of Sweden; as either at his in∣stance, or for his Armes, to restore their owne unto the op∣pressed. That would have argued feare in him; had drawne an implicite confession from him, that he had hitherto beene injurious. It was more honourable (hee was advised) to worke out his owne ends, by continuing on his old courses, and whilest he by force, undid the weaker Protestants; by Courtship and Ambassages so long to impose upon the crdu∣lity of the greater, till the Eagle were ready to shew her pounces To make our stoutnesses, yeeld and comply with our businesse; goes for a note of Wisedome. That late af∣front and shrewd turne, which Iohn George the Duke and Elector of Saxony had so freshly offered him; is not season∣able now to be remembred: twas an unkind part indeed;The Duke of Saxony attemp∣ted to be tur∣ned. but yet was his Imperiall Majesty full of graciousnesse: Austria could forget, and Saxony might make all whole a∣gaine
by turning. Thats now attempted. Marquesse Cada∣raita, then Spanish Ambassador at Veinna, was both the Coun∣cellor and the Agent in it. He in the name of the King his Master, sends Colonell Paradis with instructions unto Dres∣den; to make way for the compounding of all former un∣kindnesses with the Duke of Saxony. The Minutes of whose negotiation were to this purpose. To expound unto the Elector, the great desire the King his Master had,he Spanish mbassadours oposition. and the diligence he had used in it; to restore a happy and an universall peace, unto the Roman Empire. That his Majesty had most expressely commanded his now present Ambassadour, to bee most observant of all such pregnant opportunities, as might either maintaine or make up that memorable and ancient amity, which had so many yeeres continued betwixt the two houses of Austria and of Saxony. That the King had at this time also most straightly charged his said Ambassador, to interpose the Authority of the Crowne of Spaine, for the sodering up againe of these late breaches: which might (if not lookt into) seeme to make a rupture in that amity. That would but the Elector now be pleased to hearken to a friendly Treary, he (the Am∣bassador) came furnished with such instructions, as might with fulnesse of content, compound all the controversies. That his Master, (as hee protested) desired nothing more earnestly, then that his Highnesse (the Duke) with his whole Electorall family, might be honoured with more additions of happynesse, then their predecessors ever were: and that there might be a perpetuated correspondency of all good of∣fices betweene their two Houses. That his Majesty of Spaine thought in his high wisedome, this to be the best course for all this; that the Elector would in writing deliver his greevan∣ces: and that a certaine place might be appointed, for Com∣missioners on both sides to treate upon them. Which if his Highnesse would for peace sake be pleased to condiscend un∣to: then would he (the Ambassador) perswade with his Imperiall Majesty, to send two Ambassadors about it: and
himselfe in the King of Spaines name being Interponent, would take any paines about making up the breaches. Vnto this Proposition, the Elector returned this answer.Saxonyes An∣swer. That the purpose of his Majesty of Spaine seemed to have beene intended, towards the making of a peace betwixt the Houses of Austria and Saxony alone; and not of Ger∣many in generall. That none of that side could be so ignorant, as not to have observed how sincerely, faithfully, obedient∣ly, discreetly, peaceably, and in the highest degree patiently, he had carryed himselfe, throughout all the time of this most important and weighty businesse: and how hostilely (on the contrary) both the Count of Tilly; Sergeant-Major-Ge∣nerall Altringer, and Felt-marshall Diepenbach had used him and his Countryes; which, without any desert at all, they had not invaded onely; but after a barbarous and inhumane fashion ravaged and plundered, and with fire and sword de∣populated. That he for his owne part was not a little affli∣cted, that things were now comne to so troublesome, so dangerous and so desperate an issue: from being any occa∣sioner whereof, his hope was, that he could fairely excuse himselfe, before God and the whole world. That he now desired nothing more, then that such faire meanes might both be propounded and apprehended, for the speedy restoring of so good and solid a peace within the Empire; as that a bles∣sed agreement might be made up, betwixt the Head and the Members: the State surely settled: the miserably afflicted Empire, from this threatned ruine delivered; and all once againe restored, unto its former strength and Majesty. That he could by no meanes conceive a reason, how things in this desperate condition of the whole Empire in generall, could any wayes be bettered, by these personall and particular trea∣tyes. That during the time of these troubles, it had by va∣riety of examples beene manifested; that no generall con∣cord could by these private Leaguings be procured: but that more dangerous consequences dayly brake foorth upon it. That should he now condescend to his Majesty of Spaine in
this; he were no wayes able to excuse himselfe unto the King of Sweden, and the Protestant States of Germany. But if their Majestyes (the Emperour and of Spaine) were pleased to intend a just and universall peace; then would he shew himselfe most willing and most ready; to doe whatsoever lay in his power to performe in it. A faire answer; relishing of a publike spirit, and becom∣ming a Prince and Elector of the Empire. Saxony wisely found out the drift of this Austrian courtesie: which pretended private friendships, whilest they intended him publike enmi∣tyes: and as wisely considered, that he could not long bee safe in his private Cabin, whilest the whole Ship were on fire under him. This Treaty was made, in the beginning of October 1631. Nor yet whilest the thoughts and words of Peace were in motion, had the actions of warre on his Imperiall Maje∣sties side, any cessation. For so soone as ever the terror of the pursuite of the Victory of Leipsich was well over, and the Imperialists in Silesia assured, both of the King of Swe∣dens expedition into Duringen (quite another way from them) and of the stay of the Duke of Savonyes army,The Imperia∣lists fall into both the Lusa∣tia's. yet about Leipsich: doe Feild-marshall Diepenbach and Colonell Gotse, prepare to fall into the Duke of Saxonyes Lands, both in the Ʋpper and Lower Lusatia, which in the yeere 1623, this very Emperor had bestowed upon this same Duke of Saxony. The Duke, indeed, seemes to have consumed too much time after his recovering of his City of Leipsich; and to have beene something too precise and punctuall in examining and punishing such, as had either by their cowardise or affecti∣ons, given occasions of the sudden rending of the Towne unto the Generall Tilly. The goods of the offenders (whe∣ther absent or present) were condemned: and out of them, 30000 Rixe Dollars allotted, for the repairing of the Sub∣urbs, which themselves during the siege had burned. Gotse in the meane time comming over the River Spree, out of Silesia into the Lower Lusatia; takes, plunders, and
burnes the towne of Luben, close upon the said river. So is Dam also served, standing a little more Westerly. Gutterbock, about a league from that, is pillaged: and 30000 Dollars and Dollars-worth, fetcht out of those of Libenaw. His Horse also take in the little towne of Schlieben, in the Iurisdiction of Hertzberg: and all the townes, finally, betwixt the rivers of Spree and Elster; Cotwitz, namely, Spremberg, Hoierswerd, Finsterwald, &c. and all this was done before Michaelmas, and in the Lower Lusatia. In the meane time had Field-Marshall Diepenbach underta∣ken the Ʋpper Lusatia: which lyes neerer to the Sunne, then does the Lower. This little Countrey is usually called The sixe Townes; because of so many eminenter Townes in it; which are Bautzen, Gorlitz, Sittaw, Camitz, Lauben and Luben; all belonging to the Elector of Saxony. To sollicite Bautzen, is Colonell Four sent; and Colonell Illo, to Sittaw: which two, together with the three other on the West side of the Spree; are faine to accept of, what they could not avoyde, the taking in of the Emperours garrisons. Vnto Gorlitz, (on the same side of the Spree next to Silesia) Diepenbach sends an Imperiall Commissary first: and he not prevailing, some of his armed troopes presenting their Ordnance before the Towne; com∣pell the Citizens to discharge their Saxon garrison, and to take in whom he appointed them. Thus were all the sixe townes by the middle of October, become Imperiall. Nor had the Duke of Saxonyes owne Home-stall (as I may say) beene se∣cure from them. September 30. five hundred Crabats brea∣king into Meissen or Misnia, approach unto old Dresden, upon the Easterne banke of the Elb; and within lesse then a Dutch league of New Dresden; where the Electors owne Palace is. Here had they thought to have surprized the old Iaggers Ca∣stle; but were discovered, and beaten off with the Ord∣nance of it: after which they were scared out of the Coun∣trey by the Saxon Army. For now the Elector having notice of all this, September 27. hee first sets out with his Army from Leipsich towards Torgau upon the Elb; the next fron∣tier
towne towards Lusatia. The fame went of 22000 men in the Army: and that the Lord Marquesse Hamiltons forces, (then about Custrine and Franckford upon the Oder) should be also joyned with them. The Duke of axonyes forces tive the Impe∣ialists out of Lusatia.The Imperialists, upon the newes of Arnheims, and the Saxons comming; make towards Hertzberg bridge, where the Saxons were to passe over the Elster to come at them. Arnheim here forces his passage; beats Gotse backe from thence: who was faine thereupon to leave all he had gotten in the Lower Lusatia, and retreat with his whole Army into the Vpper. By the seventh of October, had Arnheim againe reduced all the townes of the Lower Lusatia; and then fol∣lowes Gotse into the Ʋpper: who hearing of his comming, leaves Diepenbachs garrisons onely in the Sixe Townes; and retires his forces into Bohemia partly; and partly againe into Silesia. Those that went into Bohemia, doe much spoyle by the way in Walsteins Dukedome of Fridland (which is upon the frontiers of Lusatia and Bohemia) not sparing his owne Lands and Territories. They were afterwards enquartered in the Earledome of Glatz. Those that made towards Silesia, did Arnheim give chace unto: who so hardly prest upon them, that they in confusion passing the river Neiss at Gorlitz, were faine for haste to leave their Ordnance in that Citie. Then falles Arnheim upon the Imperialists in the Sixe Townes: which being none of the strongest, and the Townes∣men willing withall; are as soone reduced now, as they had beene before surprized. All this was done by the twentieth of October; by which, the Duke of Saxony himselfe was come to Bautzen, with the other lesser part of the Army: and Arnheim having thus cleered both the Lusatiaes, is preparing to fall into Bohemia. Arnheim mar∣ches into Bo∣hemia.October 25. hee first sets forward: taking in Schlukenaw Towne first of all; where the river Spree hath his originall. This is a Romane-Catholike towne upon the Northerne fron∣tiers of Bohemia; which the Emperour had heretofore given to the Earle of Mansvelt. Thence marches he on to Tetschin:
where the river Pulsnitz falls into the Elb. This being a wonderfull well provyded place, makes countenance of resi∣stance: but changed their copy by and by, so soone as Arn∣heims Ordnance, and the grosse of his Army, presented them∣selves before it. Crossing the Elb at this place, to Ausich,and takes townes all the way. or Ausig, he comes: two Germane leagues and a halfe distant. Vpon the first newes of the Saxons being past the Elb, one hundred Horse-men of this Ausich, presently runne and tell those of Tepliz; a towne just so farre also distant towards the West. Those of Starahor, a strong Castle upon a hill kept by foure hundred Imperialists, hearing likewise of the same newes; poorely quit the Vestung or hilly Castle aforesaid. Thence, October 28, hyes hee unto Leutmeritz on the East side of the Elb; within 7 Dutch miles or 28 English, of the Citie of Prage: to which the chiefe of the Citizens and the garri∣son of Leutmeritz, had before Arnheims comming retired. Marching more Southerly next day up the Elb. the Austrian Baron Hoffkirck is by him sent with 1000 Horse unto Raudnitz, ten or twelve English miles further, and upon the other side of the river: which he surprizes. The Inhabitants being all Papists, have their houses plundered: some of the chiefe Burgers being carryed away prisoners, for their ran∣some, and the fidelitie of their fellowes. Arnheim having thus farre advanced into Bohemia, Henry Mathias the old Count of Thurn, began to stirre also. His towne of Thurn, is upon the very frontiers of the Duke of Saxonyes Misnia, and Bohemia:The old Count of Thurn makes a party in Bo∣hemia. and thereabouts (I per∣ceive) he began first of all to rise. He had his Commission for Lieftenant Generall, and some forces, from the King of Sweden; some aydes hee received from the Duke of Saxony: besides a party of divers banished and discontented Lords and Gentlemen with their Tenants, which he drew into the action. That there were two severall Armies about the end of this October in Bohemia; and those severally led too, by Arnheim and old Thurn, I finde expressely. With the Swedish troopes, does Count Thurn, first of all take in Ioachimsdale: a
towne with a pretty Iurisdiction belonging unto it, upon the West-frontiers of Bohemia, mid-way betwixt Thurn and Egra. Here the people choose the old Count for their Gover∣nour: who bringing the Countrey as hee goes along, under Contribution, marches towards Prage to joyne with Arnheim. This great and Imperiall Citie of Prage, (which is indeed three severall Cities in one) hearing of these proceedings; begins to lose the company of the Emperours great Officers and Iesuites, there residing: all begin to packe away towards Budweiss first, and so to Passaw and Ʋienna. Nor did Walen∣stein Duke of Fridland, Don Balthasar, (then Generall in those parts) the Count of Michna and Colonel Wangler, stay behind: but faining to goe out of the towne, to meete with the Count of Thurn and capitulate with him; they all toge∣ther shifted for themselves other-where. These Comman∣ders being immediately followed by the souldiours (lately sent for thither for the defence of the Citie, and said to bee two thousand men) and the Citizens thereby left to them∣selves; yeeld immediately unto Arnheims first friendly Let∣ter and Summons, upon the first of November sent unto them by his Trumpet. Himselfe at his comming accorded the whole matter with them, upon these conditions. Prage taken.1. First, That the Saxon souldiours from their very first admission into the Citie, should behave themselves peaceably and quietly; without offering violence or injustice unto any man. 2. That none of the three Cities of Prage should any way be charged: nor any Monasteryes, Colledges, or Churches pillaged. And that free leave of continuing in the towne, should be permitted unto the Monks and other Ecclesiasticall persons; who shall no wayes be injuryed by the souldioury. 3. As for the Gentry and Magistrates of the said three Ci∣ties, neither should they be burthened with any enquarterings or billeting of souldiours upon them: nor should any ran∣some or other forfeiture bee wrung from them. And if in case any of them (which is not to be supposed) should so be
used by the souldiours: then should they be protected by the Lord Arnheim, or who-ever should be the Governour resi∣ding in that Citie, where they be so molested. 4. For that the three Cities aforesaid have made an earnest request of it, that they may bee suffered to continue in the homage, which they once tooke oath upon unto the Empe∣rour: and that it may be free for any man to depart the City, without paying any ransome or Fine for it: this condition was for the present accepted of by the Lord Arnheim, untill his Highnesse the Elector of Saxony should resolve otherwise of it. 5. For that the severall abilities of the Citizens, were most particularly knowne unto their owne Magistrates: it should be left to their choice, in what houses to billet or not billet the Saxon souldiours. 6. That the Iewes as well as the Christians, should have freedome of religion; and all free protection both for their lives and goods. 7. That the three Cities should submit themselves to the protection of his Highnesse the Elector of Saxony: and that every man should make promise to live peaceably; and to give no occasion of sedition: but with a good and true mea∣ning, to observe whatsoever is contained in these Articles: which were by both parties thus signed. Iohn George Arnheim. The old, The new, The little, Citie. Within a weeke after the rendring of Prage,The Duke of Saxony enters Prage. came the Duke of Saxony into the Citie: taking up his lodging in that goodly faire Palace, lately built by the Duke of Fridland, up∣on the ruines of an hundred houses. The Count of Thurn contented himselfe with taking possession of his owne house againe; which the Emperour had bestowed upon the Count of Michna: Hee forthwith caused the heads and limbs of such Protestant Lords and others, as had beene executed by the Emperour, to be taken downe, and honourably buryed.
The Catholike Lords, Gentlemen, and Imperiall Officers of the neighbour Cities, make as much money of their estates as they can, and the most of them depart the Kingdome. Those that stay'd behind, as also the inferiour people, being afraid of ill usage from the souldiours; the Count of Thurn gives out a generall Protection in the King of Swedens name, for the se∣curitie of the Subject. Thus. The Count of Thurn gives a protection to the Subiects of Bohemia,We Henry Mathias, Count of Thurn, Baron of Ballastrino and Creutz, Lieftenant-Generall to his Maiesty of Sweden, &c. doe in his said Maiesties name, give free leave, power, and authority to the Noble Gentleman Iohn Hoost Theysel, to pro∣tect and defend you and all the subiects of Bohemia, from all iniuries, &c. The Boores begin to appeare on the Swedish and Saxish party, and kill as many Imperiall souldiers as they could singly meete withall and master. They pillage Postelberg up∣on the river Egra: with Brustwald, and other townes there∣abouts. They murther two great Imperiall privy Councellors; the Earle of Thallenberg Lord President: and the Count of Trautmansdorff. The troublesome estate of the Country, may best be read in the Count of Thurns Proclamation, for the re∣dresse of it. and sets out a Pro∣clamation, to re∣straine divers insolencies.We Henry, &c. Count of Thurn, &c. understanding, how that divers Boores have begunne, not onely to rob upon the high-waies side, but also to pillage Castles and Gentlemens houses: and that no honest man is able to goe about his busi∣nesse, for feare of being robbed by them: therefore doe we hereby fairely request first of all, and advise them, to give over these insolencies: and to pray to God rather to send them a good Magistrate, under whom they may enioy peace and quietnesse: that every man may fearelessely returne to his vocation againe, and leave off these idle courses. For this army is not come to ruine or undoe, but to redresse the country rather, against such iniuries as it hath heretofore in∣dured. My hope therefore is, that you will not revenge your former wrongs upon these our souldiers: and I for mine owne part will still continue, as heretofore I have beene, your
good Patrone and Protector. As for those of the Gentry, none I hope will become partakers with these extravagant fellowes; but be a meanes and a helpe rather, to suppresse and hinder them in their naughty purposes. My further hope is, that both one and other will apply himselfe, to this our well intended admonition: which (let me tell them) will be a great deale better both for their quiet and for their profit. But whosoever he be, that after this, shall be apprehended for the like faults againe; let him be assured that I will proceed with that severity against him, as his demerits shall re∣quire; making him an example unto the rest, that none hereafter may impute their punishment, to any but their owne disobedience. Thus much shall the Lord A∣dam of Chinitz and Tetaw, cause to bee made knowne unto you. By this time had Thurns part of the Army,The actions af¦ter the taking of Prage. taken in all the North-westerne part of the Kingdome, from Ioachimsdale aforesaid; along upon the river Egra, to the County of Satz, called the Satzer kraiss; together with the townes of Satz, Commothaw, Prisen and the rest, upon the West of the Ci∣ty Prage. Arnheim with his Saxons, did what he pleased upon the rivers Elb and Multaw, on the South and East side of the City: which he might easily enough doe, for there was not an Imperialist nor strong Towne, to resist him. So easie was this goodly Kingdome to be taken. Towards the middle of November, is the Imperiall Colonell Gallas sent in with some troopes against him. In the end of the moneth, when Tilly after his rising from Norimberg, had sent part of his army into the Ʋpper Palatinate, towards Weyden and E∣gra: he is requested to fall in with his troopes on the We∣sterne side; whiles Don Balthasar, Diepenbach, Gallas and Gotse should set upon them on the North-East side. Arnheim hearing of the comming of Diepenbach, Gallas and Gotse out of Silesia, and their being ioyned with Don Balthasar: re∣solues to goe against them, before the Tillians should be marcht up too farre into the Country, and he endangered to
be hembd up into the middle of them. By the 26 of Novem∣ber,he Imperia∣sts make head gaine in Bo∣mia, were 15000 Imperialists, (both out of Bohemia and Silesia) met together at Limburg upon the North side of the river Elb, some 25 English miles from the City Prage. A∣gainst these, advances Arnheim, November 28: very secretly and in the night, without sound of Drumme or Trumpet. Yet not so secretly neither, but that the Imperialists by their espials had notice of their approaching. Arnheim now with∣in 2 or 3 English miles of Limburg, begins to put his men in∣to order; and to give directions for the assailing of the enemy (as he thought) in their Quarters. This whiles he was doing, the Alarme is brought home to him; and word that the ene∣my had already charged his Van, and disordered it. With that, might he perceive the Imperialists in faire Battaglia; and his owne men beginning to take the rowte at it. Perswading thereupon the Regiments next unto him, To remember the cause of religion and the publike liberty, which they came thither to fight for; the military oath taken to their Lord the Duke of Saxony; and their owne honours and former victories: he presently leads them on against the Imperialists. Drawing his Sword withall, upon those which he met now fleeing, and vowing to let flye his Ordnance amongst them, unlesse they return'd into the battell: he brought all in order againe, and altogether renewed the encounter. The fight was long; but the Imperialists having brought no Ordnance with them, (their designe having beene onely to surprise Arnheim upon his march) and the Saxon Ordnance doing much spoyle upon them on the other side: are over∣owne by nheim. they were faine to retreate in much disorder towards Limburg. Many of them were cut downe by the pursuing Saxons; and the most of their Regi∣ments routed. Arnheim summoning Limburg upon faire termes, and be∣ing refused; shootes Granadoes, and Fire-workes into the Towne: whereupon the Imperialists perceiving all like to be burnt downe, quit the City, and burne the bridge behind them, for feare of being pursued. But the Saxons finding a
convenient foord or passage neere-hand over the River, pur∣sue them on that side also. Some 6000 or 7000 men, were said to be slaine in this battaile: whereof there might per∣chance be little more then halfe so many. Diepenbach was at first reported to be kild also: but he saved himselfe by flight, and recovered with Gotse into Silesia: Don Balthasar escaped into Budweiss, on the other side of the Country. The Duke of Saxony himselfe about Prage in the meane time, hath the Towne of Melnick upon the Elb,Other townes taken. to the North of Prage: and the Townes of the Countyes of Pod∣berder and Multaw, to the South of Prage, delivered over unto him. Whilest Arnheim is comming backe againe, those of the Army with the Duke, with some of Thurns forces; make Westward towards Egra: there to prevent the Tilli∣ans. Some few correspondents and well-wishers to his cause, the Duke then had within the City: the rest generally being Popish. Vpon confidence of whom, he presented about 900 Horse and Foote (one with another) before their City upon the Gallowes hill, on Satterday, December 3d, old stile. The Magistrates perceiving this, first cause the Alarme to be strucke up, and commanded every man, that was able to beare Armes, to repaire unto their guards: but a very few there were, that would make a muster of themselves.Egra taken. The Magi∣strates calling their Common-Councell together into the Statehouse, to consult either upon the meanes of resistance, or Composition: might have better saved the Towne, by putting to their helping hands, then by laying their heads together. For whilest they are there consulting; one of the Saxons correspondents by discharging of a warning peece, both calls those without, to presse upon the bridge-Port; and his fellow-Combyners within, to breake open the said Gate for them. The Saxons marching immediately up to the market place; there make a prison, of what Master Mayor and his brethren had made a Parliament-house: locking them all in, and setting a guard upon them. The souldiors pre∣sently fall to plunder the Iury or streete and houses of the
Iewes: and those ranker and more practicall Papists, whom they pleased to mistake for Iewes. For the Protestants and their Correspondents sake, they forbare the rest of the Cittizens: and were content to accept of such Billet and Quarterings, as the still pinfolded Magistrates (more for feare then love) were forced to assigne them. Two dayes after, the Cittizens take oath to the Duke of Saxony: that they would stand firmely to the Elector, the Cause, and the Protestant Religion. About this City, were some 8000 Saxons for a while kept; untill they saw whereabouts the Tillians would settle: who hearing after a while, how Diepenbach was defeated; betake themselves into their winter garrisons, Tillyes selfe returning unto Nordlingen. The Count of Thurn now went to besiege Budweiss; a good strong City upon the very Southermost frontiers of the Kingdome, sixty English miles from Prage. Hither was Don Balthasar retired: and this place, he with twenty two Ensignes maintained.The Count of Thurn falls sicke. But the Count of Thurn fell sicke not long af∣ter; and the siege came to nothing. Whilest the Duke, and Arnheim and Thurn, were abroad with the Armyes; the Austrian Baron Hoffkirck was left Gouernor of the Greater towne of Prage, and Philip Reinhard Count of Solms of the Lesser. The Imperiall Horse (and the Crabats especially) made divers excursions about the Country; yea even neere unto Prage it selfe, in the absence of the armyes. For the Duke of Saxony was now preparing to goe keepe his Christmas at home: where at Dresden he arriued, December 16, and his Felt-Marshall Arnheim with him. Divers at∣tempts upon Prage, by the Imperialists.December 13, (old stile) divers troopes of Crabats made a show of themselves before the Weissemberger gate of the greater Towne of Prage: hoping of some Corre∣spondents or tumults within, who might helpe them to re∣prize it. The Baron of Hoffkirck discharging three peeces of Ordnance hereupon (which is the signe for the souldiours to take the Alarme) and sending out some troopes of Horse against them; drave them to the retreate. The next day,
(being Christmas Eve at Prage, according to the New stile) the Imperialists came on with greater forces: the Crabats light horse being backed with 1000 Muskettiers, and flanked with as many Dragooners. The Saxons well aware of their comming, had first drest an ambush of Muskettiers in a low∣er place of covert for them; and then sent out two troopes of Arnheims owne guards and some others, to entertaine them. These feigning to flee, draw on the Imperialists into the ambush, where a many of them were entrapped by this stale stratageme. By this time, more of the Imperialists ap∣peard in sight; and with a reasonable good army. Hereup∣on, doe the Saxons retire into the City; looking that it would forthwith be assaulted. But the Count of Sultz and Colonell Gallas (who led the Imperialists) perceiving the walls and bullwarkes to be already manned, and the Ordnance busie amongst them: call off their men, and faces about to the right hand. The Towne-Horse perceiving this, fall (as usually they will doe) out upon the Reere of the Imperialists: which as they were about to doe, all on the sudden the bells in the two Iesuites Colledges (one in the old towne, and the other in the Lesser) began to ring out.The Jesuites hold a practice with the Im∣perialists. The Imperialists hea∣ring this signall, offered presently to returne againe towards the City: but the Ordnance now thundering upon them, no Correspondents appearing, and the short winters day be∣ing farre spent: they bethought themselves, and marcht off againe. The Governours and Magistrates speedily sending to the Iesuites Colledges, to know the reason of the ringing of their bells; found divers Armes and Muskets there hidden: which were ready to be used both by the Iesuites (who would for that time have beene Ex militia too) and by the Imperial∣ly-affected within the City; had but their friends without, once made themselves Masters of any gate or bullwarke. These Armes were taken away: the Military Iesuites three dayes after, turnd out of the Towne; and their 2 Colledges given away to the Carmelites and Franciscans; two kinds of
lesse pragmaticall fraternities. The Saxons perceiving how often they were likely to be assaulted; stand better upon their guards: the Count of Solms causing the Burgers watch, every day to breake the ice of the river Mulda; for feare of the enemies comming over it. December 22. the Baron Hoffkirck had the first Protestant Sermon and Communion, in the Dutch Church of the Old towne, that had in ten yeeres before beene publikely preached in the Citie. And by this time, were the exiled Protestants (both Clergy and Laity) in most places of the Kingdome,Religion resto∣red in Bohemia. a∣gaine returned; and liberty of Religion restored. December 24. the Imperialists, and three Ensignes of Wal∣lons amongst them;Five troopes of Saxons defea∣ted, fall upon five troopes of Colonell Stei∣naw his Horse; then lying at Rakonick, thirtie English miles to the West of Prage Citie. The Saxons being surprized, are knockt downe: scarce 120 of them escaping with their lives, and losse of two Cornets. The Imperialists advancing neerer towards Prage, take short two other Saxonian Lieftenants (Hauguis and Wenzor as I finde them named:and two more.) who being gone out upon espyall to discover these Imperialists; found them too soone, and lost their owne liberties and companions lives, for their labours. Many such excursions and attempts were made on either side this cold weather, scarcely worth the writing. The Saxons, (of whom there were seven thousand now in and about Prage) being aforehand with them, stirr'd little abroad: but by sitting still and bibbing in the warme Stooves all day-long, they proov'd so lazy; as that they were ever now and anon, (though in small numbers) surprized by their more active enemies. Gallas and the Count of Sultz lay still in the lurch for them; even as neere as Beraun upon the river Watta, within twelve or fourteene English miles of Prage, and on the West of it: others of them lying more Westerly at that time, towards the Vpper Palatinate. For this reason, was the Duke of Saxony constrained to send more new levyed forces, with some Ordnance; towards the good towne of Pilsen, and those quarters: which lye some sixe
or seven leagues more South-Westerly, towards the head of the same river, and in the middle of Gallas his Quarters. This strong towne of Pilsen (as I should have told you) was by accord rendred unto the Duke, before his going out of Bohe∣mia. Colonell Swalbach Generall of the Saxons artillery, now lay in the County of Luitmertz. The time of the yeere being too cold to fight,The Emperor sends againe to draw off Saxony the Empe∣ror sends to the Duke of Saxony to treate. Iulius Henry, one of the Dukes of Saxon-Lawenburg (who had some yeeres be∣fore turned Papist,) was the man employed; and about Christ∣mas was the time. His Imperiall Maiesty by this Ambassador, protested himselfe to be very sorry; to have any occasion to withdraw his affection, from so worthy and so beloved a Prince: friendly advising the Duke, that in case he should still continue constant to his purposes, and that if any hard∣ship of warre, or iudgement from God should fall upon him for it; He (the Emperour) should be altogether innocent of it. But the weather was cold, and so was Saxonyes answer. These motions were severall times renewed from the Empe∣rour, both by this and other messengers. About the beginning of Ianuary, doe the Saxons, under the leading of Baron Hoffkirck, defeate 900 Crabats,900 Crabats defeated. and take 11 Cornets from them: which they send unto their Duke at Dresden. Prage after this defeate, was held much the qui∣eter. About the 15th of Ianuary, the Imperialists of Merdies Regiment, have a designe for the plundering and burning of Slackenwald, in the County of Egra. Prince Ernestus of Anhalt, (who then had some good Saxon forces therea∣bouts) hearing of it; comes immediately upon them, and drives them to take Sanctuary in the strong Castle of Betscha,The Imperia∣lists attempt Slackenwald, (from whence some of them came) about 2 English miles to the South of Slackenwald. Other Imperialists at the same time, make daily excursions even to the very gates of Prage.and Prage, Those 3 Ensignes of Wallons, among the rest, that had before cut off 5 Companies of Colonell Steinaw's at Rakonick; were
almost every man of them cut in pieces,with losse. by those of Colo∣nell Bindthauffs Regiment, before the gates of Prage. This Regiment of Bindthauff (who was slaine at the Battell of Leip∣sich) was now bestowed vpon Ʋlrick, Prince of Denmarke and Duke of Holstein. The Duke of Saxony now levying more new forces, about Torgau in his owne Countrey; Ian. 18. sends some 10 pee∣ces of Ordnance thither: 4 of which were Demi-Cannon, and drawne with 10 horses apiece; which Tilly had left be∣hind him at Leipsich. Himselfe was all this while at home at Dresden; and Arnheim with him: whither the Lord Chan∣cellor Oxenstiern likewise came, from the King of Sweden. The towne of Egra about this time, desires of the Elector, to free them of his unruly garrison. Prage it selfe likewise was so sorely oppressed by the Saxons; that the poore Bohe∣mian Protestants, lately returned to their owne homes out of exile: choose rather to forsake their native Country againe, then to endure the heavinesse of such taxations,The Saxons ard dealing with the Bohe∣mians. as the ma∣sterly Saxons enforced upon them. Thus by the middle of Fe∣bruary, were there 1700 houses found empty in the 3 Cities: the easing of which hardship; the keeping of the Duke and Arnheim, from hearkning to the Emperour and Walenstein, (who layd hard at them:) to hasten forward the Saxon levies; and to renew the former league with the Duke, was the chiefe part of Chancellor Oxenstierns Ambassage. In the beginning of February, Prince Ernest of Anhalt with the 8000 Saxons he had in and about Egra; makes showe of rising thence; and of going against Cratz into the Ʋpper Pa∣latinate. The occasion, was a feare conceived upon the Count of Sultz his going out of Bohemia: which he thought had beene to fetch in Cratz thither. This made him bristle up. But hearing of Cratz and Sultz their going to the reliefe of For∣cheim, (a cleane contrary way from him) he staies his expedi∣tion, and lookes to the Imperialists neerer hand. Within E∣gra, was Colonell Starschedel, left Governour. February 3 (old Stile) there was a great Hubub sent into Prage from
Brandeis (a towne upon the Elb, some 10 English miles to the North of it) that the Imperialists were with divers pee∣ces of Ordnance, comming very strong against them. Here∣upon does the Baron Hoffkirck make towards Brandeis, to prevent the enemy: who falling on upon the towne, Febr. 8, were put by their designe, and retyred. The next day, would a Horse-Regiment of the Crabats (with some Foot) needes make another brave before the Towne; as if they had meant presently to have attempted it. This the Governour percei∣ving,Brandeis attēp∣ted, and reskue thrusts some bands of selected muskettiers (for an am∣bush) into the Castle, (on the same side of the towne next unto the enemies) and with some few of the residue, sallies (in policy) out upon the Crabats. These perceiving the sal∣lyers to be but weake, fall instantly upon them, and beate them backe to the very wals of the Castle: presently whereupon the Saxon Muskettiers issuing out, and the sallyers returning upon the Crabats againe; kill 300 of them upon the place: defeate, and disperse the whole Regiment. Here (as they heard at Prage) was the Count of Slyck either wounded or taken prisoner. The same third of February did some loose troopes of Crabats and others, put themselues (for the seeking of pillage) over the river Mulda, towards Pilsen: of which the Boores having notice, gather 600 of them to∣gether, sinke the boates first of all in which the Crabats had passed the river; and then set upon,The Boores kill the Crabats. and cut the throates of the plunderers. Thus the Boores served the Crabats often∣times; whose very name was more odious unto them, then any other of the Imperialists. These Boores undertooke the keeping the Westerne banke of the Mulda: which about this time, they had cleered for 40 English miles together. February 13,Don Balthasar turnes the Skales againe in Bohemia. was Colonel Marezan sent from Don Bal∣thasar di Marradas, (now lately returned from Walenstein with 8000 men into Bohemia) to fall upon the town of Satz, upon the North of the river Egra: and about 40 English miles to the West of Prage. Marezan brought but 1000 mus∣kettiers and 500 Horse, to doe the feate withall; his trust was
upon his Correspondents within the towne: who indeed o∣pened the gates in the night time unto him. The Saxons which were of Bindthauffs old Regiment, tooke the Alarme, and had three severall charges with the Imperialists. In which service,atz recovered y the Impe∣ialists, 1200 of them lost their lives, the towne was wonne, and 6 Ensignes sent unto Prage unto the Em∣perour. And this returne of Don Balthasars, gave the first jogge; which turnd round the wheele of Fortune againe in Bohe∣mia. Some Saxon forces (as if they had meant to give way to their enemies and misfortunes) were gone a iolly voyage into Silesia: to pillage and triumph certainely. There, about mid February, they fall foule upon Colonell Illo and his Regi∣ment: which they almost utterly defeated. They surprise other Imperialists at Politz: and with a running pull, had like to have taken in Glatz also. Some of them flye out as farre as Gorlitz. Thus whilest the souldiours gate some slight pillage in Silesia; the Duke their Master, lost what they had before gotten him in Bohemia. For quickly now had Don Balthasar driven other of the Saxons out of Comotha, Prisen, Rade and Caden:nd divers o∣her townes. which last, the Mapps falsely write Lada. The Marquesse of Gran, he also expulses them out of Slackenwald and Carlsbat. And thus through the idlenesse, covetousnesse, and deepe security of the Saxons, (now in the absence of their Duke and Arnheim, and the sicknesse of the Count of Thurn;) was all that North-westerne corner of Bohemia, next unto Misnia and the Ʋpper Palatinate, quite recovered by the Im∣perialists. These being Masters of that wooddy frontier, cut downe the trees upon all the Passes thereabouts: to hinder by that meanes the Duke of Saxony from sending any Horsemen, Ordnance or Ammunition-wagons, that way into Bohemia. Yea, and had not the snow now hindered the Imperialists, they had even then marched into Misnia. The plague and famine, now increased in Prage and other places; and all things seemed to threaten an alteration. The Saxons had not used
their brother-Protestants, so kindly as they should, or might have done: which alienated the Bohemians hearts, that should have assisted them. His Highnesse the Elector himselfe, was at a meeting or Diet at Torgau, about the end of this February. There was his Arnheim too. There were the Marquesse Elector of Bran∣denburg in person: and that wise Statesman, the Swedish Chancellor Axel Oxenstiern.A Diet at To¦gau, where th Catholikes moove for a Peace. The Emperor with other Lea∣guers, had their Ambassadors there also. Thus whilest one Imperiall Generall (Walenstein) is providing; and another (Don Balthasar) is already falne against Saxony into Bohemia; is there an Imperiall Ambassador sent towards Saxony, unto Torgau. Now whilest the warres are hotest, the Leaguers and Imperialists make motions for a peace (that was their businesse) which by Oxenstierns and the Protestants deman∣ding, to have the charges of the warre repayed; were put by for that present. February 29. 400 Companyes of Polackes passe the River of Mulda neere unto Soltzan and Pribus; (some 30 English miles to the South of Prage) to goe towards Pilsen. Seven hundred more of them, are bold to venter their passage over the same River at Konigsal, within five English miles of Prage also. Against these, are three Saxon Captaines, Stram, Liech∣wies, and Toner sent; with five troopes of Horse, and three Companyes of Foote, to hinder their passage, if it might bee. By the beginning of March, were almost all the passages about Prage blocked up: those onely excepted towards Dresden, which the Saxons made a shift to keepe open. And now began they (and it was more then time) to looke better to themselves at Prage. They fortifie the Horse-market; raise a skonce over the bridge there; plant some Ordnance upon all places of advantage;The Saxons at Prage grow iealous of the Catholikes. and towards the wa∣ters side especially. Now begin the Saxons to grow jealous of the Catholike Burgers, in all the three townes of the City:
many of them are committed, for that some letters of sus∣pition were found about them; others executed, for sen∣ding letters to Budweis, and entertaining practices and cor∣respondencyes with the Imperialists. All Catholikes are by sound of Drumme forbidden, to appeare upon any Alarme abroad in the streets; yea or to be seene out at their win∣dowes, terrasses, or Balconees, upon paine of great punish∣ment: but all the Protestants should upon like occasion, re∣sort unto the small side Ring upon the said Horse-Market-place. The Diet of Torgau being ended, the Duke of Saxony drawes his new levyed forces together to the frontiers; to be ready to march with the first of the Spring, into Bohemia. This list of his Army was given abroad. Of his Horse Regi∣ments were these 8 Colonels, with each 1000 horse under him. The Duke of Saxon-Altenburg. Vlrick, Duke of Hol∣stein and Prince of Denmarke. Ernestus Prince of Anhalt. Baron Hoffkirck. Colonell Tauben. Colonell Steinau. Colonell Kalkstein, and Colonell Vitzthimb. besides 2000 Horse of the Country Gentlemens; and two troopes more of 150 a∣peece, under Vitzthimb and Truckses. In all 10300. Of the Foot Companyes, were there 9 Regiments under these Colo∣nels: whereof eight had 3000 apeece, and the last 2500. The Life-Regiment,The list of Saxonyes new evyes. Arnheim, Swalbach, Starschedel, Loser, Klitzing, Wilbersdorff, Vitzthimb, and Maschnitz. To these were added 500 Voluntiers under Colonell Appelman, and 600 more, under three other Captaines. In all 27600. Horse and Foote in all, 37900. This List, if ever it were filled up; and had the Forces been mustered and brought together; hardly could the Saxons have beene excused from the imputation of errant Pultrones, and Cullions, so quickely to lose so brave a Kingdome as Bohemia: and to suffer the warres so suddenly to be brought home to them, into their owne Misnia and Lusatia. But Wa∣lenstein came sooner upon them, then was expected. The
Elector of Brandenburg, had some 8000 men, now also in a readinesse; unto whom the Swedish Colonell Dubalt be∣ing afterwards conjoyned, those few made better worke of it in Silesia; then all these Saxons did in Bohemia. This cau∣sed both the Duke and his Felt-marshall Arnheim to be sus∣pected, of what they were no way guilty.Some aspersi∣ons wypt off, from the Duke of Saxony and Arnheim. The suspition was partly occasioned, by Arnheims going from the Duke to treate with Walenstein: but the Duke answered honorably; and Arnheim hath prooved himselfe an honest man; refu∣sing such termes as Waelnstein (tis said) offered him. Whilest Saxony was a pruning his feathers, the Imperia∣lists were againe upon the wing.The siege of Elnbogen raised by the Saxons. Aprill 3d. they assault Eln∣bogen upon the River Eger; a little to the North of Slacken∣wald and Falkenaw aforementioned. Twelve hundred men they brought against it; and two dayes and nights together, they batterd it. All which time, Ʋitzthimb with his garri∣son, and the Cittizens helpe, defended the Towne, and put off one or two assaults, very manfully. Aprill 5th, the Imperialists fell very furiously on againe; and were againe as bravely repulsed. By this time the neighbour Regiments of Saxon-Altenburg and Anhalt, resolve either to remoove the siege; or else to beate up a Quarter, and to thrust some succors into the Towne: upon whose comming, the Impe∣rialists gave it over, and retired. The rest of Aprill, was spent with losse unto the Saxons.Falkenaw taken by the Saxons, and forsaken. By the end of it, the Elector of Saxony advances with part of the Army into Bohemia: and May 3, Arnheim and Philip Reinhard of Solms, march up after him with the residue. Arnheims employment was, to goe for Pilsen: and the Count of Solms was to returne into Prage againe. May 7th,Some Actions betwixt the Saxons and the Walsteiners. the Saxons set up∣on Falkenaw, on the Eastern banke of the River Eger, and betwixt Egra and Elnbogen. The Towne they take in by Sca∣ladoe; and prepare likewise to storme the Castle: which whilest they were about to doe, the Imperialists from thence setting fire upon the Towne (with fireworkes which they flung downe) enforced the Saxons to leave it also.
Walstein ad∣vances into Bohemia.About the fourth of May, had the Saxon Regiments of the Duke of Holstein and Klitzing, with other their Associ∣ates: defeated three of Walensteins new Regiments neere unto Commotha. The Saxons of Swalbachs Regiment that lay at Leutmeritz upon the Elb, now burne downe their bridge there, to prevent the Walsteiners comming at them: who then lay at Budin some two leagues from them to Prage-ward. Walenstein with his whole great Army, was by the begin∣ning of Aprill 1632, upon his march towards Bohemia: who quickly recovered Prage, and forced the Duke of Saxony and Arnheim home into Misnia: as in His Proceedings we shall tell you. And thus being able for this time to doe the Saxons no greater honour, then to say no more of them: we leave the rest of their losses, to be pursued in Walensteins Story: and the recovery of their honours in Silesia and else-where, we cave unto the Third Part.
The Military Preparations of the Lord Albert Walstein Duke of Fridland, &c. against the Duke of Saxony, and King of Sweden. HIs Imperiall Majesty by the middle of October 1631: perceiving the small hopes he had of drawing the Duke of Saxony unto his party againe, by the Comple∣ments of an Embassage; and that the said Dukes forces had by this time driven the Imperiall army under Gotse, out of Lusa∣tia; were too hard for Diepenbachs in Silesia; and becomne a terror now unto Don Balthasars in Bohemia: begins to consult (as it was high time) upon the setting forth of ano∣ther Army to oppose him. Those that were the advisers, be∣came also the advancers of his Counsailes. His Majesty the King of Spaine, contributed 300000 double Pistolets.Divers volun∣tary Contribu∣tions, towards a new Army. His Majesty King Ferdinand of Hungary, laid downe so many Rixe Dollars. Prince Eggenberg Duke of Crumau (the Empe∣rours chiefest Councellour) underwrit for 100000 Dollars. The Cardinall and Prince of Diederickstein, for so many Gil∣ders. The Bohemian Count of Michna, for 100000 of his Country Dollars. The new Bishop of Vienna, (late Abbot of Cremsmunster) for 80000 Rixe Dollars: and the Lord Stra∣lendorff, Vice-Chancellor of the Empire, undertooke for 18000 Duckats. Other Gentlemen likewise, that either had received, or that now expected any Court favours or prefer∣ments; might not be behind-hand with their Largesse.
To sollicite the Popes bounty (rather then his benediction) is the HungarianOf Strigoni∣um, or Gran in Hungaria. Cardinall Pasman employed: who for being a Cardinall, the Court of Rome would not acknow∣ledge for an Ambassador: nor that the warre he came about, was a warre of Religion. So that Saint Peters Successor having no favourable inclination towards Caesar, saved his purse by this tricke and avoyded (very Romanly) the treating with the Cardinall upon that chargeable argument. The Lord Rabata, Governour of Gradiscia in Hungaria, goes at the same time, with Pasman, unto the Princes & Gentlemen of Italy: carrying blanke Commissions along with him, to give out to such as would levy for the Emperour: and an empty purse, for such as would contribute towards it. After them in May follow∣ing, goes the yong Duke of Eggenberg unto Florence to mu∣ster, and to bring the Italian forces into Germany. And thus was the first of the three Principles of Warre (the Matter of money) taken order for: which is worthily called the Sinewes of it: for that by the Languidenesse or vigorous activity of this same money, the warre becomes either a Giant or a Lame souldiour. There had no meaner Generall all this while be  then the Emperours owne sonne, Ferdinand King of Hun∣gary. Eggon Count of Furstenberg having a good friend of his Kinsman President Ferstenberg at Cou  for the Preferment: or to be Adjutant or Director at least, nto King Ferdinand. He had left his troopes with Tilly, present∣ly after their joynt over-throw; and hearing of another mans calling to the place a little after this, he leaves the warres, and retires unto a privacy. For the Lord Albert Walenstein Duke of Fridland was the man, that had the voyces of the Courtiers for it: such Councellors especially, as being lovers of his vast bounties; knew by experience, that if Fridland chanc't upon a good Mayn, strucke a lucky hand of it, he would pay the boxe well for it. Walenstein (they knew) was no such slight Captaine, as those that had scarce heard of him, supposed. Hee had
heretofore done good service against the Turkes; beaten the Count of Mansfeld and the Duke of Brunswicke, severally, in the yeere 1626; and borne downe, since that, all before him in Mecklenburg and Pomerania. Caesars memory needed not to be refresht, with any new mention of Walensteins old ser∣vices (the Emperour knew him to be for his turne:) but the discontents, that Bavaria and other Princes (whom his Majesty had present need of) would take, at his calling in a∣gaine; became the difficulty. But these being by the art of others, either quickely made lesse; or argued downe; as if priuate respects, must of duty give way unto publike neces∣sities: the same Lord Questenberg,Walenstein in∣vited to the Generallship. who had beene sent from the Diet of Ratisbone to discharge him; is now dispatcht a∣gaine to invite him. It was in the beginning of November, a time of Walensteins good leisure; he then living at his owne faire Castle of Znaim in Moravia: as being by the Saxons tother day, chased out of Bohemia. His old friend Questenberg could not (it seemes) prevaile with him at the first; it was the month of December ere Wa∣lenstein would accept it: and then (as himselfe professed) at the perswasions of Prince Eggenberg. And herein (me thinkes) appeares a strange mixture of spirit, in this Walenstein; that be∣ing supposed as haughty and ambitious of Command, as any man in the world; yet was he so farre foorth master of the greatnesse of his owne desires; as that he could with as much moderation now refuse the Generallship, as he had before re∣signd it: he would not have authority, but with freedome, and his owne Conditions. Others have censured this for Pride in him: though nothing (me thinkes) lookes liker Honour. Wa∣lenstein (sure) would have proved an excellent Scholler, he keepes himselfe to his Termes so well. In the Letter of his ac∣ceptance, he was thus free with the Emperor. That his deserts, had bin fuller of merit; then his usage had bin either of reward or acknowledgement. That small encouragement had he there∣fore to hazard his quiet, his state, his honor, or his person a∣gaine, for any service of the Emperors. But yet had Prince Eg∣genberg
such an obligation upon him,ccepts of it r a time. that at his request he was contented to be brought on againe. Yet not so, as abso∣lutely to accept of the Generallship; otherwise then upon certaine conditions onely: and those would himselfe have the liberty of propounding. 1. First, he would entertaine the place, but for three moneths onely: nor would hee take his Commission, for longer then the first of March following. 2. Hee would not have it expected, that hee should wage battell in that time with the enemy. 3. The service hee would doe the Emperour, was, to levy as many souldiours for him, as would repayre unto his En∣signes. 4. After all which, hee would bee contented that another man should bee appointed Generall over them: or rather (which was his private wish) that a good peace might bee treated upon. The Imperiall Commission being sent him unto Znaim in Moravia; he there began to hang out his Ensignes, to beate up his Drums, and to give out his Patents for a levy. Not yet as Generall; for King Ferdinand (for the more credit to the action) still kept the Title of Generalissimo to himselfe. To lay the ground-worke for the new Army, was Diepenbach (either voluntarily or by command) brought to resigne up his Silesian troopes unto Walenstein. The levyes went on; and the intention was knowne to be for the recovery of Bohemia;His first levyes. for which exploit, Walenstein had golden mountaines promised him. But for such a worke, all things went not on, as he desired: he would come into the field like himselfe, or not at all. The moneyes already raised, were too small a summe for him: and he would have his men in the best manner accommodated. He demands three milli∣ons of gold, for the raising of 70000 men: propounds to have 5 000 Curiassiers or men at armes, raised in the Low Countries: and that Baron Dhona should bring him 10000 Cosacks: He desires Quarter for twelve Regiments in Mo∣ravia;
for foureteene in Silesia: for sixe in the Vpper and Lower Austria: and for the rest in Bohemia, till the Army were ready to goe into the Field. In the end of Ianuary, hee gives out a Command unto all his Colonels and Captaines, to have their Regiments and Companies complete, by the first of March following. Vpon the first of February, hee sets out a Proclamation to call in all such souldiours, as were then in service of the enemy. This was the Briefe of it. WeeAlbert. Albrecht by the Grace of God, Duke of Mechlen∣burg, Fridland and Sagan: Prince ofThat is, of Rugen, Vse∣dome and Wo¦lin; three I in Pomerani called e J of the Vand Wenden or of the Van∣dals; Count of Schwerin, and of the Countries of Rostock and Stargard, &c. Whereas we heare of divers Officers and common souldiers belonging heretofore unto the Armies of his Imperiall Maiesty, to be at this present in service with the enemy: we therefore give notice unto them by these presents, That whosoever of them will come backe within 6 moneths,He calles t Germanes fr the Kings se¦vice. shall be pardoned and entertained. And we command all our Officers of warre to entertaine them, and never to reproach them with their former offences; but the kindlier rather to entreate them. Given at Znaim, Febr. 1. 1632. Stylo novo. In the end of December, and beginning of Ianuary, had there beene a meeting of the States at Ʋienna: where there was an enlargement of contributions agreed upon for the ar∣my: For money was scarce as yet, nor were the souldiers halfe armed. Vpon the 11th and 12th of Ianuary (old Style) the Regiments already levied in Moravia; were drawne to∣gether from about Brin, and Olmuntz, unto Znaim: where being mustered, they were sent among the Emperors Tenants of Austria to be enquartered. This they complayning to his Imperiall Maiesty of, are referd for their redresse unto Walen∣stein. There seemes to have beene some rub in the businesse, that discontented our Duke of Fridland, about this middle of Ianuary: whereupon he boldly gave it out, that he would
continue Generall but till May-day following. Monies (it seemes) came not in currantly; nor the aides that he expected out of Hungarie:: Hungari∣ refuse to e the Em∣our. for the Hungarians had broken up their Diet or Land-day at Thirnau, without one Subsidie towards the Emperor. Esterhasy the Hungarian Palatine was answe∣red by the States, 1. That they had evident and present employment for their owne monies and forces: the Turkes being ready to fall into their Country. 2. That they were not bound to send any forces out of the Kingdome unto their King; for that they knew no enemy he had: and it more concerned them, to strengthen their own Frontiers. 3. That they knew no other enemy, either within or with∣out the Kingdome, but the Turke onely. But Walenstein by the end of Ianuary had better content (it seemes) his name was said to be set into the Commission be∣fore the Duke of Bavariaes; and Arnold Secretary of State is sent from Ʋienna to Znaim unto him: whence he went to solicite the old King of Poland. The Imperiall levies went on afterwards something cheerfullier; both in Moravia, Au∣stria, and Bohemia: the Archduke Leopold raises one Regi∣ment of Horse towards it; and the Count of Michna ano∣ther: which last man knew how to make himselfe a saver well enough, for that he was now appointed Commissary-Generall unto the Army. Towards the end of February, Wa∣lenstein sets out his Proclamation for provisions for the army: by which every Free-holder is commanded to furnish him daily with 2 pounds of bread, one of flesh, 2 pints of wine, and 2 Crowns a moneth contribution; together with lodging for the souldiers: besides 2 bottles of hay, and as much straw a day, with 2 bushels of oates weekely, and five Crownes a moneth besides, for every Horseman. This went hard with a many of the poore Farmers of Austria. The States of Silesia send in their monies, for the maintenance of the Regiments imposed upon them; that they might so bee
free from their unruly companie. By the beginning of March, had Fridland gotten 20000 men together: and the first weeke of that moneth, he com∣mands all his military Officers to wait on him at Znaim for their directions. The army presently after this, beganne to congregate and come together: and Brin the chiefe towne in Moravia, is their first Rendezvous: where being mustered, they were sent to be otherwhere enquartered. The King of Hungaria had not all this while given over the title of Generalissimo: but still the voice went, of his going into the field. By April, is there another Counsell taken; and the Duke of Fridlands Commission being renewed,Walenstein mad Generalissimo. he hath the title of Generalissi∣mo, or Generall of Generalls, conferred upon him. Of his entertainment of the Generallship, these Conditions went abroad. Which for that the strangenesse of them, may make some wise men to misdoubt them: therefore, as I would be loth to be taxed for concealing any safe part of my Intelligence from my Readers; so will I not by arguments oppresse any mans credulity. Here they are barely propounded, as they were word for word translated out of the printed High Dutch co∣py: which I doubt not but I shall find, in some after Stories. The Contents of the Conditions, wherupon the Duke of Fridland hath re-accepted of the Generallship: which in the name of his Imperiall Maiesty, hath by divers Privy Councellors (both of Warre and State) beene offered unto him. But especially and in most solemne manner, by the Duke of Crumau and Eggenberg. 1. THE Duke of Fridland shall be Generalissimo,The condition upon which, h accepteth of the Generalshi not onely for the Emperor, but also for the King of Spaine, and the whole house of Austria: and for ever so continue.
2. The Generalship shall be wholly and plenarily conferred upon the Duke of Fridland, in the most absolute forme that may be. 3. His Royall Maiestie Ferdinand the third, shall not be per∣sonally present in the army: much lesse have any command ever it. But when the Kingdome of Bohemia shall be againe recovered, his Maiesty shall personally keepe Court at Prage; and Don Balthasar di Marradas for his better security, shall waite upon him with 12000 men in Bohemia; untill there be an universall peace established in Germany. For the Duke of Fridland well perceiveth, that the Bohemians both must and will have their King to be personally resident among them. By this meanes also, shall both the Emperor and his Ge∣nerall rest the better assured, that no rebellion shall there be attempted. 4. His Imperiall Majesty shall give him security in the best manner, that he shall have some Lordship given him in in∣heritance in Austria, for his ordinary recompence. 5. Hee shall for his extraordinary recompence, have the highest Royalty, in any of the recovered Countries of Ger∣many. 6. Hee shall have the disposall of all theHe meanes it, the lands d goods of h onely as mselfe should nquer. Confiscations in the Empire, after the most absolute manner. So that nei∣ther the Imperiall Councell, nor Exchequer, nor the Cham∣ber at Spiers, shall pretend any Interest in them, either in part or in whole: nor have any thing to doe with the decisi∣on of them. 7. The Duke of Fridland shall have absolute power to dis∣pose, not onely in matters of Confiscation, but of Pardons also. And notwithstanding there should from the Emperors
Court, be granted any letters of Safe-Conduct or of Pardon: yet that without the Duke of Fridlands confirmation, they shall be of no value: and extend no further then unto Life and Honour, and not unto Goods or Estate: the reall and ab∣solute pardoning whereof, shall be granted by him alone. For his Imperiall Maiesty is too gracious and too good: and pardoneth every one, that sues to his Court for it. Which if it should be so still, then should the higher and lower Co∣lonells and Officers of the Army, have their rewards ta∣ken away; and the souldiery, that which should give them content. 8. And if there should ere long happen to be a peace treated upon in the Empire; that then the Duke of Fridlands owne Interest to the Dukedome of Mecklenburg, should be con∣tained in the capitulation. 9. All the charges and expences for the continuation of the warre, shall be given unto him. 10. All the hereditary Dominions of his Imperiall Maiesty, shall at any time be open unto him, and his Army; to retreat into upon occasion. If any thing may seeme to make these Articles lesse credi∣ble, it is that a many will hardly be brought to suspect, that the Emperour should ever condiscend to the creating of such a military Dictator; for so he is upon the point. But let the Duke of Fridlands mighty vast spirit bee considered; the Emperors present and pressing necessities weighed; the King of Hungariaes giving over remembred, the absolute autho∣rity exercised by the Generall observed; and other accidents and circumstances considered: and then will not the beliefe of it come so impossibly: as at first sight it appeareth. It might be judged to be as beneficiall for the Empire at this time, to have a Dictator created; as it hath often beene for the State of Old Rome; who did thus, in all their extremi∣ties.
But I heere leave every man to his owne ingenuity: for mine owne part I conceive, that his Imperiall Majesty did not weakely, but wisely, yea very wisely in it. This both made the Generall the more awfull to the Country, and his owne souldiors; and provided against the losse of many a faire op∣portunity, whilest new orders upon every occasion, must otherwise be sent for to Vienna. Presently after this, and about the beginning of Aprill, hee appointed some of his to enter Bohemia:He advances nto Bohemia. their first Rendezvous being at Konigsgratz upon the Elb; directly East almost of Prage. Himselfe met with the rest of his army, at Sweinitz in Silesia, about the same time: for whom victuals had beene bought at Breslaw. Hee was reported, all together, to have had an Army of 50000 men: and to be sure, Wallenstein would not come into the field without as good provisions for them, as the Em∣pire could at that time affoord them.His numbers. There went Lists abroad of 99600 men, in 42 Regiments, that he should have in his Army. But these perchance, were given out but for terror: nor doe I thinke, he had full 40000 together in one Army. To omit smaller Rencounters of his. He towards the end of Aprill, sweeping along upon the Northern parts of the King∣dome, betwixt the Duke of Saxonyes new Conquests in Bohemia, and his owne hereditary Country of Misnia; passes his men over the Elb, about Budin, some twenty Eng∣lish miles to the North of Prage City, and neere the place where the River Egra falls into the Elb.He takes and burnes Budin. This Budin had either made resistance, or given some distaste or other unto him: and therefore to shew other places, how ill he meant to take the like usage, he turnes Budin into ashes. Thence advances he Southward unto Schlani, a Shire-Towne almost right against Prage: which he takes, and encamps at. Hence sends he a Trumpet with his Letters unto the Duke of Saxony; To enforme him of the Commission he had from his Imperiall Majesty,He propounds a Peace unto Saxony. fully to treate upon and conclude a faire peace with him: wherefore his advice was, that there might be some Commissioners deputed on both sides, to meete and treate
upon the termes of it. The Elector of Saxony sends his Felt-Marshall Arnheim (who is an excellent Speaker) unto Walen∣stein, then at Schlani: and Walenstein sends Colonell Sparr backe with Arnheim, unto the Elector. The conditions that Sparr brought, were much to the same purpose, with those the Spanish Ambassador had before propounded: namely, For a private league betwixt the Houses of Austria and Saxo∣ny; and no way towards an Vniversall peace of the Empire; or mention of any other Protestant Princes. The Dukes an∣swer was, That he very lately had renewed his former league with the King of Sweden; and had bound himselfe to con∣clude nothing without the privity and consent of his said Majesty. Sparr returning with this Answer, is sent backe a∣gaine for a better: but Saxony desired his Excellency the Duke of Fridland, to rest satisfied with the former: seeing,Saxony refuses the condition that unlesse there might be a Cessation of Armes, untill the King of Swedens pleasure might be knowne; he was able to give no other. Walenstein all this time refreshed his Army; and percei∣ving the Dukes resolution, advances in one of the first dayes of May, towards Prage City. He first presents himselfe on the side which was easiest to be approached; upon the Starre-Parke, right before the Lesser City. Some 7000 Saxons (or neere-upon) there were in all the three Cities: whereof 2000 now were in this Lesser. Summons being given and denyed, Walenstein brings forward his Approches.Walenstein be∣sieging Prage, Some Sallies and Rencounters there passed: for all which, Walen∣stein gat up a very large Battery, and mounted twenty pee∣ces of good Ordnance upon it. A vast breach and a saulta∣ble, he made, and commands it to be stormed. The Saxons maintained it very stoutly: and beat off the Assailants many times (tenne times, some say) from their walls. But Walen∣stein resolving to spare for no mans-flesh; makes his Horse∣men drive on, and keepe up the Footemen, and so overlayes the defendants with numbers & repeated attempts,takes the lesser City by assault that he by fine force enters this Lesser City. Those in the New and Old
Townes perceiving this, fall upon the first Summons to capi∣tulate: but could obtaine no other conditions of him, that knew the weakenesse of the Cities as well as themselves: then,and the other two by compo∣sition. That they should goe out with their lives, and baggage, onely with swords by their sides, and leaving their Colours, and other Armes, and Ordnance, behind them. The Saxons being forced to assent, leave twentyone, say some; twenty foure Ensignes, say others; unto the Conquerour: who pre∣sently sent them to Ʋienna unto the Emperour. Who, to re∣ward his Generall for this, and to encourage him to future Services; sends him the Title of Duke of great Glogau in Silesia, for it. The Saxon-garrisons were convoyed out of Prage, unto Leutmeritz. Prage thus taken about the fourth of May, old stile: the Conquerour sends another messenger unto the Duke of Saxo∣ny,alenstein re∣ewing the reaty with axony, to renew the former treaty: his forces in the meanetime, fairely putting other of the Saxons, out of the next townes of Bohemia. The Curriers passing to and againe, betwixt Prage and Dresden, Saxony (at last) consents to take a view of the Imperiall Propositions: which the easie taking of Prage, hee perceives, to have made much the harder. These foure they were said to be: and Sparr carryed them. ends him these ard conditi∣ons.1. That whereas the Elector had demanded restitution of the domages, done by the Tillyans in his towne of Leipsich, and otherwhere in his Countrey: he should cast up those spoyles too, which his Saxon Armies had done the Emperour in Bohemia; and set the tone against the tother. 2. That hee should make downe-pay, of two moneths meanes unto the Imperiall Army. 3. And freely and speedily give over the Bishopricks, Church∣lands, and Cloysters; which he yet held impropriated. 4. And endeavour to get the King of Sweden out of Germany.
These foure demands if hee satisfied him in; then would his Imperiall Majesty bee pleased, To condiscend unto the granting of free exercise of the Evangeliacall Religion, thorowout the Kingdome of Bohemia. But the Duke of Saxony not holding himselfe yet brought so low, by the taking of one Citie;which Saxony refuses. as to stoope to such disadvantageous conditions: utterly refuses to treat upon them. Tis an old tricke of State, That when a stronger ene∣my purposes either to picke a quarrell with a weaker, or o∣therwise to gaine upon him; to propound impossible conditi∣ons, or extremely dishonorable, unto him.Walensteins plot in it, And thus did the Duke of Fridland, now serve the Duke of Saxony: offer him such Termes, as he had small hopes, that the other would ever yeeld unto. The use that Walenstein would have made of the time, that the Treaty should have taken up; was a very handsome one. The Saxon souldiours, being now over-mastered in Bohemia; began to judge of their Cause, by the speeding of it; and a little entreaty, would have made a many of them, turne to the stronger. This was one of the plots, that Walenstein had upon Saxony; to take advantage of the mutinies or discon∣tents of his souldiours, and to inveigle them away from him. But his second designe was yet better. The Saxons having forsaken by this time, most of the further townes of Bohemia: and drawne their forces unto Leutmeritz upon the Elb, iust betwixt their owne Country and Prage City: Wa∣lenstein had now almost gotten betwixt them and home, ere they were aware of him. This had he done, he would either have cut all their throates; or have forced the Duke and them, unto any conditions. To this last purpose, had he privately sent out some Regiments, to fetch a compasse about towards the North, to passe over the river Pulsnitz, and to take Bri∣sen: and all on the sudden in the next place, to have chopt into Aufig upon the Elb, betwixt Leutmeritz (where the Saxons yet were,) and Dresden. Then had hee beene Master of both banks of the Elb; and they had beene in a coope.
But Arnheim, by the mooving of these Imperialists, begin∣ning to smoake Fridlands drift; out did him at last, in his own finenesse.which is prevē∣ted by Arnheim. Arnheim seemes very forward to have the treaty goe on; plyes Fridland with Curriers daily: suffers people to beleeve, that he was in earnest. But yet in the meane time, he privately sends some troopes before, to assure Ausig and the Elb; gets up his Baggage and Cannon: and all on the sudden, Satterday, May 26. in the night, sends these away before unto Ausig, and so onwards unto Pirnau upon the Elb in Misnia,The Saxons for∣sake Bohemia. neere unto Dresden. The next morning, Arn∣heims selfe marches away with his whole Army: there, (at Pirnau) layes he a bridge ouer the Elb, and entrenches strongly. Walenstein sware by no beggers (he uses not to sticke for that) to see himselfe thus over-reacht: and resolves to be re∣venged upon the rest of the Saxon garrisons, yet in the coun∣try. The first weeke of Iune, therefore; part of his Army he sends out under Colonell Holck, to take in Egra; and so to beate out his way into the Ʋpper Palatinate, to ioyne with the Duke of Bavaria, against the King of Sweden. The Sax∣on Colonel Starschedel, as yet kept Egra: where he had once before held out a siege; as hath in the Saxon Proceedings, been told you. Holck, having laid his siege, loses 200 men in the Approaches.The Walsteiners take Egra. But nine whole Imperiall Regiments, now en∣compassing the City; Starschedel being first conscious, of the unsensiblenesse of the place; and out of all hopes of being re∣lieved; parlies and yeelds, upon Barnabe the brights day, marching out upon souldiers conditions, and being convoyed into Saxony. Elnbogen,Holck, after this turnes to the Northwards; and be∣sieges Elnbogen. The towne was kept by the Saxon Colonel Ʋitzthimb, with part of those raw and new-levied forces: and altogether unprovided besides of Ammunition, and what was necessary for a siege. Yet some shew of resistance he made, though not with a purpose to keepe the Towne, but to obtaine the better conditions. A Commission-Dormant he
had also in his pocket to give up the towne, if he were prest to it. Thus is that towne also rendred unto Holck, upon Thursday Iune 14: Ʋitzthimb being conducted home into Saxony. Fridland in the meane time with the other part of the Ar∣my, marches up from Prage, and takes Leutmeritz,and Leutmeritz. which the Saxons (as we told you) had voluntarily forsaken. This cau∣sed such a terror in Misnia, for feare he should fall into those parts; that those of Leipsich and other townes of trading, conveighed their goods into the Elb, and so away for Ham∣borow. The Duke of Saxony himself came to Birnau aforesaid, making all strong there, to keep out Walenstein. But He had other irons, now upon the anvile: his thoughts were now turnd against the King of Sweden; who, as he by this time heard, was farre already advanced into the Ʋpper Palatinate:Walenstein goe towards Egra, in pursuite there, of the Duke of Bavaria. This Duke, had earnestly now againe sollicited his speedy assistance: who, (to the wonder of the world) having made such quicke dispatch in Bohemia: now leaving some Regiments at Leutmeritz, turnes with the rest towards the Frontiers, unto Egra; much neerer to Bavaria. This was much about the 16th or 17th of Iune.to ioyne with Bavaria against the King of Sweden. The Army he now led with him, seemes to be about 110, or 112 Cornets of Horse, besides some troopes of Crabats light-Horsemen; and about 140 Ensignes of Foot: in halfe of which, (if the list of his Army, that I have seene, be true) there were to be 300 in a Company. These numbers I collect,His forces. by the generall view both of his Army and Bavariaes together, at their first com∣ming before Norimberg: where were told 246 troopes of horse (besides Crabats,) and 197 Foot-Companies. Of these, the Duke of Bavaria at his ioyning with Walenstein, had 134 Troopes of horse, and 58 Foot-Companies, onely: so that the rest, were Walsteiners. Saxony thus freed of the feared invasi∣on; sends Arnheim into Lusatia first; and so into Silesia, after that was cleared: where he recoverd the Saxons honor lost in Bohemia: and within 2 moneths, overthrew Diepenbach and Gotse, with the whole Imperiall Army.
The Duke of Bavaria having surprised Ratisbone, un∣der a pretence of exercising his souldiors hard by it:nd the Duke f Bavaria goes  meete him. so soone as Cratz was returned from Weissenburg, advances into the Vpper Palatinate towards Egra, to conjoyne with Walen∣stein. He in the beginning of Iune, marching full Northward from Ratisbone, quite thorow the Ʋpper Palatinate: goes to Amberg first, the chiefe City of this Palatinate. Some five English miles to the left hand of this Amberg, is the Towne of Sultzbach; belonging unto the Palatine Augu∣stus of Sultzbach; so often heretofore mentioned. To this Towne, the Duke sends a sufficient part of his Army: and Iohn Eberhard Count of Schomburg led them.avaria takes ltzbach, He besie∣ging the place, hath it, after some dayes of opposition, de∣livered up to him on these conditions. 1. That two Captaines of Foote, with their Captaines, should be admitted into their Towne for garrison. 2. This Bavarian souldiery, was to be governed by such justice and military Discipline; as that they should no wayes molest or doe injury to any Burger. 3. The Councellors, Officers, and Servants of the Prince, should have free leave to depart the Towne, with all their goods, wives, and children. 4. The Princes Castle should be free from being plundered. 5. Billets and lodging should be assigned to the garrison, according as the Cittizens could among themselves agree up∣on it. The Bavarians thus becomming masters of the Towne; were not so of their owne words. For, first, in stead of two Companies, they thrust 700 Foote, and 400 Horse, into the City. 2. The houses of the Princes Councellors, and of the richest Cittizens, were not plundered and rifled onely, but spoiled too: whatsoever was worth carrying, being desti∣nated to be sent thence into Amberg. 3. The Princes Castle was foulely plundered and misused. 4. And 6000 Florens, with much terror and threatnings; wrung out of the Princes Servants and the Cittizens. This was not Grecian faith, but Bavarian: and it may well be beleeued of them; for so had they lately before, served Weissenburg. This was done, about
the 6th or 7th of Iune. The Duke of Bavaria with the other part of the Army, went and tooke in Amberg:and advance towards Wal∣stein. where was not much resistance. Hence after some few dayes, he advan∣ces over the River Nab, towards Durschenreyt in the way to Egra and Bohemia. The King of Sweden (he heard) was by this time comming against him, from about Norimberg: and he thought it not best to abide his comming. Some 36 Cornets of Walensteins Horse were likewise neere at hand to joyne with him, and those he now went to meete withall. And indeed the King of Sweden was now comming against him: whose March up, and Retreate backe againe;A touch (by the way) of t King of Swe∣dens pursuin of Bavaria. we will now in Walensteins Story briefely touch upon; because Walen∣steins comming, now put him to it. The King arrived at Furt, 3 or 4 English miles from Norimberg, on Thursday Iune 7th. Friday and Satterday, he there held a generall muster: the num∣bers then found, we shall by and by tell you. Satterday night, into Norimberg he went: where the King of Bohemia had beene a weeke before him. The next day, the two Kings, to∣gether with the Lord Marquesse Hamilton, Iohn Duke of Hol∣stein, &c, there rested, and heard a Sermon in Saint Laurences. Iune 11th Saint Barnabees day, about one in the morning, out went the King to his Army at Furt againe; & there propounds his going to pursue the Bavarian. The Army advances; and that Munday passes by the Louvergate of Norimberg, in this or∣der. First, marched 10 Regiments of Foote: then,The Kings fo¦ces, and ord of marching. 20 peeces of great Ordnance, Cannons, Demicannons, and peeces of Bat∣tery: and 20 lesser Field-peeces after them. The greatest, were drawne with 20 or 22 horses a peece: and the Lesser, with 6 or 8. Next marched 100 brave Cornets of Horse: and the Baggage and Ammunition-wagons last of all. By the Hospi∣tall-Gate on the other side the City, marcht 50 Cornets of Horse more, 60 Ensignes of Foote, and 30 smaller Fielding-peeces. They were marching by, all that Munday. That night, lay the Kings at Lauff upon the River Pegnitz; some 9 Eng∣lish miles to the North-east of Norimberg. Iune 12th, the Ar∣my arrives at Herschpruck, due East up the same River, and as
much further. All this, was in his way to Amberg. This day the King sent the Palatine Augustus of Sultzbach his Lieftenant, (Prince Augustus himselfe, being before this, sent to quicken the Elector of Saxony) to recouer his Lords Towne of Sultz∣bach againe. Foure hundred Horse, had he with him: who pre∣senting themselves towards Evening upon a hill before the Towne, and demaunding to have it rendred: the Bavarians answer them with their Ordnance. But perceiving after a while, some Foote-Companies to bee comne up to second the Horse:tzbach overed. they parly, yeeld, and goe out next day. The Ba∣varian Governor, was shot dead at his comming out, and that in revenge of the Bavarians former usage, of this Towne and Weissenburg. His guilty souldiors fearing the like justice, sting away their Armes, fall downe upon their knees; and offer to become the Kings souldiours. Iune 13, the King sets forward towards Sultzbach: 15 miles from Herschpruck. Midway be∣twixt these 2, is the Towne of Hartmanshoven: not great, but very advantageously situated for a Passe of strength; as standing where 2 small riverets fall into the Pegnitz; and having a wood and hill, right before it. The King much wondred, that Bava∣ria had neglected this Passage: who had, indeed, but forgotten it, and was even this day sending some troopes to hinder the King at it. But they came an houre or 2, too late. That night, was the King purposed to lodge in Sultz∣bach Castle:e King hea∣g newes of  enemy, but was put besides the pillow, by the newes of the enemies being seene about Hambach, foure miles to the North ward. This made him send out some light-horsemen, to discover the faces and motions of the enemy; and to draw with his whole army in Battaglia, towards that Quarter. These were the Bavarian Vant-curriers; of some of whom, there ta∣ken prisoners, the King learnd; that their Duke had already received 16000 Walsteiners; and that Fridland himselfe, was already in the Vpper-Palatinate. This newes, causes the King to resolve upon the retiring backe to Norimberg. Some light skirmishes,tires betwixt his men and the Crabats, I omit: for all this of the Kings, is not upon the Main, but upon the By onely:
and brought in, to bring downe Walenstein, the more metho∣dically. The King now counter-marching; recovers to Norimberg againe, upon Tuesday, Iune 19th. There he now resolves, to expect his enemy; whom he was (for number) farre too weake to meete withall in a pitcht battell. From hence he sends about, to hasten his Generalls to him.to Norimberg. Should not the King have sate downe by some friend-City; Walenstein would have follow∣ed him ever. And of all Cityes, this of Norimberg, was the best for the Kings purpose. Twas neerest: the Kings royall word was engaged to defend it: twas strong; and exceeding well victualled; both for their owne use, and supply of his Army. Round about this City he rides, both to view the Fortifications of the Towne, and to lay out the ground for his owne Retrenchments. These began at the River, and were a mile compasse round about the towne, with skon∣ces and Redoubts, where-ever need was. His Workes,The King en∣camps about Norimberg. were strongest upon the South side: because he judged, the Enemy would encampe on that side, as indeed he did. The Graff or Moate about his head-workes, was 12 Foote wide, and 8 deep. Eight thousand men, laboured dayly upon the Fortifications: and yet was not all compleate, when Walenstein came against him. But of this slightly, because beyond my Title. The Duke of Bavaria, after that Don Balthasar was comne with the Aides from Walenstein unto him, returnes boldly o∣ver the River Nab, unto Nabpurck:Bavaria turnes backe, against the King. and there confronts the Kings Army. Some also he sent more Southerly, as farre as Schwandorff, upon the same River. Those forces of his which the King heard of about Hampach, were sent from that divi∣sion of his Army at Nabpurck. These having some skirmi∣shes, with 2 or 3 troopes which the King sent to discover them: were after 2 or 3 charges, driven backe upon their fellowes. But the Swedes too farre pursuing,Some Swedes defeated. fell into an am∣bush: and were to a man almost, there cut in pieces. By the middle of Iune, was Fridland himselfe falne into the Palatinate: and to shew who it was, that was now a com∣ming.
He came like Iupiter in the Poet;Walenstein comes into the Ʋpper Palati∣nate, all in thunder and light∣ning. Walenstein must be dreaded. All in fire & tempest he takes and destroies the Prince Palatines Dominions, and other the poore Protestant townes, before him. The same spoile, had Don Balthasar committed in the Vpper Marquisate of Parent; which belongeth unto a Prince of the Electorall house of Bran∣denburg.which he de∣stroyes before him. There, is Kemnath taken againe; which the Austrian banished Baron Keffenhullo, had a little before taken, with the Kings forces. Bondesilia and Tirschein are over-runne: and this last, burnt to ashes. There were prayers in all Churches and Cloysters now made, in Austria and other Catholike countries, for the good successe of the Armies: the zeale of which, (it seemes) was so hote, that (like a Burning-glasse at a distance) it set fire upon the Ʋpper Palatinate. These 2 Armies being conioyned; sate downe a while about Amberg; and Sultzbach. There they mustered, and contrived their businesse.Walenstein and Bavaria ioyne. Vpon Tuesday Iune 26, by one in the morning the Armies rise: marching with much silence towards New∣markt, full South-west from thence, and about 18 English miles distant. At Sindlebach in the way, 6 miles short of Newmarckt; 7 of their Regiments about 6 a clocke in the morning; fell up∣on a Swedish Regiment of Dragooners under 7 Cornets, which were Colonell Dubalts; and 4 troopes of Horse, of Colonell Sperreuters.A Swedish Re∣giment of Dra∣gooners defea∣ted. The Swedish at first, made indifferent good worke with them; and laid some 40 Crabats upon the earth, that made the first Cavalcado, and fell into their Quarters. But being by such a multitude surrownded; they were alomst all slaine, and the gallant Dubalt taken prisoner: whom Walenstein very ho∣nourably,A noble Cour∣tesy of Walen∣steins. set presently free again without ransome. This fight was almost 20 miles from Norimberg: whither word by noone, being carried unto the King; he with all speede drew out his best Horse, advancing that very evening, to make the reskue. But the newes of the defeate, turnd him backe againe. Divers such like Rencounters passed betwixt the Horse of ei∣ther side, with enterchanged fortunes; before Walenstein came to settle.
Thus came the Armies along: and their purpose was, to be∣siege and starve up the King of Sweden. His other Generalls with their Forces, were not yet come up to him; and they knew themselues too strong for him. Part of their Army, skowres all along the river Pegnitz; which runs thorow No∣rimberg. These going due West from Sultzbach; take Hersch∣pruck, Lauff, and Altorff: to hemb in the King on that side, and to keepe his victuals and aides from him. Vpon the Southerne side of Norimberg, came the other part of the Army: and both the Dukes with it. About Iune 27 or 28, they from New∣marckt, first send to Freyenstat; a towne in a morasse some 10 miles to the South-West; where they appoint their chiefest Magazine. The Army advances unto Rott, due South from Newmarckt, and 15 English miles to the North of Norimberg: Here Tillyes Magazine sometimes was, when he besieged No∣rimberg; and where his powder miscarried. Some Regiments are here left: so that this was Walensteins first Quarter.Walensteins se∣verall Quar∣ters. Here passes he the Rednitz; which runnes thence within 4 English miles to the West of Norimberg; and so due North to For∣cheim, and into the Mayn at Bamberg. This river, would Wa∣lenstein now possesse himselfe of. Downe along therefore up∣on the Westerne shore of it he goes, unto Swabach; 7 miles from Rott, and 8 or 9 from Norimberg. Here had Tilly also sometimes enquartered; and here, the Dukes now made their second Quarter. Betwixt this and Furt, (almost 10 English miles further, beyond Norimberg, and wide of it) lay his Horse∣guards all the way, with some Foote-Regiments here and there. Their safety, was the river Rednitz: which parted them from the Kings Army. To this Swabach, they came Iune 30th: where they put 17 goodly Foot-Regiments, into Battaglia.The Armies confront one another. To confront these, the King brings out his Horse: but the ri∣vers being betweene, forbade all comming at one another. Walensteins chiefe Quarter was at Furt: where Iuly 4th he sate downe; and entrenches; where, the fastnesse of the woods; the tops of the hills; and the advantage of being betweene the 2 rivers Rednitz, and Pegnitz, (which a little from thence
make an alliance betwixt their Issues) made his Leaguer very much the stronger. Thus did the Dukes put themselues, be∣twixt the Kings campe, and the Country of Franconia: whence his forces and victuals were to come. All the townes on the other side, had they taken: and left him a breathing-place of some 4 English miles onely, round about his Quarters. He must now trust to be victuald out of Norimberg: & it comes not far short of a miracle, that one town should be so wel provided, as to doe it.What forces the King now had in his Trenches The King now had 132 Ensignes of Foot: which made up 10767, in the Muster-booke: and 152 troopes of Horse: which came to 7676. In all, 18443 men, as I have seene it written out of the Army. These were too many, for one towne to maintaine: and yet too few, not to be bidden battell by 2 such Armies. But their purpose being to Diet Him, and to avoide blood-letting in themselues: forbare to as∣sault him. Not perchance, because Walenstein durst not, but for that he would not: he durst not put all Germany and Italy, up∣on the fortune of one Battell. But the King to give them their wellcome into the field, the very first night, and next day, Iuly 5th cut in pieces 3 troopes of their Horse,The King cuts off 3 Cornets. and brought off 3 of their Cornets. And here I leave them. FJNIS.
A Table drawne by way of a Iournall or Dia to shew where the King, Horn, Tilly, Bavaria, and Walenstein were, and what they did upon those dayes, that are men∣tioned in the Margent. September. The King September. Tilly September. Gustavus 16 Sets forward. 8 Flees to Hall.   18 Takes Erfurt in Durin∣gen. 9 To Ascherleben.     13 Moues from Halberstat. 27 Sent against Altri 26 Lies at Arnstat. 17 Comes to Alfelt.   27 Comes to Ilmenau. 25 Passes the Weser. 29 Takes Gotha. 28 Passes the Duringer∣waldt. 26 Goes to Warburg.       30 Comes to the King. 29 Comes to Schleusing. 30 Comes to Fritzlar in Hessen.   30 Besieges Konigshoven in Franconia.     October. October. October. 1 Takes Schweinfurt. 2 Goes from Fritzlar.   2 Enters it. 3 Spoiles townes in Hessen.   3 Writes letters to Bamberg. 4 Ioynes with Altringer.   4 Comes before Wurtsburg. 6 Musters at Fulda.   8 Takes it. 10 Is at Aschaffenburg.   10 Levies forces about Wurtsburg. Sends troopes abroad to take townes in Wurts∣burg and Bamberg Di∣ocesses. 11 Sends Altringer to the Lorrayners. With the King a moneth. 11 Levies forces about Wurtsburg. Sends troopes abroad to take townes in Wurts∣burg and Bamberg Di∣ocesses. 16 Sends 3000 towards Werthaim.   12 &c Levies forces about Wurtsburg. Sends troopes abroad to take townes in Wurts∣burg and Bamberg Di∣ocesses. 17 The Lorrayners ioyne with him.     18 Goes towards the Palati∣nate.   16 Defeates Tillians, and takes Werthaim. 20 Is about Darmstat.   17 His forces still about the Country. 21 Some of his defeated at Rotenburg.   18 &c His forces still about the Country. 22 Takes Babenhausen.   21 Defeates more Tillians and takes Rotenburg. 23 Sollicites Franckford: And goes into the Berg∣straes.   22 Defeates some few Lor∣rayners.    
  Duke of Bavaria levies.   shofsheim, ergentheim d other towns taken       30 Tilly still about the Pa∣nate. With the King all this while. s Declaration at urg.     November. November. November. w taken. 5 Turnes backe from the Palatinate.   g about Oxenfurt.       6 Is at Oxenfurt.   es towards Franck∣.       7 Takes townes in the way to Norimberg.   ons about Steinheim. 8 Takes townes in the way to Norimberg. 5 Left about Wurts∣burg. ng comes downe the yn, taking Procel∣, Miltenburg, Klin∣berg, Trenfelt, and chaffenburg. 9 Takes townes in the way to Norimberg. 6 Left about Wurts∣burg.   13 Takes Rottenburg.     14 Takes Winshaim, and Guntzenhausen, and Weissenburg.     15 Takes Winshaim, and Guntzenhausen, and Weissenburg.   rs Hanaw. 16 Is about Onspach.   es at Offenbach. 17 Comes to Swabach.   ers Franckford. 18 Before Norimberg.   es Hoest.     rnes to Franckford. 22 Rises from Norim∣berg.   Thanksgiving at 23 Rises from Norim∣berg.   s league with the etterawish Earles. 24 Lyes two nights at Rott.     25 Lyes two nights at Rott.   e leaguer at Costum th the Actions about e Ringaw & Bingen s Army returnes to ford. 26 Puts his men into gar∣rison, and goes to Do∣nawert.     27 Puts his men into gar∣rison, and goes to Do∣nawert.     28 &c Puts his men into gar∣rison, and goes to Do∣nawert. 29 Is still in Franconia. December. December. December. ses thorow Franck∣ to besiege Heidle∣ 2 Meetes Duke of Bava∣ria. 4 Takes Kitzing.
2 Takes Townes in the Bergstraes. 4 Goes to Nordlingen, where he stayes. 10 And Winshaim this time. 3 Takes Townes in the Bergstraes.     4 Besieges Oppenheim Fort   12 And Gebsattle. 7 Passes the Rhine.     8 Takes Oppenheim.   16 And Mergenth Rotenburg, ab time. 13 Takes Mentz.     14 Enters Mentz in Tri∣umph. 12 Duke of Bavaria at In∣golstat Diet.   16 His thanksgiving.     18 Fridberg taken.   20 Takes Hailbrun. 21 Konigstein taken.     22 Spaniards forsake some Townes in the Palati∣nate.   26 Returnes into ¦nia. 23 Spaniards forsake some Townes in the Palati∣nate. Bavaria sends one Am∣bassador to the Emperor, and another to the King of Swe∣den.   24 Spaniards forsake some Townes in the Palati∣nate.     26 &c Rhinegrave defeates the Spanish about the Mosel.   30 Takes Guntzen. Spiers City accords with the King.     Ianuary. Ianuary. Ianuary. 1 Manheim surprised. 1 Altringer prepares to re∣lieve Rotenburg. 1 About Winshai 3 Heidleberg and Franc∣kendale slightly blockt up.   2 Busie about his ¦sters. 4 Heidleberg and Franc∣kendale slightly blockt up. 3 Tilly goes to Donawert and to Amberg, purpo∣sing to send against the Saxons. 3 Busie about his ¦sters. 5 Heidleberg and Franc∣kendale slightly blockt up. 4 &c Tilly goes to Donawert and to Amberg, purpo∣sing to send against the Saxons. 4 Busie about his ¦sters. 10 The 14 dayes Truice be∣gin.   10 The Truice beg     14 At Iphoven. 12  goes to Gelnhausen. In Truice time, Spaniards passe the Mosel. 9 Cratz made Felt-Mar∣shall in the Vpper Palati∣nate. 16 Goes to Noriml     21 Returnes to So¦furt. 20 King returnes to Franck∣ford. 10 Tilly returnes to Nord∣lingen.     11 Tilly returnes to Nord∣lingen.   22 Actions betwixt the Rhinegrave and the Spaniards. 18 Sends some Ordnance out of Wilsburg Castle, to Ossa. 25 Prepares to goe Bamberg. 23 Actions betwixt the Rhinegrave and the Spaniards.     24 &c Actions betwixt the Rhinegrave and the Spaniards.     Duke Bernard takes townes about Mentz. Bavaria sends forces to Am∣berg. 29 Takes Hochstat
February. February. February. epares to goe against niards. 2 Cratz goes to succor For∣cheim. 1 Takes Bamberg. ing of Bohemia ar∣es. 4 Tilly busie in fortify∣ing on the Danuby.     5 Tilly busie in fortify∣ing on the Danuby. Rainy weather, that he can doe nothing. easted. 6 &c Tilly busie in fortify∣ing on the Danuby.   es to besiege Creutz∣h.     Palatine Birckenfields levyes. 20 Goes into the Vpper Pa∣latinate. 20 Provides to besiege For∣cheim. reutznach taken. 22 At Newmarckt.   ing returns to Franck∣d. 23 Provides to goe against Horn.     24 Marches to Altoff.   Actions about Spiers. 27 Enters Forch im. 28 Tilly comes against him.   28 Comes before Bamberg.   March. March. March. eiues newes of Horns nesse. 1 Enters Bamberg. Forsakes Bamberg: and pas∣ses the Mayn. es his Army together. s them on before a∣st Tilly. selfe sets out from ckford. at Aschaffenburg. Lohr. Werenfelt. Stayes about Hasfurt in the Bishoprick of Bamberg. 12 Calls a Councell of War at Forcheim. 13 Musters at Forcheim, and marches towards the Vpper Palatinate. 2 In sight of the enemies.     3 Hee defeats two Regi∣ments.     4 Againe in sight of the enemy.     5 Goes to Schweinfurt.     6 Busie in disposing  my. mes to Arnstein. 15 At Erlang. 7 Writes to the King. Tettelbach. 16 At Newmarckt.   Kitzing: and Hep∣ to Oxenfurt.       18 Still at Newmarckt. 11 Comes to the King. Winshaim.     Dunkelspiel.     camps at Furt. es into Norimberg. 20 Drawes towards the Da∣nuby. 15 Goes with the Vantgard to Winshaim. ne skirmishes with Tillians.    
24 Comes to Oetingen and Pleinfelt. 26 About Ingolstat. Stayes with the King. 26 Takes Kaisham.     27 Takes Donawert.     28 Hebron sent out: and Fuggers Castle taken.     29 Prince August sent out.     30 Banier sent to Newburg. 30 Goes into Bavaria.   31 King passes thorow Do∣nawert.     Aprill. Aprill. Aprill. 1 Army drawne to Nor∣theim. 1 About Rain.     2 About Rain.   2 Duke William Weymar comes.       3 Encampt along the Lech.   3 Place for the Bridge o∣uer the Lech sought and found. 4 Encampt along the Lech. 7 Sent to pursue Til 4 Place for the Bridge o∣uer the Lech sought and found. 5 Defeated at the Lech; and Carryed away wounded to Newburg.   5 The day of the great fight.     6 King passes into Bavaria.     7 Goes towards Ausburg.     8 Encamps at Lechausen. 6 Bavaria with his Army flees towards Ingolstat.   9 Summons Ausburg. 7 Bavaria with his Army flees towards Ingolstat.   10 Takes it. 8 Bavaria with his Army flees towards Ingolstat.   14 Goes into it.     15 Goes to Waho, towards Ingolstat.     16 Comes before it.     17 Spent in working. 18 Bavaria surprizes Ra∣tisbone. 23 Sent from before stat to spoyle Bava 18 Spent in working.     19 A Sally.     20 The Kings Horse shot: & Marquesse of Baden slaine. 20 Tilly dyes in Ingolstat. 25 Comes againe King. 22 Goes to Newburg.     24 Rises from Ingolstat.   27 Hee and Hebr Landshutt. 25 Takes Mosburg.     29 King goes to Landshutt.    
nes backe to Mos∣g.     es Freisg.     ances rds Mun∣.     rs it.     usters there.     t Ausburg, to goe a∣st Ossa. 20 Crats falls into Bavaria.   livers Bibrach.     ne backe to Ausburg. 27 Takes Weissenburg.   Iune. Iune. Iune. ng advances towards mberg. Bavaria goes into Vpper Palatinate. Sent towards the Palatinate. kes Aichstat 5 Takes Sultzbach and Amberg,   d Pappenhaim. 6 Takes Sultzbach and Amberg,     10 Goes towards Walstein.   ives at Furt. 13 Returnes upon the King.   Musters. 14 Returnes upon the King.     15 Walstein comes.   Norimberg.  Lauff, 26 Goes from about Am∣berg.   Herschpruck. 27 Defeats Dubalt.   zbach recovered. 28 At Freyenstat.   res to Norimberg. 30 At Swabach.   mps at Norimberg,       Iuly.     4 Encamps at Furt.  
A TABLE OF THE PRIN∣CIPALL MATTERS. AGreements, see Articles. Altringer, his Breeding and good parts, 110 Ioynes with Tilly, 111 troubles Hessen, ibid. Resolves to releeve Rotenburg, 119 spoyled at the Lech, 144 Arnheim beats the Imperialists out of both Lusatiaes. 200. Marches into Bohemia, 200. Takes Prage, 202. the townes he takes after it, 205. overthrowes the Imperialists at Limburg, 206. A good Speaker, 229. over-reaches Walenstein, 232. Excused, 217 Arnstat, the King comes to it, 5 Articles Agreed upon by the King and Saxony at Hall, for the pursuing of the Warre, 2 with Erfurt Citie, 4 with the Bishop of Bamberg, 9 with Imperialists of Hanaw, 25 of the King with Franckford, 32 betwixt the Earles of the Weteraw and the King, 36 Hepburns with Oppenheim Fort, 45 with the Spanish at Mentz, 48 Articles of the Neutrality, 63 offered by the King to Triers, 71 and to Cullen, 87 with the Spanish at Creutznach, 82 offered by Tilly to Norimberg, 115 propounded by Bavaria to the Emperour, 124 The Kings with Ausburg city, 158 and with Munchen, 168 Arnheims with Prage Citie, 202 Articles on which Walstein would ac∣cept the Generalship, 222 those, on which he did, 225 propounded by him to Saxony, 230 by Bavaria to Sultzbach, 234 Aschaffenburg taken by the King, 30 Attempt, a desperate one of a Leif∣lander, 14 Ausburg, Popish practices upon it, 119 The King goes toward it, 151 sits downe before it, 152 takes it, the King comes thither, 171
B BAmberg Bishop, the King sends to warne him of his comming, 5, 17 he makes his peace with the King: and the Termes, 9 he breakes it, 10 Bamberg Bishoprick, divers townes taken in it, 8 Bamberg towne, Horn takes it, 103 recovered by Tilly, 91 the Bishop flees, 104 Bamberg, the Actions there, betwixt Horn and Tilly, 89, &c. Banier, Generall, sent to Magden∣burg, 28 his Regiment put into Aschaffen∣burg, 28 his service at Ingolstat, 163 Bavarians deale treacherously with those of Weissenburg, 172 and with Sultzbach, 234 Bavaria Duke; his Story, 121 summons his people, ibid. Appointed Generalissimo over the Catholikes, 122 Sets out his Manifesto, 123 calles a Diet: and sends Ambassa∣dours to the Emperour, and King of Sweden, 123 his Propositions to the Emperour, 124 joynes with Tilly, 124 overthrowne at the Lech, 125 would treat with the King: and retires into Ingolstat, 125 what advantages hee made of the treaty of Neutrality, 68 Bavaria goes to joyne with Walstein, 234 his forces then, 233 takes Amberg and Sultzbach, 234 Receives aydes from Walstein, 235 returnes against the King, 237 joynes with Walstein, 237 Bavaria, the Kings march up to it, 126 the King drawes out of it, 171 what forces he left in it, 173 the largenesse of the Kings con∣quests in it, 175 Bergstraes taken by the King, 42 Bernhard of Saxon Weymar, how he surprized Manheim, 60 takes the Count of Ems prisoner, 172 Bibrach, besieged by Ossa, 170 delivered by the King, 170 Bingen forsaken by the Spanish, 57 Birckenvelt levyes for the King, 83 Bishofsheim taken by the King, 20 Boats sent the King to passe the Rhine, 43 Bohemia, entred by the Saxons, 200 The Story of the Actions there, 201, &c. Religion restored in it, 210 forsaken by the Saxons, 232 The Skales there turnd by Don Bal∣thasar, 213 Boores rise in Bavaria, 157 they abuse the Swedish souldiers, ib. defeated in Schwabland, 179 Brandeis an Imperiall Captaine, de∣ceives himselfe, 24
Bridge over the Lech, the figure, 150 Brigade, what it is, 28 How many the King brought with him into the Palatinate. 28 C CArdinall Pasman sent from the Emperour to the Pope: but not acknowledged for an Ambassa∣dour, 220 Carlstat, the King levyes about it, 18 Catholikes desire a Peace, 215 Commissary-generall, his office, 33 Conditions, see Articles. Conquests of the Kings, how large, 175 Contributions of the Imperiall Cour∣tiers towards a new Army, 219 Cratz, goes to relieve Forcheim, 104 made Felt-Marshall unto Tilly, 118 falls againe into Bavaria, 171 takes and spoyles Weissenburg, 172 Creutznach besieged, 77 the towne wonne, 78 The Castle besieged, 79 taken, 82 Cullen, a Diet there, 86 they desire Neutrality, 87 the Elector afrayd of the King—his Iudgement of the Imperiall decree, 86 D DE Latre, befriends the Author, 25 Diepenbach takes the pper Lusatia, 199 Beaten out by Arnheim, 200 Donawert besieged, 136 taken by Sir Iohn Hebron, 138 Don Balthasar flees out of Prage, 202 Turnes the Skales againe in Bohe∣mia, 213 Spoyles the Vpper Palatinate. Drusenheim bestowed on the Earle of Hanaw, 84 Duringen, the King marches into it, 2 Duringer-waldt, the King passes it, 6 E EGra taken by the Saxons, 207 recovered by Walstein 13 he comes thither, 233 Elnbogen besieged by the Imperialists and relieved, 21 Taken by Walstein, 23 English Gentlemen their forward¦nesse at the siege of Creutznach, 8 and at Donawert, 13 Erfurt, taken, upon what termes, Ernestus Saxon-Weymar, left Gover¦nour at Konigshoven, joynes with Horn, 10 F FAlkenaw taken by the Saxons; an they beaten out againe, 21 Forcheim, the Imperialists retire th¦ther out of Bamberg, 10 Tilly comes into it, 12 Franckendale blockt up, 6 the State of it after, 8 Franckford, the Kings demands to i 3 it assents to the King, 3 the Kings Thanksgiving for it, 3 King returnes out of the Ring a
thorow it with his Army, 42 Franconia, the King mooves towards it, 5 writes to the Gentry and Cities of it, 9 Freising taken by the King, 167 Fridberg taken by Haubald, 56 Friedberg taken by the King, 151 Fugger an Imperiall Generall, 110 puts a garrison into Ausburg, 153 urstenberg resignes his Generallship, 119 His hopes to be Generall in stead of Walstein, 220 urt, the King encamps at it, 129 G GVntzenhausen taken by Tilly, 114 recovered by Horn, 98 ustavus Horn sent abroad, 6 takes in Gota, 6 See Horn. H HAilbrun taken by Horn, 100 Hall, what was concluded there, betwixt the King, and Duke of Saxe, 2 Hanaw, sollicited by Tilly, 21 the Earle befriends the King, 22 takes townes for him, 84 Haubald surprizes Hanaw, 22 summons the Countrey, 26 takes Frydberg, 56 eidleberg slightly blockt up, 60 the State of it after, 85 the Kings purpose of besieging of it diverted, 43 epburn or Hebron, Sir Iohn, takes Oxenfurt, 8 Keepes it against Tilly, 27 Takes Oppenheim Fort, 45 Hochstat, taken by Horn, 102 Hoest taken, 33 Hoffkirck, Governour of Prage, 208 Defeats the Crabats, 211 relieves Brandeis, 213 Holck takes Egra and Elnbogen, 232 Horn put out of Bamberg, 91 his Letter of it to the King, 89 defeats two Tillian Regiments, 92 retires to Geltersheim 93 recovers townes in Franconia, 97 goes to see Norimberg, 100 prepares to fall into Bamberg, 101 the Rayne hinders him, 104 sent to pursue Tilly, 151 takes Landshutt, 160 Horse shot under the King, 161 dig'd up by those of Ingolstat, 164 Hungarians refuse to ayde their King, 224 Huntsruck what it is, 58 I IEsuites turn'd out of Memmingen, for their practices, 177 And out of Prage, 209 Ilmenau, the King comes to it, 5 Imperialists, overthrowne at Limburg by Arnheim, 206 Attempt Prage, with losse, 208, and 211 They recover Satz, 214 and other townes in Bohemia, ibid. They besiege Elnbogen, and leave it, 217
Ingolstat, the King goes towards it, 158 his Horse shot there, 161 the King rises from it, 163 Italians, invited to ayde the Emperor, 220 K KAisham Cloyster taken, 135 King of Sweden doubtfull whi∣ther to goe, 20 sets forwards towards Hanaw, 28 his Birth-day and Age, 50 advances against the Spanish, 74 in danger at Creutznach, 79 marches up towards Bavaria, 126 how strong, 127 encamps at Furt, 129 Goes into Norimberg, 129 his Oration there, 130 Pursues Tilly no longer. His rea∣sons, 133 overthrowes him at the Lech, 144 reasons for laying his bridge, 146 his judgement upō the action, 147 musters at Furt, 235 advances against Walstein: his for∣ces, ibid. takes Herspruck. Retires, 236 encamps at Norimberg, 237 what forces he then had, 240 the wellcome he gave Walstein, 240 King of Bohemia comes to the King of Sweden. 75 His welcome to his people, 76 and to Sweden, ibid. goes towards Bavaria with the King, 126 with the King at the Battell of Lech, 143 King of Hungaria voiced to be Gene∣ralissimo for his Father, 220 Kitzing recovered by Horn, 97 Konigshoven, taken by the King, 7 Konigstein taken for the King. 57 L Landgrave of Hessen brings an Army to the King, 3 lies in the Ringaw, 3 goes home, 5 Landgrave of Darmstat accords with the King, 40 Landshut taken by the King, 16 Landsperg taken for the King, 16 Lech river, Tilly guards it, 14 the King seekes a fit place to lay bridge over it, 14 The place found, and described, 14 The famous story of the Kings pas¦sage over it, 14 Letters. Of the King to Franconia, of the King to his Generalls co¦cerning the Neutrality, 67 of the Elector of Triers to his Sub¦iects, 6 of Gustavus Horn to the King, 89 of Tilly to Altringer, 10 of the King to the towne of Aus¦burg, 15 Horns letters to them, and thei answers, 155 The Kings letters to the Switzers 17 Leutmeritz taken by Fridland, 23
Lord Craven, his valour and service, 81 and 138 Lorrayners, 3 Cornets defeated, 19 their Story, 52 Lusatia, taken by the Imperialists, 198 cleered againe by Arnheim 200 M MAnheim finely surprised, 60 Manifesto, of the King at Wurtsburg, 16 of the Duke of Bavaria, 182 Mayn river, the King makes towards it, 8 and why, ibid. takes townes by it, 30 Memmingen declares for the King, 176 the Iesuites expell'd out of it, 177 the King makes a bridge there, 171 Mentz yeelded to the King, 48 fortified, and 2 bridges made at it, 51 Mergentheim taken by the King, 20 recovered by Tilly, 27 reprised by Horn, 119 Mosburg taken by the King, 165 Munchen taken by the King, 168 N NEutrality, the Story of it, 61 The Kings letters about it, 66 not observed by the Catholikes, 68 what the King lost by it, 73 Neutrality desired by the Elector and City of Cullen, 87 Newburg Duke, observes not the Neutrality, 73 sends to excuse it, 151 his towne taken, 152 Newburg towne, an Aenslaught upon it miscarried, 140 The Duke sends an Ambassador to the King, 151 The towne taken by the King, 152 The King goes to see it, 163 Nordlingen forsaken by the Imperia∣lists, 19 Norimberg, assents to the King, 21 the Kings care to raise Tillies siege, from it, 33 the King goes to it, 129 the King encamps by it, 181, & 237 O OAth offered by the King to the Germanes, the Forme of it, 97 and 158 Oppenheim Fort besieged, 43 taken, 45 the towne taken, 46 and the Castle too. 47 Oration of the Kings at Norimberg, 130 at Ingolstat, 161 Ossa, an Imperiall Commissary, 53 takes on the Lorrayners, ibid. goes with Tilly towards Bavaria, 113 his charge, 170 besieges Bibrach, ibid. Oxenfurt taken by Hebron, 8 the King goes thither, 27 Tilly comes thither then, 27 Oxensteirn Chancellor, left Governor at Mentz, 126
sent Ambassadour to the Duke of Saxony, 212 P POpe shifts off aiding the Emperor, 220 Prage taken by Arnheim, 202 divers attempts upon it, 208 reprised by Walstein 229 Protestant Churches and Schooles re∣stored in Bavaria, 165 Q QƲestenberg sent to Walstein, 221 R RAin taken by the King, 146 Rhine, the King passes it, 44 Rhinegrave sent towards the Mosel, 58 beates Spanish over the Mosel, 58 takes townes in Simmern and Tri∣ers country, 58 Ringaw, entrance gotten into it, 40 River, the benefits of it in warre, 8 Rotenburg, taken by the King, 19 reprised by Tilly, 114 recovered by Horn, 119 S SAxony recovers Lusatia and Sile∣sia: and overthrowes Diepen∣bachs army, 233 his proceedings, 195 The Duke attempted to be turned, 195 The Spanish Ambassadors Propo∣sition to him, 196 his answer, 197 he recovers both Lusatiaes, 200 he enters Prage, he refuses to treat with Wal and with the Emperour, a List of his forces, excused, Saxon-Lawenburg, sollicites Ha made Generall of the Ordnan Tilly, Governour of Donawert, beaten out by the King, Scottishmen, their valour in warres, 13. Schwabenland, how much of i Kings, the Story of the actions abo 176 Schweinfurt, taken by the King, Sir Iohn Hepburn takes Donawert The King acknowledges it, t ¦nour him, helps to take Landshut, left Governour at Munchen, Sir Patrick Buthven his actions a Vlm, and in Schwaben, 177 defeates the Imperialists Boores, often, 177 brings Schwabland under cont¦tion, Sir Iames Ramsey wounded, Sir Iohn Hamilton his valour, Spanish beaten by the Swedes, the Kings fight with them, passing the Rhine, forsake towns in the Palatinat commanded out of Triers,
aine defeated by the Rhinegrave, 74 ey defeate him, ibid. ire over the Mosel, 75 accords with the King: the acti∣s about it, 59 ore actions about it, 85 heim, some actions about it, 29 ken by the King, 30 burg accorded with the King, 174 bach taken by Bavaria, 234 covered by the King, 236 campt at by Walstein, ibid. ish souldiers their civility, 78 les defeated by Walstein, 238 T Hierhaupten taken by the King, 151 n the old Count rises in Bohemia, 202 s acts there, 202: & 205 s Proclamation in Bohemia, 204 s letters of Protection to the ountry, ibid. lls sicke, 208 ans, 3000 slaine, 18 Regiments defeated, 19 , would relieve Wurtsburg, 15 ppeares neere the King, 18 sses the Mayn, 26 ollicites Franckford, 26 pes into the Palatinate, 27 turnes into Franconia, 27 kes Mergentheim, 27 arches to Norimberg, 27 The way of his flight from Leip∣sich, 106 his letters to Altringer, 107 recollects his Army, 107 continues his flight: and formes a new Army, 108 Falles into Hassia, 109 Ioynes with Altringer, 110 number of his Army then, 111 goes towards the Mayn: and joynes with the Lorrayners, 112 goes into the Bergstraes, and turnes backe into Franconia, 113 joynes with the Lorrayners, 112 sollicites Franckford, 113 takes Weissenburg, and rifles On∣spach, 114 sets downe before Norimberg, 115 Rises from thence, 116 his heart mis-gives him, 117 devides his Army, and puts into garrison, 117 his reasons, 118 Retires into Nordlingen, 118, 120 sets out against Horn, 120 Puts him out of Bamberg, 91 his owne Report of the manner, 93 retires from the King, 127 why he goes into the Vpper Palati∣nate, 129 comes into Bavaria, 140 fortifies Rain, 141 His fight with the King at the Lech, 143 mortally wounded there, 144 Dyes, 161
Treaty of Wetteraw Earles with the King, 35 Triers Elector, accepts the Neutrali∣tie, 69 his Proclamation against the Spani∣ards, 72 V VLm accorded with the King, 176 Sir Patrick Ruthven made Go∣vernour, 176 The Story of the Actions about it, ibid. W WAlb, the Kings attempt to lay a Bridge over the Rhine at it, 41 Walstein, refuses the Generallship, 221 Accepts it upon conditions, 222 Begins his levyes, ibid. his many Titles, 223 protests to hold the Generallship no longer: but is contented, 224 Made Generalissimo: and on what strange conditions, 225 He advances into Bohemia, 228 Propounds a treaty to Saxony, 229 and 230 Takes Prage, 229 His plot upon the Saxons: over∣reacht in it by Arnheim, 231 Walstein goes to Egra, 233 His forces then, 233 falls into the Vpper Palatinate, 237 joynes with Bavaria, 238 nobly releases Dubalt, 238 comes along the Rednitz, 239 his severall Quarters, ibid encamps at Furt, 24 forbeares to fight, 24 Walsteiners, three Regiments of them defeated by the Saxons, 217, 218 Weissenburg taken by Tilly, 11 and by the King, 13 taken and plundered by Cratz, 17 and recovered by the King. ibid Werthaim taken, 1 Wetteraw Earles Treaty with th King, 3 William Duke of Saxon-Weimar take Erfurt fairely, left Governour there, Wilsburg Castle wrung by Tilly fro the Marchionesse of Onspach, 11 viewed by the King, 13 Wirtenberg Dukedome, some action in it, 8 Wormbs, accorded with the King, 5 Wurtsburg Bishop, the King sends t warne him of his comming, 5, 1 Wurtsburg, the towne wonne, 1 the Castle besieged, 1 the manner of the taking, 1 a conspiracy against the King, d¦tected in it, 10 FINIS.
