A4265 R170403 52211887 175413
The Authors of the First CASE of SALT-PETRE, Humbly offer the following Particu∣lars as Reasons against passing the Bill. As to the Occasions of the Crown and Merchants (upon which the Bill is grounded) and as to Supplying Ireland and the West-Indies with Gun-powder (mentioned in the last Salt-Petre Case, delivered by the Prosecutors of the Bill,) FIrst, That none of them do want Salt Petre. Secondly, If they should want Gun-powder, it is cheaper to buy it in Holland, than to import Salt Petre from thence, and make it into Gunpowder in England. Thirdly, That the passing this Bill will raise Salt Petre (and consequently Gunpowder) in Holland near Cent. per Cent. to the prejudice of those who have occasion for it. As to the Tradesmen who have since petitioned for passing the Bill, First, They did not Petition of themselves, untill they were solicited thereunto by the Prosecutors of this Bill. Secondly, That some of them use no Petre, and others inconsiderable quantities, and no Manufactures are sent from hence to Holland for want of Petre, there being enough in Eng∣land to supply them. As to future Supplyes, First, The East-India Company are to supply the Crown with 500 Tuns yearly, and several of their Ships are Arrived, and others daily expected. Secondly, That several Entrys have been lately made in the Custom-house of Salt-Petre Im∣ported from Hamburgh, as the Manufacture of Germany, from whence more is Expected. Thirdly, That the Salt-Petre-Work at Islington is capable of Producing great Quantities, and is so acknowledged by all Impartial men who see and understand it; and is in it self an Evidence that it could not be sooner finished, notwithstanding all the false Aspersions cast upon the Owners of it, as Patentees, Impostors, and Stock-Jobbers. As to the Design of the Bill: First, It is in part to Repeal the Act of 12 Car. 2. Cap. 18. (for Increasing our Shipping and Navigation,) on purpose to Inrich two or three men. For a Merchant (whose Dutch Factors Name is Poole) having bought 600 Tuns of Petre at the Sale at Amsterdam (which was in the beginning of this Sessions) at about 56 l. per Tun, brought in this Bill to raise the Price of Salt-Petre there, which it hath done to about 76 l. per Tun: And if this Bill passes, it is expected at 90, or 100 l. per Tun. For there are several others who wait for the passing of this Bill, and thereupon Immediately to Buy up the Petre in Holland; so that the King is Forestalled, and if he should want, must pay what Price they please. Secondly, That this Merchant and two or three Stock-Jobbers (since taken into his Assi∣stance, who had before given out Ginnyes in the Nature of Laying of Wagers, That the Stock in Islington Salt-Petre-VVorks would fall) are the only Prosecutors of this Bill, and the Crown, Merchants and Tradesmen (who ought to have been Principals in this Cause) are only Subpena'd in as Evidence to Inforce the Bill. If these things are true in Fact, it is humbly hoped that (notwithstanding all the self-contradicting Arguments in the last Salt-Petre Case) the Honourable House of Commons will see no Reasons for the passing of this Bill.
OF Salt-Petre, BY THE Authors of the First.
