L3256 R180165 [ocm]62369453 188004
The Lovers Pastime, OR An Amorous Encounter. Betwixt two Lovers that did well agree For to make use of time as you may see, Time cannot be recal'd being once lost And Lovers in delights are often crost. To the Tune of Turn love, &c. portrait of a man portrait of a woman AN amorous pair of young Lovers, one Evening chanced to meet, When Cupid was shooting at Rovers this couple did lovingly greet And after a kind salutation, this gallant began to draw nigh, His Lady to court, for pastime and sport in hopes there was no body by. Come hither my pretty Betty, with thy fair rouling eye, Dost think that thou canst love Me no indeed not I. Why dost thou make me that answer prithee tell me the reason why, Dost think thy self too young for me no by my troth not I. What is the reason my Betty of late thou art grown so coy, Hast thou any secret promise made no indeed not I. Then for to make the matter short, resolve me or else I dye, Wilt thou prove unkind to me no by my, &c. This place it doth seem to invite us a little to sport, and to play, And every thing dot delight us now we are togeth r this day, If I should presume to be billing hence no body can us espy, I hope thou wilt not be unwilling no by my troth not I.
a woman and a man LOng time have I wisht to enjoy thée that I might my Betty imbrace, For shame thou wilt never deny me, for now is the time and the place, We'l huddle, we'l kiss, and we'l tumble so prittily down we will lye, Provided that thou wilt not grumble no by my troth not I. What pleasure I take to be merry with Betty so loving and kind, Thy lips are as red as a Cherry thy beauty doth ravish my mind, But for to speak a little in sport if I with thee should lye, I hope you will not chide me for't no by my, &c. I took her by the hand and I kist her for I was both merry and jolly, I would not for mony have mist her since I had a mind for to dally. Whilst we were thus prittily wooing I askt her if she would not cry If I should begin to be doing no by my, &c. Then let us be quick and be nimble for suddenly we must depart, My Betty I scorn to dissemble I love thee with all my heart, But what if thy belly should chance to swel, and thy mother should ask thée why, Would'st thou to her the reason tell, no by my, &c. Then I in my arms did imbrace her and bid her to be of good cheer, I told her I would not disgrace her but call'd her my love and my dear, She laid her self upon the bed where no body could descry, Quoth I my dear thou art not afaid no by my, &c, What pretty delight we enjoyed there I'l leave it to Lovers to judge How loving and kindly we toy'd there without either grumble or grudge Quoth I now my own pritty Betty, with thée I my valour will try, And i'l have thee to'th wine, if thou wilt not repine no by my, &c, I took her off the bed then and I set her in the chair, Now thou hast done with me quoth she I prithee draw near my dear If I should come too near to thee I fear that thou wouldst cry For loosing of thy Maiden-head; no by my, &c. But now it is time to be going from Betty I needs must part 'Tis time to leave of our woing although it doth grieve my heart When ever we méet, I entreat thee my swéet that thou wilt be loving as I And never to grutch, my taking a touch. no by my troth not I. Pnted for R. Burton at the Horse-shooe in West-smith-field. With Allowance.
