N601 R235675 [ocm]62369502 188030
The New Corant. Or the merry wooing of Jonney and Jenny. Young Men and Maids if here be any You'l say this Ballet is worth a penny, You shall ir hear if you will stay You know the price, buy them away. To a new Tune call'd Up goes aly aly. engraving of man engraving of woman HEar is a new fine ditty If you will but draw near You'l say it is wondrous pretty as ever you chanc'd to hear Then prethee be kind sweet Jenny And do me not deny My love it shall still continue Vntil the day I dye Then up goes aly aly up goes Mary and Nan Jonney was courting of Jenny and so they went merrily on. I have a littie money my father did give to me Then prethy come hither my honey and so let us both agree, Then slight me not swéet Jenny thou dost not know my mind my love it shall still continue Then prethee be loving and kind. Then up goes, &c. Besides I have a Cow which grazeth on the Plain Sweet Jenny canst love me now or else with grief I'me slain, Tis all for love of thée that I do here remain Then Jenny sit down by me and kiss me once again. Then up goes aly aly, &c. My mother did promise me when ever she did dye She'd give me the Pottage pot between my wife and I, My Aunt she hath a Cradle which rockt my cousin Tom Sister Mary will give me a Ladle Thus Goods come in ding dong. Then up goes aly aly up goes Mary & Nan Jonney was courting of Jenney and so they went merrily on.
Besides I have a yow which cost me but five shilling And Bellows I have to blow If Jenny thou art but willing and other things I have Which to me doth belong we shall live fine and brave For our Goods come in ding dong. Then up with aly aly up goes Mary and Nan Jonney was courting of Jenney and so they went merrily on. Then Jenny give me thy hand and do not me deny Ile be at thy command until the day I dye. Ile work both night & day my Jenny for to maintain then cast me not away But shew some Love again. then up, &c. The Maids answer. Your words are very rare which you propound to me But some men will speak fair and yet deceitful be There is many maids have tryd what truth is in young men And constant some do prove but tis not one in ten. then up, &c. Yet this I do confess thou art a handsome man But you do run to Bess & then to me agen Thus I do plainly sée you waver like the wind You go to two or thrée then how can you prove kind then up with aly aly up goes Mary and Nan Jonney was courting of Jenney and so they went merrily on. Yet if you will be true unto no maid but me, This I will assure you thy wife I mean to be, But if you should be cross as many husbands be, My heart will quickly burst as you shall plainly see, then up with aly aly, &c. The Mans answer. Sweet Jenny fear not you of my unconstant Love To thee I'le be as true as is the turtle dove Tis not the love of dross or Gold shall put me by There shall no Love be lost between my wife and I, then up with aly aly &c. Come now lets poynt a day when we shall married be Tom piper he shall play and I will dance with thee, So thus we'l spend the day in merryment and joy At night we'l go to bed and try to git a boy, then up with aly aly &c. And so for to conclude I do young men advise chuse not a maid to rude But one of a handsome size, and so come let us kiss And make no more delay this Ballets a penny a peice So buy them all away then up with aly aly then up with Mary and Nan, Now Johnney doth lye with Jenney and so the World began. With Allowance. Printed for F. Coles, T. Vere. I. Wright. and I. Clark.
