R593 R182524 [ocm]64551656 184756
Rebellion given over House-keeping: OR, A General Sale of Rebellious Houshould stuff. Being a Pleasant New Song. To the Tune of, Old Simon the King. woodcut of woman in window REbellion hath broken up House, and hath left me Old Lumber to sell: Come hither and take your choice, I'le promise to use you well. Will you buy the Old Speaker's Chair, which was warm, and easie to sit in, And oftentimes hath been made clean, when as it was fouler then siting: Says Od Simn the King, say O d Simon the King, With hs thread-bare Cloaths, and his Mamsey Nose, sing hey ding, ding, a ding ding. Will you buy any con itches? tey she ftest that ever were spent; They'r the sides of the old Committees, fed up with th' long parliment. Here's a pair of beows an tongs, and for a small matter i'le fell 'em; They'r made of the Presbiters Lungs, to blow up the Coas of Rebellion, Says old Simon the King, &c. I had thought to have given them once to some Black-ith for his Forge; But ow I have consider'd on't, I for them have found other use: For i'le give them to se hr, to make the Organs to roar, And the little Pipes urk higher then evr they did before, Says old Simo he King, says Ol Simon the King, With his Thread-bare Cloaths, and his mamsey Nose sing hey ding, ding, a ding ding.
Here, s a couple of Sools for sale, the one square and t'other is round; Betwixt them both the Tail of the Rump fell unto the Ground. VVill you buy the States Council Table, which was made of the good wain-Scot; The frame was a tottering Bable to uphold th'independent plot; Says old Simon the King, &c. Here's the Beesom of Reformation, which should have made clean the Floor, But it swept the wealth out of th' Nation and left us Dirt good store. VVill you buy States Spining wheel, which spun for the Ropers Trade? But better it had stoodstill, for now in has spun a Fair Thred? Says old Simon the king, &c. Here's a very good Clyster Pipe, which was made of a Butchers stump? And oft-times it hath been us'd to cure the Colds of the Rump. Here's a lump of Ignorance, which once was a Iustice of peace, Who l and the Deuil did serve, but now it is come to This, Says old Simon the King, &c. Here's a Role of States Tobacco, if any Good Fellow will take it: It's nither Virginia nor Spanish, but i'le tell you how they do make it; Tis Covenant mixt with Engagement, with an Abjuration Oath; And many of them that did take it complain it was foul in the Mouth, Says Old Simon the King, &c. t the Ashes may happily serve to cure the Scab of the Nation, VVhen they have an itch to serv a Rebellion by Innovation, A Lanthorn here is to be bought, the like was scarce e're begotten: For many a Plot't has found out, before they ever were thought on, Says old Simon the King, &c. Will you buy the Rumps great Saddle, which once did carry the Nation; And here's the Bitt and the Bridle, and Curb of Dissimulation? Here's the Breeches of the Rump, With a fair dissembling Cloak, And a Presbiterian Iump, with an Independent Smock, Says old Simon the King, &c. Will you buy a Conscience ne'r turn'd, which served the High Court of Iustice? And stretch'd until England it mourn'd, but Hell will buy that if the worst is: Here's Ioan Crumwels Kitching-stuff-Tub, wherein is the Fat of the Rumpers, With which she Old Noll's Horns did rub, when he was got drunk with full Bumpers: Says Old Simon the King, &c. Here's the Purse of the Publique Faith, here's the Model of Sequestration, Here are the old wives who on good troth, sent Thimbles to ruine the Nation: Here is Dick Crumwel's Protectorship, and here is Lambert's Commission, And here is Hugh Peters his Scrip, cram' with the Tumultuous Petitions. Says Old Simon the King, &c. Here's Olivers Brewing Vessels. and here's his Dray and his Slings: Here's Hewsons Aul and his Bristles, with divers other odd things. And what doth the price belong to all these matters before ye? I'le sell them all for an old song, and so I do end my story Says old Simon the King, Says old Simon the King, With his thread-bare cloaths, & a Mamsey Nose Sing hey ding, ding, a ding ding. FINIS. Printed for J. W. J. C. W. T. T. P. and M. C.
