11567 S102816 99838578 177631
A SERMON CONCERNING THE EPIPHANY, PREACHED AT THE Cathedrall Church of Christ in Oxford. By RICHARD GARDYNER, D. D. and Canon of the same Church. OXFORD, Printed by LEONARD LICHFIELD, and are to be sold by MATTH. HVNT. Anno Dom. 1639.
TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD, IOHN, LORD-BISHOP OF OXFORD, my much Honour'd Diocesan. My Lord, I Am as full of hope as desire that your Gentlenesse will helpe into the light this bashfull Piece of my Composure. For having long liv'd in the Sun-shine of your Favour, it may
well be expected that somewhat of mine should bee colour'd with the beames. The Argument being the wise mens devotion claimes a peculi∣ar Interest in your religious protecti∣on, since 'tis demonstratively evident that the Example of their piety hath made a conspicuous reflection on your practise, which spares no Cost that God may be serv'd like Himselfe. We have seene their well-ground∣ed faith, which S. Peter calls Luci∣ferum in cordibus, appeare in the franke, and free Largesse of your Love to Christ. The sacriledge of former times purloyn'd the holy treasures, challeng'd the setl'd mansi∣ons of your Sea for their owne by Law, as if they mean'd you should
be knowne to be the most Christian Bishop in having with Christ no house left to repose your head in, nor Chappell standing, wherein you might offer up Attonement for them. To remove this scandall your Exemplary munificence ayded by So∣veraigne Power hath given out of your Cofers to the Church, what o∣thers have taken away from the Church to store their Cofers. So that through your Lord-ships bounty we may now againe say here stands the Lords Oratory, and This is the Bishops Palace. Heretofore the E∣vangelicall Altar was plac'd so incon∣gruously throughout the whole Dio∣cesse that a Proselyte might easily mi∣stake it for a secular Table, or common
Boord: now it hath that exact positi∣on, which is consonant to the Pri∣mitive Times. To prevent a promis∣cuous imployment of our Cathedrall Ʋtensills your pious Zeale hath stampt Gods Marke upon them, whereby none may dare to alter the propriety, nor pollute them with pro∣fane uses. And thus you have wal∣ked in the steppes of wise men both in the Substance, and circumstance, which makes me confident that this Narration of the wise mens diligent enquiring, and devout worshipping our Saviour will find a gracious ac∣ceptance, being humbly presented to your Fatherly indulgence by Your Lordships obliged to serve you in all Canonicall obedience. RICHARD GARDYNER.
TEXT 2. C. V. 2. Of the Gospell by St Mathew. Where is he that is borne King of the Iews? For we have seene his starre in the East, and are come to worship him. I Have heretofore re∣related the Iournall, & Gestes of the Pro∣gresse, which the Ma∣gi made to Ierusalem, taking my Rise at the first verse, as at the first stage of their set∣ting forth. Now quite to leave them there, and upon no opportunity to reflect on the Motive, and End of their Journey; what
were it but with the Foxe in the Fable to lick the outside of the Glasse, and not to tast the sweetes that are within it, Naz. Orat. 11. or in the words of Nazianzen , to commend a goodly Statue frō the shadow it casts, and to passe by , those perfections, which de∣serve our chiefe commendations. The Tuesday Course then being almost conti∣guous to their Solemne Festivall seasonably reverted me to a survay of this second verse, since therein we may discover the maine drift of their travell, & expence. Our Dialect renders them Wise men, and signifi∣cantly too: For at their first arrivall they did not weare away the Spanne of their time in descrying the Gaudes and Glories of the Citty, in trifling about impertinent, & frivolous Questions, but like Wise men in∣deed they forthwith propound a religious demand, saying, Where is He, which is borne King of the Iews? And yet I feare the world∣ly wise will take them for none of the wi∣sest in regard of that forme of Jntergatory.
The method of humane Policy prescribes Travellers to set a watch before their mouthes, to bee thrifty of their language when they converse with forreine Nati∣ons, because a , or freedome of speech in such betrayes levity, and hazards safety. These then may seeme to be nick∣nam'd Wisemen, onely in an Jrony, for who would not esteeme it rather an insolent presumption then well weigh'd discretion to dispute the Rights, and Proprieties of a Crowne; to raise a bruit of a Naturall King newly borne when another is elected, and established in the Throne? Such an affront as this is able to strike fire out of the dullest Prince, much more out of Herod, who as he was a Foxe in subtlety, so he shew'd himselfe a Lion in Cruelty. For when their Errand was presented to his Eares his enra∣ged jealousie burn'd so fiercely that it suck'd up the bloud of all the Male Infants with∣in the Coasts of Bethlē. And had not an hea∣venly inspiration diverted these Nuncios from the intended way of their Returne,
their bloud also should have runn'd among the Ingredients, and made up the dose to al∣lay his fury. But the Babe-slayer needed not thus to rave, Christ's susception of our Nature was no way ominous to his usurped Title. Hee came, saith S. Mathew, to minister, and not to be ministr'd unto. Tis true, He was a King, Pilate an Infidell to the preiudice of Caesar, his Emperour, & with hazard of his owne life stilld him so at his death, as those stran∣gers did at his Birth. Yea himselfe confess'd it, Mark 14. & his Father confirm'd it. Ps. 2. At Rex fuit in Saecula, non de saeculo: yet he was no Temporary Monarch of this Earth, but the King Eternal who hath all power in heaven, and in Earth, and so he was not to succeed any, nor any other him. Indeed his Royall Descent, & proximity of succession to the Crown might have claim'd the Throne of his Father David, See this fully prov'd in Speeds. Cloud of witnesses. the externall Monar∣chy of all Iewry. For both by Ioseph his Le∣gall Father, and Mary his Naturall Mother, himselfe was the onely immediate, next
Heire to Abiud, & Rhesa sonnes of Zerubba∣bel, in whose Line the Crowne by Right, should have been invested after Jechoniah. But he would not hold by that tenure: if he had, his Birth should not have bin so vile, and contemptible, nor his life so toile∣some, and miserable. He would not have begunne his State in a Manger, nor should a Cratch have been his Cradle; and brutish attendants his neerest Courtiers. A scan∣dall so great in the fastuous conceit of the Priests, and Scribes, that they would not be brought to acknowledge him to be the Messias, to whom they were to doe their homage, and sweare allegeance, although their forefather Iacob directly left it in his Testament, that when Shiloh came, all the shew, and outward pompe of the earthly Scepter should depart from Iudah, and Za∣chary in expresse tearmes proclaimed it to Jerusalem, Behold thy King cometh to thee poore and lowly. For the Iewes, who have been more diligent in the custody and por∣tage of the old Testament, then in the true
Exposition of it, were notable to discerne through so thick a vaile as lay over their eyes, plaine Prophesies from obscure Aenig∣maes, & therefore being desirous to brave it in the flesh, phantastically supposed that He who was to be borne King in their Quarters should trample on the necks, and Crownes of Princes, loosen the chaines wherewith they were manacl'd by the Romanes, and make them all great, and powerfull Potentates. But the Lord raignes, be the Earth never so impatient: Non brachio saeculari, not by out∣ward force over our goods and bodies, so terrestriall Rulers exercise dominion. The weapons of his Kingdome, are of an hea∣venly nature, his two edged sword cutts be∣yond the marrow, pierceth the deepest se∣crets, and retir'd cogitations of the inward Cabinet. The most obdurate sinner that sets up cavills, and raiseth as it were bull∣warks against the Lord, and his Anointed, feeles at one time or other, the power of his Spirit, ready to beat downe those strong
holds of sinfull imaginations. So that the breast of every carnall man hath that, which will speak for subjection to Christs dominion. I will not wander beyond the pale of the Church, nor touch those bad humors in the mysticall Body, which want nerves, and sinewes of faith to unite them to the Head. Our Saviour's entire Regiment is among his true members, who receive sense, motion, and quickning spirits out of his Fulnesse. The Assemblies of the Faith∣full are his immediat subjects, with whom his Word goes for a Law, and the guidance of his Spirit, for the sway of his Scepter. In them he Lordes it as a King in his King∣dome, when their understandings desire to know nothing but him, and what may stand with his truth; when their wills, and affections resigne, and yeeld up all in obe∣dience, and conformity to his will. He ma∣nifests the might of his Supremacy in their rescue from the thraldome of sinne, the sor∣cery of the flesh, and from the vigour of the Curse. And that the world may know he
is  the great Monarch of the uni∣verse, King of Kings, and raigning over all that raignes, he makes all things service∣able to their good. Sometimes permitting the rage of Tyrants to grow on high, that thereby he may be glorified in the Cou∣rage, and constancy of his Servants amidst the pangs and torments of death. Other∣whiles he restraines the tyranny of their Persecutors, causing them on a sudden to become his Peoples humble Oratours. The Magi guided by the holy Ghost, en∣title him King of the Iewes transcendently, because his Kingdome of Grace, the Stan∣dard of the Gospell, was first advanc'd in their Coasts. They were his Primogeniti; and 'tis the Prerogative of the first begot∣ten, to have a more honourable mention then others, which are Aliens. Yet his af∣fection was not so wedded to that Nation, that he wholy put the Gentiles out of his protection. The Pale of Palestine was too restrain'd, too narrow for his bounds. His dominion was to be extended so farre as
the Sunne darts his beames: the Heathen were given as his Inheritance, and the ends of the Earth for his Possession. The pro∣mise of the seed of the woman, which should break the Serpent's head, was made to Adam in Paradise as he represented the whole Posterity of Man-kinde, and so no Nation, no Condition can shut out a good heart from God. Why was the Stranger which sojourn'd among the Hebrewes ca∣pable of Circumcision, the pledge and seale of God's favour, but to signifie that saving health was to be deriv'd from their Tribes to all the Kinreds of the Earth. Neither is it without a mystery that in old Simeon's Anthem the light of the Gentiles is placed before the glory of Israell. Tert ul. lib. adv. Iudae. Tertullian is so farre from giving preeminence to the Iews that he proves it was prefigur'd by the Birth of Esau, and Iacob, that the elder people of the Jewes should serve the younger of the Gentiles. Others will have their rejection to be shadow'd forth in Gedeon's dry fleece, and the vocation of the Gentiles in the wet
floore. So that the Jewes were no more to be compar'd to the encrease of the Gentills, then the litle peece of Wooll to the whole Floore. Indeed the Jewes may truly be said to be like Gedeon's fleece; for as it was wa∣ter'd with the raine of heaven when all the Land else was dry, so God did let fall the dew of his mercies on their territories, when he left all other places barren, and dryed up through want of the influence of his graces. But after their rebellion they became like Gedeon's fleece, which afterwards was on∣ly dry, when there was dew on all the Earth besides. They were at first to God as Reu∣ben to Iacob, the strength, and glory of his age; but by ingratitude with Reuben they lost their dignitie, and with Esau their birth-right. S. Ambros. Ep. 73. l. 9. Nam quomodo dicent Pater cùm verum Dei Filium negant per quem adoptio acquiri∣tur? For with what comfort can they call God Father, who beleeve not in his onely Sonne, without whom they cannot bee a∣dopted his children? Quomodò Testamen∣tum nuncupant, qui mortem Testatoris negant.
What right can they have in the Covenant, who undervalue the death of the Testator by which 'tis ratified? Quomodò libertatem usurpant, qui negant sanguinem, quo redempti sunt? How can they challenge the glorious liberty of the chosen, when they trample under their feet the bloud of their Redemp∣tion? In vaine doe they boast they are de∣scended from Abraham, since he is not a Jew who is one outward in the flesh, but in∣ward in the Spirit. The Commonwealth of Israel is as well Mysticall, as Literall, and they are right heires to Christ's Kingdome, who reverence him as their Lord, & King. So that wee are the seed of Israel, having prevailed to be adopted God's people. For wheresoever true beleevers keep their resi∣dence, there the Land becomes Israel, & the Church Sion. Quous{que} ergo Iudaee durissime? S. Maxim. How long therefore ô thou carnall, stiffe∣neck'd Iew, wilt thou stop thy Eares against the Dictates of the Patriark's, and Testi∣monies of the Prophets? What a deadly ob∣stinacy hath possess'd thy heart above all o∣thers?
Thou canst not be perswaded to thy salvation by the tongues of Angels, & yet the Wisemen were confirm'd, and brought to thy Christ by the sight of one starre, which is the motive of their Journey, vidimus stellam Ejus. Where is He that is borne King of the Jewes? for we have seen his Starre. Tully was of opinion that the world was fram'd in such an order at the first begin∣ning, Cicero de Divinat. ut certis rebus quaedam signa praecurre∣rent, that certain signes, or tokens should al∣waies runne before certaine effects to give a glimpse, or light of their approaching. But this rule cannot be extended unto all, for as it is false Logick to maintain an argument affirmatively from the part to the whole, so were it likewise a grosse Errour in Divini∣ty to presse God, as it were perforce, to re∣veale his pleasure touching future events because he hath given warning by expresse signes of some particulars. Yet the fruitlesse Plodders, and Prolers in Nativities thought no matter of importance could fall out,
without the same were signified before hand by the Starres. Cardan was so saw∣cy as to erect a Figure of our Saviour's Birth: Earle of North āp∣ton in his de∣sensative p. 108 so cites him. Christ saith he was borne Primâfa∣cie virginis ascendente, the first face of the Virgin ascending, whose proper image is a Ʋirgin nourishing a Child, and thereup∣on, grounds an assurance that the Starres, and Planets wrought in his Nativity. Tertul. de Idololat. Cre∣do hoc nomine Christum sibi obligaverunt. J think, as Tertullian speaks scoffingly, such Figure-flingers as these, bound Christ to their profession, by this courtesy of making the starres to keep an Audit of his com∣ming. But 'tis both impious, and ridicu∣lous to suppose the influence of the Planets doe inspire, and force effects, which are ordained by God. The Father is round with them. Non est regnum caelorum sperare, Tertul. ut su∣pra. cujus radius, aut digitus abutitur caelo. He cannot hope for the Kingdome of Heaven, who thus abuseth heaven either with his finger, or his Compasse. These execrable illusions ipsam propemodûm dei majestatem pulsant,
doe almost strike at the Almighties sove∣raigne Majesty, and make it as it were a vassall to the works of his owne hands. There is no doubt but the very minute wherein all the miracles, and mercies should be wrought by Christ was fix'd in the Divine providence before the world was made. The fulnesse of time in which God sent his sonne was no other time then that which his Prophets, and not the Ho∣roscope foretold. Chrysol. Ʋidimus stellam ejus (as 'tis in the Text) (i.) Eum, qui habet stellam, non habetur à stella: Cujus ortum tenebat Autor, non quae ortum tenebat Autoris. Wee have seen his starre (i) we have seen him, who govern'd the starre, and not the starre him. Very well doe they call it his starre, because although all the starres being created by him are his, yet this was Christ's more pe∣culiarly. The rest of the starres were made that they might distinguish the times, and seasons, this was commanded to appeare that it might declare the Lord of the world, and the time of his heavenly King∣dome
was at hand. Stella erat non legifera, Chrysol. sed signifera, non apparuit caeli climate, sed virtute nascentis. Christ's nativity depen∣ded not upon the starre, but the starre on his Nativity, in respect whereof it was first created. It cannot be that this starre could be a∣ny of those glorious lights either fix'd or planetary, which in the creation were made for the ornament of heaven, and to enlighten sublunary creatures. Betwixt them and this there are many differences, both in respect of its motion, splendor, situa∣tion, and the manner of appearing. All o∣ther starres move ad motum primi mobilis, circularly, from the East towards the West, whereas this starre proceeded in a straight line from the East towards the South. O∣the starres appeare not in the day time, their light is obscur'd by the light of the Sunne: this starre appeard, and directed one Wise-men at high noone. Other starres are placed in the heaven, this was not in the
firmament, but the Aire, otherwise it could not have pointed out the way to the Wise-men, nor the house where the Infant lay. Lastly this Starre did differ from other stars in the manner of appearing, for sometimes it appeard, and sometimes it did not; some∣times it appear'd moving, and sometimes standing, so that it must needs follow it was no common starre, remaining in the heaven from the beginning, but a new light deputed only to the honour of our Saviour's birth, and the service of these Magi. Now if you would know how they understood the office of this starre was to be a Conduct to Christ, first we lay it as an undoubted truth they could not discover it by skill of the Astrolabe, that light was but a slight ground for a supernaturall be∣liefe. Some hold they had often heard from the Oracles of the Sibils, and their own Prophet Balam had spread it over all their Country, that there should rise a
Starre out of Iacob, and together with it a Scepter to Israel, as 'tis recorded in the Book of Numbers. This they learn'd, and this ranne in their mindes, this they made use of, and so comparing the Prophecies with the Event, they fell upon the right that this starre did portend , the scepterd King was borne to the Iewes. J will not affirme, as some doe, Vid. Mal∣donat. su∣per Math. c. 1. that the holy Spirit himselfe assum'd the figure, and forme of this starre, but J may safely say that by vertue of his spirit, who is the Mor∣ning Starre of the East, which guides Ar∣cturus, and his Sonnes, as Job speakes, they attain'd the knowledge how this starre did fore-tell the birth of the Messiah, which should smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of Seth. The Eternall word, , that light of truth did illuminate their soules to understand what Balam their Countreyman had divulged. The starre was a spark of Christ's owne kindling; A torch which himselfe lighted to direct these
Wisemens footsteps. For they say not wee have seen a new starre in the ayre, strange, and miraculous, but they adde the particle , the starre, thereby intimating they had seene a starre expected, and formerly reveal'd. D. Leo. Dedit aspicientibus intellectum, qui praestitit signum. Certainly, saith Leo the great, he, which guided their Eye outward∣ly inspir'd their heart inwardly. And here from bringing the Magi to a new Sunne on Earth by a new starre in hea∣ven we may observe how sweetly, and fa∣vourably the Lord dealts in that hee wins men by those meanes, which are suteable, and correspondent to their dispositions. These Astrologers were studious, and dili∣gent to seeke after God in his coelestiall works, & therefore he teacheth them out of their own book, a starre from heaven shall lead them to the place where divine know∣ledge is to be had. God is never deficient to him that is not so to himselfe. Indeed our inbred corruption infects whatsoever is
infus'd into us, and so no goodnesse in us of it selfe is a fit mover of the good graces of God, yet his voluntary favour, his frank, & free affection regards the small sparkes, and beginnings of light, which himselfe hath set up in our soules, and though it burnes dimme, yet if we let it not goe out, but doe our best to cleare that obscure, faint light, he will make us capable of a greater light. The weake, waxen wings of nature are not sufficient to raise us to our  of eternall happinesse, yet if her faculties, by grace enabled, be well husbanded, rightly managed, they will not hinder an ascending a degree, or two towards it. They cannot save us, they may some way profit us, if wee doe not sit downe in the beginnings of knowledge, but with a willing minde goe on, and travell for more. J suppose none will conceave the liberall intentions, & bountifull actions of Morall honest men to be evill formally, in the very Essence, though they are so, being taken cir∣cumstantially,
in respect they ayme not at the right end, Christ's glory, which makes them ineffectuall. For as trueth is truth where∣soever we finde it, so good ceaseth not to be good in whomsoever it resideth. Jf the sub∣ject shall alter the very nature of a quality, then the misplacing of a vertue will prove its losse, & destruction; vertue shall degene∣rate into vice, and so two opposites may not onely agree, but grow into an inseparable union, and be entirely one. The Scripture is so farre from crying downe morall prepara∣tions, that it presseth particulars of that kinde, which God hath so accepted that up∣on their right imployment he hath graci∣ously pleas'd to infuse a more ample mea∣sure of holinesse, a further meanes of salva∣tion. The Eunuch in the Acts was well af∣fected to Religion in undertaking so long a journey as from Aethiopia to Jerusalem for devotion sake. The Lord registers his religious steps, and the Spirit convaies Phi∣lip to his Chariot to give him better instru∣ction. Cornelius was a just man, and, which
was strange in a Captaine, made up of almes, and good works, he was one that fear'd God, and this was the utmost period of his explicit Creed before he met with S. Peter for ought appeares in the text. The Lord takes notice of this devout dispositi∣on, and in a vision directs him how to send for Peter to be inform'd in the Knowledge of the Gospell. The Ancients then who hop'd well of morall honest men are not too uncharitably to be censurd, for, as they urge, though God tyes us to the ordinary means, yet he hath not tyed himselfe. , or , ingenuity of nature, and other morall excellencies are not opposite, but subordinate to grace: Grace destroyes not, nor abolish∣eth them, but heales, and perfects them. The Wisemen desir'd to improve their piety, and God sublimates it, sending his starre as a Harbinger to draw them closer to him, & that out of the East, which is the place of the starre's first appearing. Where is he which is borne King of the Iewes? We have seen his starre in the East.
The East, as it followes in the Evange∣list, was the place of the Starres first ap∣pearing that where sinne abounded grace might superabound. There Sorcerers, and Practisers of hellish Arts serv'd Satan, and thence shin'd a spirituall light to chase a∣way darke ignorance, and spirituall wic∣kednesse. In lumine tuo ridebunt lumen. In thy light they shall see light saith David; S. Austen. In Christo tuo videbunt gratiam. In the Lords Christ, or Gods Anoynted they shall apprehend grace to be made partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in Light, who hath taken them out of the Kingdome of darknesse, and translated them into the Kingdome of his deare Sonne. So true is that of Esay, the people of the Gentills, which sate in darknesse saw a great light, and light is risen to them, which dwell in the region of the shadow of death. And indeed not without good ground, did this new starre appeare in that part of the world where the Sunne riseth, since it
was to declare, the new riseing of the Sunne of righteousnesse, which enlightens every one that comes into the world. Be∣sides, from whence should our faith have its beginning, but from thence where the Sunne hath its first rising, faith giving light to the soule, as the Sunne to the body. Bon∣adventure holds it fit in congruity, that from the East man should first be taught to worship God, since in the East he had first offended him. 'Tis no vaine conceipt that our Saviour was pleas'd to be crucified with his back towards the East, to inti∣mate he had cast behind him, and quite for∣got all sinne, whose first footing was in the East. Salmeron's opinion concurring with the Centurists may seem probable that because these First fruits of the Gen∣tills came from the East, well order'd Christians in a commendable conformity to the primitive times, doe use to pray with their faces that way, as professing how in the persons of these Wise-men they receav'd the rudiments, and Principles of their be∣leefe.
The turning our backs to the West when we are in religious devotions, may be morally usefull against the Jewes, as sig∣nifying we believe Christ's death to be pass'd, and behind us, and therefore we look to the East, thereby acknowledging both his Resurrection, & comming againe to Judgement, who shall come as the light∣ning which cometh from the East, Math, 24. Hence the wisdome of our Church hath order'd, that in situating Christian bodies in the grave, their faces be setled Eastward, as thence expecting the glorious second coming of their blessed Saviour. But J am to consider for what end the Wise-men pre∣sented themselves to Christ at his first com∣ing in the flesh, and that's specified in the close of the verse, it was to performe the religious Act of adoration, we have seen (say they) his starre in the East, and are come to worship him. The Scribes, and Pharisees, yea whole multitudes sought our Saviour, but it was
either to crucify him, or to entrap him in his speech, to see his miracles, or to be fed with his loaves, and fishes. These took by∣paths, and wrong waies to come to Christ. The persons in the Text sought viam in viâ, the Lord of truth in the true way; they ap∣prehended Christ, not only as the way to life, but as the way, and the life, which made them fall downe, and worship him. Wherein they acknowledged the Sonne of Mary to be the King of Eternity, adoration being the homage due to the God of hea∣ven. But is it not strange that the circum∣cised should deny him, who was borne King in the midst of them, and yet the un∣circumcised, aliens to the Covenant, confesse his soveraigne power in Ierusalem, the Mo∣tropolis, and Royall seat of the circumcisi∣on? 'Tis an Axiom in Philosophy Quòd sen∣sibile positum supra Sensorium non facit sensa∣tionem, that an object too neere applied to its proper Organ, makes the sense loose its apprehension. As a hand laid too close upon the eye cannot be discern'd, as it may
at a distance. Much after this manner it befell the Iewes. Christ being so neere to them, that he lineally descended from that Nation, they neglected a right application of him, and became so blind in the fight of him, who was the light of the world, that they could not see the glory of his power, and the fruit of his coming, whereas this bright starre of righteousnesse shin'd clearly in the region of darknesse. They, who dwelled farre off were carefull to follow the light of reason, and conscience, to im∣prove, and make the best use of prudentiall motives. And here I must take leave to vary from Calvin's exposition, Vide S. A∣than. l. de In∣carn. Nazi∣anz. Orat. 9.5. August. Ser. 29. de Temp. the current of Antiquity being against it. He would have the Worship in this place tender'd, not to be an act of Religion, but Civility. We deny not that  promiscu∣ously signifies civill, and divine reverence, yet the Holy Ghost commonly useth it for a religious prostration of the body in the act of adoration. Cornelius his devout man∣ner
of worshipping S. Peter, in the tenth of the Acts is expressed by . The worship, which the foure and twen∣ty Elders yeeld to God in the 19. of the Re∣vel. is render'd by , and our Savi∣our applies it to Satan S. Math. 4. , thou shalt worship the Lord thy God. And in the same religious sense, the word must be understood in my text, o∣therwise the Wise men had been ridiculous in undertaking such a tedious journey, if the end of their coming were to worship a temporall Prince, who being newly borne could neither take notice of their homage, nor understand the honour was presented to him. Herod might well be of∣fended with this action, because they went about to set up another King within his Territories. Their countreymen at home might suspect them of seditious pra∣ctises, as if they mean'd to bring in a for∣raigne Ruler. Wherefore J may safely con∣clude that the meannesse of Christs birth would have diminished his glory even in
the judgement of those Wise men, if they had not beleeved that He, whom they saw in the manger was Ipse Ille that bare rule in heaven. The Ʋbiquitaries in declining an irreli∣gious neglect have fallen to excesse of piety by exhibiting divine worship to the hu∣mane nature abstractedly from the divine, whereby they doe not much differ from Heathen Jdolaters, who adore the Creature for the Creator. The Schoole is herein or∣thodox; Aqu. part. 3. q. 25. art. 2. Adoratio latriae non exhibetur huma∣nitati Christi ratione sui ipsius, sed ratione divi∣nitatis, cui unitur: divine worship is not gi∣ven to th humanity in respect of it selfe, but in regard of the Divinity to which it is united. S. Aust tract. in Ioh. 42. Divinitas ejus quo imus, humanitas e∣jus quâ imus, so saith S. Austen. His divini∣ty is that whereunto we goe, his humani∣ty is that whereby we goe: Paulinus A∣quiliens: cont: Felicem l. 1. in Biblioth. pat. at non alter in suo, Alter in nostro, yet he is not another in that which is his, and another in that which is ours, sed totus in suo, & totus in no∣stro,
idem in utro{que}. But whole in that which is his owne, and whole in that is ours, and the same in both. Concil. Con∣stantinop. 5. Can. 9. juxta Concil. E∣phes. c. 8. Hence it is that we doe not terminate our adoration in ei∣ther nature a part, and severally, but we worship with one adoration the God-head with the Man-hood in the person of the Word. Damascen speaks it out, , Damas. l. 3. Orth. Fid. c. 8. saith he, . I for∣beare to pursue these speculative litigations, being desirous rather to stint my selfe then to lash out. Give me leave then to summe up all with that which may excite de∣votion. Quod fecit Magus non faciet Christianus? The Easterne Sages travell'd farre in the eztremity of winter to present, a solemnt worship to our Lord, and Saviour, where are they that will scarce step out of doores to God's publique worship, when the Church stands hard by, if perchance there fall a few drops of raine to wet their dresse, or to discolour their shooes? These in the
text had but the irradiation of one starre for a Convoy to Christ, we have a Constellation of many starres, and some of the first Mag∣nitude, shining cleerely in this Horizon. Eminent, and powerfull Preachers of the Gospell, those great Lights of the Church have a long time convey'd a bright illustra∣tion upon this Goshen, this our land of light, and shall we come short of the dar∣kest times in the lustre of religion? What a shame is it that they should be more devout before the Manger in the state of Christ's humiliation then wee are before the Altar now he is in the height of his Exaltation! All the postures of their bodies, and soules were awfully affected to Christ's infinite gentlenesse, & goodnesse, even then, when he made a Stable the Chamber of his Pre∣sence. And therefore 'tis to be fear'd, if we leave not of our prophane carelesnesse, that the men of the East will rise up in Judgement against the Men of the West (i) against many in our daies, who present themselves in the Courts of the Lord at
times of divine service in ambulatory moti∣ons, irreverent deportments, vaine Com∣munications, as if they made litle or no dif∣ference betwixt the Exchange, and the Church, the common Taverne, and the sa∣cred Tabernacle. But let us, who acknowledge Christ our Leige Prince, and Soveraigne, like good subjects humbly seek, & come to this God Incarnate, falling down at the Manger, and at the lap of the Virgin, where this blessed Childe lyeth ('tis Luthers zealous exhorta∣tion on the Galath.) and there behold him given to us, borne for us, sucking, growing, dying, rising againe, ascending above the heavens that he may at length bring us thi∣ther, where we shall see him face to face, which we beseech him to grant us for his mercies, and merits sake. AMEN. FINIS.
