17915.5 S5125 [ocm]38160611 29267
An excellent Ballad of the Mercers sonne of Midhurst, and the Clothiers Daughter of Guilford. To the tune of, Dainitie come thou to me. THere was a wealthy man, in Sussex he did dwell, A Mercer by his trade, as many yet can tell: He had a youthfull sonne, Whom fancie so did moue, He tried night and day alacke I die for loue. Alacke I die for loue, beautie disdaineth me: The Clothiers daughter deare, workes my extremitie. She hath my heart in hold, that did most cruell proue: Thus cried he night and day, alacke I die for loue. Alacke I die for loue, fortune so sore doth frowne: The Iewell of my heart dwelleth in Guilford Towne. There lyes the Lamp of life. for whom this paine I proue, Faire Phillis pittie me, alacke I die for loue. Alacke I die for loue, and can no comfort flude: The Clothiers daughter deare beareth so high a minde. Sweet beauties paragon. faire Venus siluer doue: Sweet Phillis pitty me, alacke I die for loue. Alacke I die for loue, While thou dost laugh and smile Let not thy pleasure be true loue for to beguile: My life lyes in thy hands, then as it doth behoue Slay not the Mercers sonne, alacke I die for loue. If that my beautie bright doth grieue thy fight quoth she, Then let the Mercers sonne, turne still his sats from me. I doe no man disdaine. nor can I cruell prone, My tongue must still say nay, where my heart cannot loue. Where my heart cannot loue, louers est I must shun: The Clothiers daughter thus answers the Mercers sonne. I beare no loftie minde, yet pittie cannot moue My minde to fancie him, where my heart cannot loue. Where my heart cannot loue, I must his suit denie, For though I laugh and smile, yet falshood I defie. Thou art too fond a man lifes danger thus to proue, Ile not wed good friend Iohn, where my heart cannot loue. What good can there be fall to that now married wife, Where goods & wealth is small? want causeth daily strife: But where is wealth at will, experience plaine doth proue, Though loue at first be small yet goods increaseth loue: Yet goods increaseth loue, and I will neuer wed, But where a key of gold open the doores to bed. For she may merry be, what chance soeuer hap, Where bags of money come tumbling within her lap. Tumbling within her lap, while she her gold doth tell, With such a husband, Sir, I doe delight to dwell. Were he young, were he old, deformed, or faire in show, My pleasure still should be where treasure still doth flow. Where treasure still doth flow, is that your minde quoth he? My father will bestow as much as comes to thee, Hadst thou fiue hundred pounds, fiue hundred pound beside, My father will affoord, if thou wilt be my bride. If thou wilt be my bride, thus much I vnderstand, My Father will giue me his house and ske his Land. So that while he das liue, with vs he may remaine: What sayes my hearts delight, this is a bargaine plaine. This is a bargaine plaine, quoth she, I am content, So he performe this thing, I giue thee my consent, And I will merry be, my minde shall not remoue Thou shalt be my sweet heart, Ile be thine owne true loue. Ile be thine owne true loue, then vse no more delay, I greatly long to sée our happy marriage day, To Midhurst all in haste goeth the Mercers sonne, He told his father deare, his true loue he hath won. The old man hearing this, conueyed out of hand, Assurance to his sonne, of all his house and land: When he had done this déed, he wept full bitterly, Saying, my owne deare sonne thou must be good to me. Well worth two hundred pound this morning I was knowne, But the clothes to my backé, nothing now is mine owne, And all this I haue done deare sonne to pleasure thée, Thinke on thy fathers loue, and deale thou well with me. Deare father, (quoth the sonne) if I doe not doe so, God powre vpon my head hot vengeance, griefe and woe. The young man wedded was to his faire louely bride, But wondrous griefe and care thereof there did betide. As after you shall heare, in the old mans complaint, A tale of greater griefe, cannot your hearts attaint: A warning by this thing, all men shall vnderstand, Lest they doe come to liue vnder their childrens hand. Finis.
A new Ballad intituled, The Old mans complaint against his wretched sonne, who to aduance his marriage, did vndoe himselfe. To the tune of. Dainty come thou to me. Woodcut illustration of a young man. ALl you that Fathers be, looke on my miserie, Let not affection fond worke your extremitie: For to aduance my sonne in marriage wealthtly I haue my selfe vndone, without all remedie. I that was wont to liue vncontrouled any way, With many checkes and taunts, I am grieued euery day. Alacke and woe is me, I that might late command, Cannot haue a bit of bread, but at my childrens hand, Whiles I was wont to sit chiefe at the Tables end, Now like a seruing-slaue, must I on them attend: I must not come in place, where their friends marry be Lest I should my sonne disgrace with my vnreuerencis: My coughing in the night, offends my daughter in law, My deafenesse and ill fight doth much disliking draw; Fye on this doting foole, this crooked churle quoth she. The chimney corner still must with me troubled be, I must rise from my chaire, to giue my children place: I must speake seruants faire, this is my wofull case. Vnto their friends they tell, I must not say they lie, That they doe keepe me here: euen of mere charitie. When I am sicke in bed, they will not come me nye Woodcut illustration of a young woman. Each day they wish me dead, yet say Ile neuer die. O Lord and't be thy will, looke on my wofull case, No honest man before, euer tooke such disgrace, This was the old mans plaint euery night and day. With woe he waxed faint, but marke what I shall say. This rich and daintie paire, the young man and his wife, Though clog'd with golden coine yet led a grieuous life. Seuen yeere they married were and yet in all this space God gaue them nere an heire, their riches to imbrace. Thus did their sorrow bréed, ioy was from them exil'd: Quoth she a hundred pound would I giue for a child: To haue a folly child: of mine owne body borne; Full oft I am reuil'd, of this my barren wombe. Much Physicke dis she take, to make a fruitfull soyle, And with excesse thereof her body she did spoile. Full of griefe full of paine, full of ach grew she then, That she tryed not amaine, séeke me forth cunning men, That I my health may haue, I will us money spare, But that which she did craue, fall neuer to her share. Alacke, alacke, she said, what torments liue I in, How well are they apayd, that any case can win. Woodcut illustration of an old man. So that I had my health. and from this paine were frée. I would giue all my wealth, that blessed ioy to sée. O that I had my health, though I were nere so poore, I car'd not though I went begging from doore to door? Fye on that muck (quoth she) it cannot pleasure me, In this my wofull case and great extremitie. Thus liu'd she long in paine, all comfort from her fled, She strangled at the last her selfe within a bed. Her husband full of griefe, consuming wofully, His bodie pin'd away, suddenly he did die, Ere thirteene yeares were past, died he with out a Will, And by this meanes at last, the old man liuing still. Enioy'd his land againe after such miserie: Many yeares after that, liued he most happily, Farre richer than before. by this meanes was he known He helpt the sicke and sore, the poore man ouerthrown: But this was all his song, let all men understand, Those Parents are accurst liue on their Childrens hand. Finis. Printed at London for H. G.
