18063 S119839 [ocm]20234098 23494
TO THE READER CHRISTIAN READER LOOKE rather what is intended, than what I have attained. My principall aime and purpose is to show that who soever doth love to see the true purtrate of IESUS CHRIST our LORD, must verse Himselfe in holy Scripture, except Hee will chuise to ly open to delusion. If it please Thee to read and seriously perpend what is said to this purpose, I have eneugh for my paines. I haue contrivd it in a measured stile, that thou mayst read with lesser wearying. Looke not for elaborat words, for not only the weighti∣nesse of the subject made mee shunne what soe∣ver might breed obscuritie, but I ever held the whorish ornamnets of affected eloquence an vnsutable Ornament to garnish pure Truth. If it seeme to Thee I haue extended the worke to more than a competent length, some few moments shall serue Thee to runne thorow the margents, Howrs thou mayst reserue to what further it stall please to make search for in the work. If my stile seeme any where sharpe against the abuise and abuisers of the Arti∣ficiall
Crucifixe, weigh my reasons withou prejudice, and I hope, I shall not neede to stan in feare of thy condemning censure. If th maner of handling of this Subject seeme to the more proper for a Preacher than a Gentle∣man of my place, refuse it not for this, for  worthy Preacher, of my neere and deare ac∣quaintance, out of His loue to CHRIST and thy Salvation, did not only stirre mee vp to buil this peece of worke, but both by Conference an Counsell, (as my weaknesse stood in need of advise) did fordwardly concurre to fur∣nish helpe to the materials. Thou shall doe we therefore to passe by the insufficiencie of th Instrument; that, likeing the purpose neither the better nor the worse for this respect, bu looking (chiefly) to the Truth of that whic is spoken, by occasion thereof Thou mayst be stirred vp to a further study of the knowledge of IESUS CHRIST, and Riches of grace and truth in Him, and so to a greater love of Him, and communion with Him, for which end I pray the Spirit of IESUS be with Thee.
OF THE BOOKE. YOu that with awfull eyes, and sad regards, Gazing on Masts of Ships crost with their yards; Or when yee see a Microcosme to swim, At evry stroake the Crucifixe doe limme In your Braines Table; or when smaller things, As pyed Butter-flyes, and Birds their wings Doe raise a Crosse; streight on your knees doe fall And worship: you, that evrye painted wall Grac't with some antik face, some Godling make, And practise whoordome for the Crosses sake With Bread, stone, mettall; Read these sacred Layes And (Proselytes) proclaime the Authors praise, Such Fame your Transformation shall him giue, With Homers EVER that his Name shall liue. W. D. Of Hawthorn-denne.
IN AVREVM AVRATI EQUITIS, GVILIELMI MORI DE CRVCE POEMA. VEteres Poëtae fabulantur, virginis Permultùm amatae cùm nequiret Iuppiter Potiri amore, se liquâsse in aureum Imbrem, puella quem tenero excepit sinu. Istic libellus, bellus, & verè aureus, Subesse monstrat veritatem fabulae. Totius orbis qui perennat arbiter Novit protervum quàm sit humanum genus; Quàm sit maligno pectore, & quàm ferreo. Tam novit arctis vinculis in Tartaro Clausum profundo, si Salus salvum velit, Ipsi vt Saluti non fores recluserit. Tam novit imo pectori insitum nefas, Ʋt nullus aditus consilio sano siet, Quod saccarum, & mel non sapit facundiae. Magni Tonantis spernit altè oracula, Exculia ni sint, ni nitescant aureo Splendore, cultu & gemmeo Eloquentiae. In corda sic sese insinuat altè DEUS, Ʋinclis amoris ducat vs{que} vt aureis! En Ʋatis hujus aurea eloquentia Laeto imbre pectus perpluit divinitus: Hujusce pennâ stillat imber aureus: Sinus patescant; verus huic inest DEUS. IO. ADAMSONUS.
In Nobilissimi, piissimi{que} Iuvenis. GƲLIELMI MORI, à Rowallan, Equitis aurati, cognati sui vnice chari, piam de cruce poesin, IOANNIS GELLII à Gelliestoun, Med. D. EPIGRAMMA. SI facienda canens, faciensve canenda meretur Laudem, tu gemino dignus honore cluis. Carmina digna facis, vita est dignissima versu: Illa Sophum monstrant; vita, me los{que} pium. Macte jugo tali: coeunt vix nexibus vsquam Trina vno, pietas, ingenium, at{que} genus. Plurima MORE tuis debes Majoribus: olim Stirps tua debebit postera plura tibi. Ejusdem ad pubem verae virtutis aemulam Protrepticon. HEV virtutis egens, at turgens stemmate quivis, Solo se magni nomine iactat avi. Sollicitat raro venturos cura nepotes, Ad patru titulos addere laude suos. Mollia traducunt foedo pars otia luxu, Delectat{que} alios alea, ludus iners: Pervigil infames lustrat pars magna popinas, Continuo{que} alios turpe lupanar habet. Sunt quibus at virtus, vitio caruisse putatur, Nil{que} boni vt faiant, abstinuisse malo:
Dum iuvat vmbrosos indagine claudere faltus, Hortari{que} citos saxa per alta canes. Quadrupedumve placent rapidi certamina cursus, Aut carptus curvo gyrus in orbe levis. Aut volucrum parvam captare per aëra praedam, Quam praedo crudis unguibus ales agit, Dum{que} hic curat equum, accipitrem alter, & ille molossum, Sic brevis indignis fallitur hora modis. Non ita nobilium Morus iubar exigit annos, Non illi lepidis tempora lapsa iocis. Impiger Aonidum sed dulcia castra sequutus, Excoluit doctis artitus ingenium. Et bifidi tremulâ Parnassi conditus vmbrâ, Pleno Castalias gutture traxit aquas. Cum{que} habeat faciles quaevis in vota Camoenas, Materia est Musae res sacra sola suae. Impuros procul ire iubet, quos vulgus amores Concelebrat vatum, ficta{que} furta Deûm. Raptus, nequitias, mimos, sine pondere nugas, Et quae sunt passim ludicra trita fugit: Haud vano augurio, mores nam pagina pandit, Teslis & est animi sermo, & imago sui. Tractat enim saepè, & narrat quis{que} illa libenter, Quorum est arcanus pectore fixus amor: Miles equos, caedes, hostes, spolia, arma, triumphos Prosequitur: funes navita, vela, rates. Temones, rastros, stivam, dentale, iuvencos Agricolae memorant, & faber artis opus: Sic pia, mente pii, referuntq, nefanda profani, Qualis & est cordis copia, voce patet: Sic ergo Sophiae divinae munera Morus Exhibet, è sacris cuncta petita libris: Nectare, & ambrosiae dulci stillantia succo, Quae{que} famem sedent, flumine quae{que} sitim:
Quae simul exhilarent gratâ dulcedine mentem, Lectoris{que} aures arte, lepo beent. Nil latet hic foedi, nil turpi crimine vitam Imbuit, haud toto linea spurca metro: Instruit at rectâ Deus vt ratione colendus, Et quae sit fidei regula vera docet. Scilicet humanâ quae non cervice profecta est, Fingitur vt Pallas vertice nata Iovis, Coelesti sed tota fluens ab origine, nescit Mortalis cerebri somnia vana, dolos. Oraclis sacri comprensa voluminis, vltrà Ire vetat, certo limite clausa fides. Hinc Phariis monstrat tenebris, vis quanta sepultos A bripit insanos, & sine fine furor. Dum lignum, dum saxa, cruces, Cererisque paratae Crusta colunt, fragili numina facta manu. Os quorum sermonis inops, sine lumine ocelli, Et surdis affert auribus aura sonos. Naribus & patulis non est odor vtilis vllus, Nullus & in vacuo pectore pulmo move, Et stupidis manibus tangendi nulla facultas, Nec possunt se aliquò ferre referre pedes. Talia sunt PAPAE quae grex lymphatus adorat Numina, quae fecit dextera, corde timens. Attonitus stupeas, quae sicvesana furentem Mens agit in facinus. (prô pudor, O lachrimae!) Si spectes, pronus velut vt de marmore divis, Inflexis genibus, oscula, dona ferat. In numerum, ritu magico, crucibusque frequenter Se signans, tacito & murmure vota premens. Qualiter ac illis fument altaria, templis Insensi thurs pinguis odore, foco. Sed crescit rabies, furiis plus effera Caci, Dum vice Verbigenae liba, trabesque colunt.
Vertice, cum, raso, qui adolet nunc ignibus aras, (Callidus in magicis sacra pare focis) Sacrificus, Missam arcano demurmurat ore, (Arcanâ Cereris dignus & ipse face) Coelis deducto, cantato carmine, CHRISTO, Fit subito panis mica minuta Deus. Inque dies sacer ille Dei, mactaturad aras Agnus, in aeternum qui semel ante luit. Quemque capit vasti non ingens machina mundi, In panis rerum conditur orbe Parens. Aere, auro, argentove Cruces, variisque figuris, (Materia ingenio, Daedale, digna tuo) Stellantes baccis, gemmisque micantibus igne, Numinis ex aequo debita iura secant. Taliaque appendunt demissa monilia collis, Christum extra portant, quem minus intus alunt. Haec tam dira lupae Romanae, ac horrida monstra, Crimina & in celsum morte pianda Deum, Hicce Caledoniae vates celeberrimus orae, Enthea divino flamine corda calens, Exosus, suavi perstrinxit carmine, quale Cantat vicino funere dulcis olor. Vnde superba fluet laus duratura per aevum, Et semper vernans gloria flore novo. Qui super ergo suâ molitur laude laborem, Supra maiores scandat vt ipse suos; Vel se tollere humo, & famae venientis amore, Nititur eximiis fe indere nominibus. Hanc capiat virtute viam, vestigia servet Illius, & MORI laude sequatur iter. Cuius sit quamvis alta, ac affinis origo Regibus, & tumidum Nobilitate genus, Noluit esse tamen famâ contentus avorum, Nec fuit inde sibi gloria ducta satis,
Ni pennis vectus propriis sublimior iret, Et foret ipse sibi fortè futurus honor. Quo iam nunc potitur, magnum & memorabile adeptu Nomen, & est veri verus honoris honos: Inque Caledoniis celebrabitur ecce poëtis, Primum & Musa dabit candida casta locum.
IN DIVINAM, DOCTISSIMAMQVE D. GVLIELMI MORI, de verâ crucis CHRISTI contem∣platione POESIN. DVM tu, More, sacri divinâ carminis arte, Effigiem veram crucifixi ostendis Iesu. Non auro, argento-ve, nec aere, aut marmore sculptā Qualia, vana superstitio sibi fingit idola, Humanae figmenta manus, inventaque mentis; Sed quam divini pingunt proeconia verbi, Corporis haud oculis, fidei sed luce videndam, Non collo, manibus ve, pio sed corde ferendam: In terris, nomen tibi, de Cruce Musa, parabit, Marmoreis statuis, omni{que} perennius aere, Crux ipsa, in coelis, vitae immortalis honorem. Aliud. CHristicolis, Christi crux, est quae gloria cunctis, Nomine non vno est gloria, More tibi, Mente crucem Christi dum pura amplecteris ipse, Dum{que} alios quae sit crux quo{que} vera doces, Materies tanto ingenio, tanto{que} Poeta, Tam docti calamum, digna subire metri. Frustra alii, blandae afflavit quos aura Camoena, Ingenium nugis, eloquium{que} terunt. At tibi, divini qui carminis, alite sacro, Altius humanis tollis in astra caput, Entheusest metris vigor, & caelestis origo, Et verus veris vatibus aptus bonos. Perge altiexerere ingenii monumenta, paratu Hâc decus, hâc fama, hâc itur ad astra via. Haec in laudem Stauropticae à D. GVLIELMO MORO aedita MICHAEL VALESIVS.
A wish of goodwill to all the Professors of Poperie. WHat clowd of Error hath your eys closd vp Soule-poysned Popelings? what enchanting Cup Of superstition haue you drunke? what Fiend Hath thus illuded your infatuat Minde? With what fond zeale doe you the Crosse adore, A prettie Ornament to trim your Whore, (Whose best attyre proves in effect but trash, Or rather fuell for Tartarean flash) As if th' Eternall's sacred worship stood More in apparent, than in reall Good; You leaue the substance and the shade you loue, A Crucifixe than Christ you more doth moue. O that your eyes were ope! Come, come and see Your Crosse in Cut-worke, and th' Anatomie Of a true Crucifixe, delineat cleare, By One, the sacred Sisters Mineon deare, In sweeter layes than e're Arion sung; Which would to God within your hearts were hung For these base forg'ries, Manufactures vaine Which on your breasts you daylie entertaine. By W. Forbes.
THE TRVE CRVCI∣FIXE FOR TRVE CATHOLIQVES. IF sacred Truth2. Thes. 11.12 did not conciliate trust, My doubt remoue by sa∣tisfaction just But muse I could not, how from time to time, Man, (butGen. 2.. a masse of anima∣ted slime A cloud of dust, tos'd by vncer∣taine breath, A wormeling weake, soone to stoupe downe to death,) Durst bee so bold, his pow'r as to enlarge; And (proudly2 Command Levit. 26.2. Psal. 97.7. vilipending GODS discharge) A frantick freedome to himselfe durst take An Image for religious vse to make. And now I can not halfe enoug admire,It is strange that mē should call the worke of their owne hands How fondlings (daringLevit. 10.1. offer vncouth fire)
Agnus Dei, & Crucifixus, Christ his proper stiles, & ascribe such vertues as flow from CHRIST his person to them▪ & trust and leane, and giue religious worship to thē, and yet plead to passe free of Idolatrie. Agnus Dei, is as much as the lambe of God. Crucifixus, as Christ nai∣led on the crosse.The naughtie issue of a noysome seed, Like errour yet should to lyke madnesse lead, CHRIST of his honour due in∣duc't to reaue Vnto their owne inventions, it to giue, A peece of abject wax, closd in a clout, For GODS lamb blushing not to beare about; Nor (sense distracted) CHRISTS owne proper stie, The Crucifixe, forbearing to defile, It attributing to their Christs of drosse, (A mans faind shape, fixd on a fancied crosse) With honours, stiles, and titles, not a few, To crucified CHRIST IESVS, only due. To1. Cor. 2.2 Gods spirit calleth Christ Himselfe the Crucifixe, and nothing else. Paule no Crucifixe be∣sids was knowne, Saue CHRIST,Math. 16.16. Sonne of the living GOD alone:
This crucifixe of His, ourIsa. 40.9. GOD, ourIohn. 20.28. Isa. 43.11. LORD, By All should bee obeyd, servd, lovd, adord. Our harts for Him, whose heart for vs did bleed, A rowme should bee to rest in, and reside. Hee should our glorie,Gal. 6.14. 2. Cor. 10.17. our re∣joycing bee, Wee2. Cor. 4.11. Ibid. 5.16. liue to Him, who chusd for vs to die. His image in our lyfe we all should beare, Walking as Hee, pure,Philip. 2.15. innocent, sincere, OurGal. 5.4. flesh, our foule affections mortifying, Heere, to be His for ay,Mat. 16.24 our selues denying. AsGal. 6.14. to the world, as crucified to sinne, ReadieMat. 19.27. Mark. 10.28. Luk. 18.28. for Him, with each thing els to twinne, Wee labour should, while heere wee borrow breath, In bleeding hearts2. Cor. 4.10. to beare about his death.
No right nor lawfull resem∣blance of Christ cruci∣fied, but such as Himselfe hath made.To this intent, in pure Truths sacred booke, Our dayly task should be on Him to looke ToIohn. 5.39. Isa. 8.20. search the Scripturs, which of Him record, And crucified before our eyes afford: We should those holy ordinances haunt, His Sacraments, means which Himselfe did grant, And Registred left in his latter-will, His death to keepe in fresh re∣membrance still: And with a longing soule, and list∣ning eare, The Gospells joyfull tidings bent to heare, Such wee should bee,1. Cor. 2.2. as know∣ledge all hold vaine, Saue CHRIST to know, and for our sinnes Him slaine. ThusGal. 3.1. Paul him suffering to all eyes exposd, Which2. Cor. 4.3.4. misbeliefe, and igno∣rance not closd,
Thus may wee all Him by faiths piercing eye In Glasse of his owne institutions see,In Gods word & ordinances CHRIST may be seene, as in a mirrour. Thus bee preserud from following Christ-lings vaine, Shew'd in the juggling trickes of wits prophane, Which Numbers lead astray; a∣mongst which crew, No doubt but chosen soules are not a few, To whom cleare eyes GOD once to see will giue, As others, who did in like error liue, That meanes none els, CHRISTS knowledge can afford, But such, himselfe hath stablisht in his word. Thou knowst (sweete CHRIST) the pitifull respect, Those simple soules I beare which Thee affect, And faine would find Thee, but a∣stray are ledde, With vaine inventions in mans fancie bredde,
Who searching Thee, cast in a cu∣rious mold Of baser mettle, or of purest gold Worship to Thee, vnwarranted allow, And basely to a lying idole bow, Intending thus to impetrat thy peace Doe loade themselues with sin, Thee with disgrace. With pittie mov'd, with in∣indignation just To such, a better pourtrate wish I must; Which to draw foorth, LORD furnish mee with airt, Bee thou my Patrone, who my Patterne art: My hand, my pinsell, let thy Spi∣rit guide, That (all humane respects farre laide aside) Free from presumption, curious∣ly to trace Each subtile line of thy Immor∣tall face,
Thee shaddowing foorth, my draughts may not debord From sacred mirror of thy sauing word. Teach Thou my straines to flie no other flight, Still leade mee with the Lanterne of thy light, That with thy loue enflam'd, I may with feare, Thee, in that Glorious mirror still admire; Where, to our measure, Thee a∣bridg't wee haue, Of Thee at least uficient truth to saue, Yet so that what thou to reueale hast dain'd, A part can bee but of that part attain'd Which as Mans soule thy Spirit dth enspire, Some more, some lesse, none fully can acquire; The soberest measure, euen the least of all, If thou vouchsafe, LORD serue my purpose shall.
1 Mans happi∣nesse stands in his cōmunion with GOD.MANS prime felicitie, and soveraigne blisse, His onely chiefest good, which Most doe misse, By Combination of Eternall bands, In his Communion, with his Maker stands. This Vnion, first spirituall must bee found:2. This Commu∣nion in this world, is spiri∣tuall only. The Soule our better halfe to GOD bee bound, To him conjoynd, before our Bodies loade, Can bee admitted to his blest aboade. 3. The way to make it vp, & keepe it is the right know∣legde of GOD.This band to make, of GOD the knowledge true So needfull is, to man ere sinne hee knewe, That life it was, his GOD to know aright: Ihon, 17, 3.Now life eternall is, since put to flight By disobedience, truly GOD to knowe, And CHRIST his Sonne, the source whence life doth flowe.
GODS Rebell Sathan,1. Pet. 5.8 Sathan there¦fore hath ever labored to mar mans know∣ledge of God, that he might marre mans communion with GOD. mans malicious foe, Debard from grace, since first by pride brought low, Depriu'd of happinesse, b exild from Heaven, Hopelesse to be restor'd to darke∣nesse driven, In malice set,Apoc. 12.9. Iude. 5.6. by subtiltie and slight Mans happinesse to marre, with all his might, Him from his GOD, and Sove∣raigne good to part Striues, of his GOD the know∣ledge to pervert. In man (hisGen. 1.26. Man at his first makeing had sufficient knowledge of GOD, given him by meanes appointed of God, to moue him to keepe cōmunion with his Maker. Makers image) GOD infusd A light, too glorious to haue beene abusd, ARom. 1.19. Heavenly knowledge (fore-fault by his fall). Both of himfelfe, and things cre∣ated all; In which faire volume, Man might dayly looke, And exercise his witts, as in a Booke,
Which him to reade, to studie did invite, GODS boundlesse pow'r, his wis∣dome infinite. TheGen, 3, 5. But Satan by an vnlawfull meane offering to augment his knowledge be∣reft him of the benefite of that which he had. Serpent offring to aug∣ment this light, By greater knowledge to vnsile His sight (For yet his eyes had still  code No wicked thoughts perve had his will) Did vnawarres thus worke his ouerthow, Sinne making him at once commit and know. Thus not alone by treason did seclude Himselfe from grace, lost GOD, his chiefest good, Rom, 5, 12.But guiltie made his offspring by his fal, Which puld in him the fruit which poysond all: Thus (Errour ruling Reasons sa∣cred raigne) False GODS, Imaginarie Good did faine
Iustly of skill, of will, of strength denude, To know, loue, follow, what was truely good. But O the bountie!GOD after the fall brake vp the light of the restoring and saving knowledge of CHRIST in the promise of the incarnati∣on of his word and wisdome O the boundles loue Of GOD, whom mercie no desert did move, Hee of his goodnesse willing to reclaime Those Rebells, objects vile of wrath and shame, Did with himselfe determine to bring backe, And His, wretcht Man, by double title, make, Restoring him to more, since his offence, Than he enjoyd in state of inno∣cence;Gen. 3.15. So bound himselfe by promise to this end A Womans Sonne vnto the world to send, A Man in wisdome Majestie and might Equall with GOD, to frustrate Sathans slight:
1. Iob. 3.8.The Serpents heade to breake, his works destroy, Lost happynesse that man might re-enjoy. But Sathan stroue by mis∣beliefe to de∣barre man from seeing this light. Iohn. 8.44. Gen. 4.The father of deceitt, hat ly∣ar bold, Now blinded Man in darknesse striues to hold▪ And with his Owne prevailing did pervert, And harden cursed Cains cruell heart, And such as hee, his misbeliving seede, Gods faithfull word and promise to diffide. God appointed sacrifices and oblations, as spectacles to helpe mans dimme sight to see Christ the Lambe slaine from the be∣ginning of the world.To help Mans weaknesse, GOD in offerings shew His holy Lambe set foorth to pub∣licke viewe, Him outward figures shadowing beneath: To manifest the vertue of his death. The Devill of all their Types the trueths did hide: But Sathan stroue to make MenMan made vpon the outward worke abide:
To et all labor'd (whom his sug∣red hooke,Gaze on the spectacles only and not looke through them to CHRIST. To swallow over he coud moue to looke,) Beyond the signes to their ap∣pointments end, That so for trueths men might on shads depend. GOD yet this mysterie to make more plaine,After the flood God made it yet more mani¦fest that his Sonne should be a man in∣carnat by ap∣paritions, and personall types. His Sonne for Mans redemption to bee slaine More clearly in the flesh to manifest, Good hopes to Man did giue, on which to rest, ToGen. 19. and. 32.24. Iosh. 5, 13. mortall eyes presenting now and than, The Worlds Redeemer in the shape of man. Now Sathan seeing hee did moyen lacke,But Sathan stroue to de∣stroy this light by inuenti∣on of images in Sems po∣steritie where the visible kirk was. CHRISTS comming in mans Nature to keepe backe, New slights assayde, and so his purpose wrought, That he, in Hebers house, (Sems ofspring) brought
ImagerieCompare Gen. 31.30. with the 34 and 53. verses of that cap. nixt Iosh. 24.2. and 14 15. last Ezek 20. from the 5 to the 10, and cap 23.3.14.19.21.27. of mettell, wood, and stone, Perswading those the safest means alone Gods knowledge both to haue and keepe acquird, Mans ouerthrow thus craftily conspird; Wonne to giue way thus to in∣ventions vaine, Abrahams stocke idolatrie did staine. FromGen. 12.4. GOD called foorth Abra∣ham frō the so¦cietie of Image worshipers. this contagious crew which thus did fall, TheRom. 4.11. father of the faithfull GOD did call, And (separat from their societie,) His Church did stablish in his familie. ByEzek. 20.7.8. But Sathan so farre preuai∣led with the world by this be wihing de∣vice, that eve¦rie age almost hee ensnared by imagerie the people of God, Abra∣hās offspring till the capti∣uitie of baby¦lon. Sathans arts by Egypts soule infection, Here yet ensued anone a new defection, Till e GOD brought foorth his people, did his law By f his owne finger on two tables drawe,
Midst flames promulgate; that no liuing soule, His will presume should after to controule; Yet base imagerie, in such a sort, Corrupted mans conceat did so transport, ThatIudg, 8, 33, ibid, 3, 7, and 10.13, Deut, 32, 15, Ier, 2, 13, &c euerie age almost, afresh they fell, Though plagued for this sinne did thus rebell, And on this fancie neuer ceasde to dotte, Till GOD made even with their deserts their lotte, Them (after heauy stroakes of his disdaine,) Delyuering to proud Tyrants to detaine In fearefull bondage, slauerie worse than death. In2, King, 24, 15, 2, Chron, 36, 17, Ester, 2, 6, Babell, mongst idolaters to breath, Hence Iewes (wee reade) did neuer image make, Loue, beare about, their God for such forsake.
But as they did of the Messiah heare, Did to the ancient Prophecies giue eare. When GOD had banished images out of his Church, Sathan labo∣red still to make men mis∣conceiue the promised Mes∣sias, so to mar the true know∣ledge of Him.Yet Sathans thoughts on evill ever fixd, Not ceassing his intent to follow, mixd With GODS pure Truth tradi∣tions, not a few, Which lasted till our LORD did all make new; And mongst GODS people, and peculiar race, For outward idols finding now no place, Wholly his slight extending did neglect No meanes, in minds an idole to erect: Of Many, whom his subtiltie did make GODS Oracles, the Prophecies mistake, To dreame that CHRIST should bee an earthly King, To Earthlings earthly dignities to bring,
Their EyesMath. 13.15. Isa. 6.10. lockt vp, giuen ov'r to Vanitie▪ GODS true spirituall meaning2. Cor 4.3.4 blynd to see, That Saducees secure, who nought did care, But things for present life, which vsefull were, Soules Immortalitie, the generall doome, TheActs. 23.8. Mat. 22.23. bodies rising fables durst presume Of cheieffe accompt, of speciall respect, Became with men, tho Atheists in effect: ThusAct. 23.6.7. Superstitious Pharysies, Prophane And Godlesse Saducees, (Religions staine) Did almost all the Iewish Church devide, (The Blinde giuen ouer to the Blinde to guide,At last Christ came himselfe that all might gett the right knowledge of Himselfe.) Till GOD in end, Man pittying thus misled, Sent in the flesh his CHRIST the plea to redde,
His mourning Saints to cheare these broils among, Which did for Israels consola∣tion long. Thus Man to GOD, Earth to conceale to Heaven, InEph. 1 10. Gal. 4.4. times full terme, by Him the SONNE was giuen. Hee to the world, did to this onely end, The expresseCal. 1.15. Image of his Per∣son send, In whom theHeb. 1.3. brightnesse of His Glory shind, Immortall GOD in mortall shape enshrind, Isa 9.6. Act. 20.28.True GODIo. 1.14. Heb. 2, 14. true MAN,1. Tim. 25. Heb. 9.15. a Media∣tor meet To GOD his Soueraine good, Man to vnite InPhil. 2.7. mans base shape, GOD thus made manifest, TheIo. 1.14. Word made flesh, to grace man repossest, GODS wisdome infinit, His1. Io. 4.9. Loue sinceere, Thus in the1 Tim. 2.5. Man CHRIST IESVS did appeare,
His Trueth vncomprehensible was than In Him made sensible to shallow man, Who saw in Him the Rays of Heavenly light, The viue Character of His paterne bright,. Which did not in His outward featurs shine, But in his doctrine,Heb. 1.3. life and works divine: Which did all eyes in admiration draw, That who the Sonne, the Father also saw.Iohn. 14, 9, But Sathan stroue that man should looke onely on his bodily shap and not looke through the vaile to his godhead dwel∣ing in the man Christ. Gainst this restoring of GODS knowledge true, Man to his GOD, in malice Sathan flew, And boldly dares renew the aun∣cient warre, With envy swolne this glorious worke to marre; Hee streight did stoppe Mans vn∣attentiue eare, That man should not His heavenly doctrine heare,
2. Cor. 4.4. math. 13.55. Mark 6.3.With foggie mists, with sinnes thick clouds He blinds, The mirror darke of world-dis∣tracted minds, That they no further than his out side pierce, The glorious beames His God∣head did disperse, In all his actions dazling so their sight, That with weake eyes they might no view this light; But Him disvaluing, Them who dearely lov'd, Iohn. 10.38.Nor with His life, not works, nor wondrs mov'd; They onely pore vpon His out∣ward frame, Philip. 2.7.Who in a seruants shape most meanly came, Cladde with our Natures imper∣fections fraile, Rom. 8.3.Inwrapt (as seemd) in sinfull fleshes vaile, Whom viewing with the cloudie eyes of sense, No wonder that the world con∣ceiud offence,
That Hee who came the world to saue alone, Thus to the world did proue a stumbling Stone.Rom. 9.33. Isa. 8.14. Thus did the Iews, thus Turks thus Heathens fall. Thus Saracens, thus Machometans all, Rejecting CHRIST cause mans basse shape He bare, Ly taken in the craftie hunters snaire. But CHRIST who came, lost mankind to reclame, Least this humilitie should marre his ayme, GOD in himselfe invisible to show, And manifest to Earthlings heere below, That Essence Infinit, Omnipo∣tent, Most Good, most Glorious, most Excellent, Did wonderfully in His Heavenly brest. (Tho never but in motion) ever rest,
To remed this error, Christ remoueth His bodily presence & causeth write His Na¦tures Offices, wordes, workes, life, death, and all that serued to salvation.Hee, his Apostles, Messengers divine, Pen-men, in whom pure Trueth vnstaind did shine Inspyrd, as Hee did by His Spreit endite, His birth, lyfe, death and testa∣ment to write, So that (tho Atheists this wovne coate would rend, GODS WORD by heavenly inspira¦tion pend,) What These, what His Evangelists record, Sweet straines, in sweetest harmo∣ny accord; Which holy ditements as a mir∣rour meete, Ioynd with the Prophesies in Him compleet, Might serue His Glorious Image to present, To such as sought Him with a pure intent, To make Him truely to salvation knowne, To all that loue Him, ev'n to all His owne.
In These His Pen-men whose skild penill drew,Onely the out¦ward shape & lineaments of His face and bodie, He will haue conceilld and not writ∣ten in scriptur Not his adulterat, but his pour∣trait true, In mirror of the Scriptures He imprents Vntouchd to leave His outward Lineaments, His bodies frame, the featurs of his face, To Him but common with fraile Adams race, Giues charge his person, pro∣perties to paint, The world with His life, doctrine death acquaint, His Natures offices, His wonders wrought, His suffrings, sayings; not omitting ought That to His praise, Mans profite might redound In all whats needefull to Saluation found, Which might our Faith confirme, our Loue inflame, Or paterne proue to which our Life to frame.
And this our LORD, did wiselie: for the sight, Of mans base shape, in Him, but dim'd the light Of GODS perfection, and did onely show, The fraile infirmities from flesh that flow. The bodily sight of the li∣neaments of our Lord his face and bodie was a stumb∣ling block to many that saw him: the rehear¦sall whereof in Scripture hee thought not expedient.And what of These, could the re∣cord haue wrought? What good His bodies just pro∣portion brought, Since, face to face injoyd, His li∣ving sight, As heere he did present an earthly wight, So little helpt the world in Him to view, Of GOD Invisible The Image true? At These the world did stumble: These espyde With natures twilight, millions made to slide. These were the barke, through which (with pleasing strife,) Illightned eyes did view the Tree of life:
These were the Caske, which peirc'd, sweet balme did yeeld That to an angrie GOD wretcht man conceild. These were the vaile the God-heads beames did hide, In Him did dwell and bodily abide,Coloss. 2.9. Which cloud to peirce, this Sunne which did withhold, Did all behooue, who view His Godhead would. These but the superfice, which cover did The richer substance of the Trea∣sures hidde Of knowledge deepe, of wise∣dome most profound, Of vnseene graces, which in Him were found.Christs bodily shape did not show what a one Hee was, much lesse is the faind shaddow of that shape, fit to show to vs what a one he either was on is. Thus what of CHRIST was set to outward sight (While seene on Earth of Hea∣ven to make vs right) His bodies shape, His lineaments of face, The featurs choice, which Him did chieflie grace,
Him to point foorth were equall in no sort, And what a one Hee was, to show came short: Againe, of what the Eye a-lyfe espyd, e, A lifelesse picture can no be denyed Yet short to come: for Painters doe not ayme The soule of Him, whose shape the hand doth frame To set in sight: They striue a∣lone to leaue His Bodies figure, whom they paint or graue, And that but for the present day or houre They did the Paterne see, but having pow'r, The Scripture onely is a fitt mirror where∣in we may gett a right sight of Iesus, and of what soever is to bee knowne of him for con∣fort and sal∣vation.Time, wrinkled age still hastning by degrees, Their arte to mock, which mock mistaken Eyes. But these vine draughts whose Heavenly luster shine, By arte most exquisite, in write divine
Not superficially his shape doe show, But solidly make vs our Saviour know; Not as our Image, but as GODS He bare, In our fraile Nature, Man as men wee are; Not in one Nature, but in both vnite, God-man conjoynd, a Sauiour com¦pleet, Not in one act, one case, or one estate, But from his birth, even to His lifes last date, From his descending to Earths lower parts, The Virgins wombe, this mirror bright imparts Him fully,He must there fore verse him selfe in Scrip∣ture who de∣sires to see Christ and not to be deluded with conceats of a false CHRIST. till He suffering did ascend, At GODS right hand to raigne, world without end. If CHRISTS true pourtrait truely then to see, Thou longst, the Scripture must thy mirror bee,
The Spirit (heere) thy LORD, then yeeres more old, What one He should bee, ere Hee came, foretold And, ere humanitie did Him in∣vest, His purtrait wonderfully (heere) exprest, For vs not onely serving on the stage, But all the Elect, since the worlds first age. The auncient Church did all in substance see, Know, loue, beleeve, enjoy, of Him what wee. Heere, as the Spirit in this mir∣ror cleare, Him singled foorth, His sight, by faith sinceere, Iohn. 8.56.Did patriarchs all and Prophets so enflame, In the old Test¦amēt you shall see Christ de∣scrbied as the Faithfull be∣fore His come∣ing saw him.That in His day they joyd before Hee came. Loe! heere the Iewish Church by Moses Law Conveend, His suffrings in some measure saw,
Him slaine for sinne, though dim∣ly to their view The torchlight of their Sacrifi∣ces shew: On Him they weakly, yet with pleasure deepe, Through lattices of Typs, and figures, peepe, And (as they may) behold, from this dark cloud, TheMal. 4.2 Sonne of righteousnesse, Himselfe vnshrowd, ThatIoh. 1.29 Apocal. 13.8 Lambe of GOD, that taks away sinnes staine, Ere world was made, who for the world was slaine, Feeding on Him their souls, as wee, by faith Thus to bee fred with vs, from endlesse wrath; Both1. Cor. 10.3. by one cuppe, by one spi∣rituall foode Refreshd, both sav'd by vertue of His blood. To see this ladder was toGen. 28.12. Ia∣cob given, From Earths low centre, reach∣ing highest Heaven,
Gen. 49.10.Till Shilo came who cleerly did impart, The Scepter should from Iudah neuer part, Iob. 19.25.Iob liu'd perswaded, while most deeply grieu'd, That for his safetie his Redeemer liu'd. Isa. 9.6.This Prince of peace, this coun∣seller most wise, The Father euerlasting, Blessed thrise, A Child of wounder, euen the GOD of might, Luke 2.32.Israels Glorie, and the Gentiles light, Esay foretold (aZach. 3.8. Isa. 11.1. branch of peere∣lesse worth,) From Iesses stemme, shall in the Flesh sprout forth, A King on whom the gouerne∣ment shall stay, Of all the world who shall the Scepter swey, A pow'rfull Prophet, by the LORD anointed, Good tydinges to the meeke to preach appointed,
Who shall bind vp, not breake the bruised reed,Ibid. 42.3. See the 53 cap. which is full of cleare Pro∣phesies of CHRIST. The weakely smoaking flaxe not quenche, but feed, Isra'ls Sweete singer did his straines accord, All to set forth the Glorie of this LORD, Whom Hee a Priest for euer doth detect,Psal. 110.4. After the order of Melchise∣decke, Him doth point forth,Psal. 22 7. now as expos'd to scorne, His hands,Psal. 22.16. and feet most pitifully torne, By lot his vestures parted,Ibid. 18. in his neede Made vinegar to drinke, on gall to feede,Psal. 69.21. Constraind to crye, with sense of horror shaken, My GOD, My GOD, why hast thou Mee forsaken?Psal. 22.1. Now as victoriously on high ascending,Psal. 68.18. Him twentie thousand thousand Angels tending,
A captiue making of captivitie, To His proclaiming peace, and libertie, The swelling pride of proude in∣sulters laid, HisPsal. 2. foes crusht downe, HisPsal. 110. Ier, 23.5. foot-stoole being made. Of this Eternall, ever budding Braunche 1. Chr. 11.17.To be raisd vp to David (who to quench, His burning thirst with Bethlems streams did long) The Spirit spoke by Ieremias tonge, Him setting forth a King, whose prosperous raigne Iustice and judgement should on Earth maintaine, Who Iudath save, who Israel should reclame, The Lord our Righteousnesse de∣signd by name. In short, no age did revelatioun lacke, CHRIST the Messiah manifest to make
From time to time, who by de∣grees of light, By Types or Prophecies was set in sight, Till from the Arke, the outward covering drawne. This glorious Day-starre in the flesh did dawne. Looke yet a little in this mir∣ror rare Predictions with accomplish∣ments compare,In the new Testament you shall see more clearely Christ revealed, than the Prophets sawe Him vn∣der the Law. With wonder ravisht, heere thou shalt behold, All done, what earst was to bee done, foretold, Of Typs, the clowdie Mysteries explaind Shadows sequestred, reall Truths attaind, The legall rites, the ceremoniall lawe By Him abolisht, who the vaile did draw Of CHRIST affording a more liuely sight, A clearer knowledge, and a nea∣rer light,
So that the tenderest sight, the weakest eye, Him now vnmasked in this glasse may see. For now the Spirit (Moses face vnvaild,) ALuke. 2.7. Babe presents Him,1. Cor 15.54 death and hell who quaild, TheDan. 7.9. Ancient of dayes a suck∣ling weake, WhoRom. 1.3. from His daughters bowells birth did take, An Infant,Iohn. 1.1. coeternall with his Sire, Whose1. Pet. 1.12. Incarnation Angels did admire, Prizd by the foolish with con∣tempt and scorne, Because a weakling of a weakling borne, In humble state, layd in an homelie stall,Luke. 2.7. To narow bounds confind, who boundeth all, The comfort crauing of Her Vir∣gine brest Who gaue Him birth (his wants by cryes exprest)
Borne and exposd at once to Ty∣rants spight, Constraind His lyfe to saue by secret flight,Mat. 2.14. Mat. 2.16. The stormie flood of bloodie Herods rage Let loose on  the equals of his age, Who to assure Himselfe of Him alone, Cruell to all, prou'd pitifull to none. Heere shalt thou see Him even while thus despisd, By Princes of the East, a Saviour prizd, His God-head who no sooner doe behold, But offering gifts of Incense, Myrrhe, and gold, Fall downe, adore,Mat. 2.11. Pictures can not describe that which the scriptures speake of Christ his in∣fancie. and to their LORD approue, Their faith, their hope, their loy∣altie and loue. Since costliest Crucifixes, Picturs none, Since crafts mans skill on mettall wood, nor stone,
This can so liuely to the Eye present, As doth His written Word and Testament, Why fondly then prefer phan∣tastick men The Gravers toole to the Apo∣stles penne? Luke 2.46.Hold on, thine eye fixe on His Youths sweet spring, Which doth faire buds of Pie∣tie forth bring, Inciting tymouslie our tender yeeres, To true devotion (since no act appeares, In which he provd to vs a Pre∣sident, The which was not for our in∣struction ment) Heere thou shalt find Him in the Temple sett,Luke. 2.46.47 And Heavenly knowledge from His child-hood gett, Israels doctours hearing Him de∣mand, Who at His doctrine all asto∣nishd stand,
Ravisht to see, yeeres so vnripe, admitt Such full perfection of a hoarie witt. But now, the Spirit doth in∣vite thine eye Thy Saviour drencht in Iordans streams to see: Loe,Luke. 2.21. Hee who formerly was cir∣cumcis'd, By His greatMath. 3.13 Mark. 1.8. Harbinger must be baptiz'd: Thus sanctifying by those seales divine, The auncient Church, the Church that was to shine: Those actions His pure bodie must endure, Which should haue force to clense our soules impure; Tho Him,Col. 2.9. in whom (vnseene) the Godhead raignd, NorHeb. 4.15 filth, nor fore-skinne of cor∣ruption staind, So that, except for vs, the LORD of life, Did need, nor streams, nor cir∣cumcising knife:
2, Cor, 5, 21,Yet sinne for vs himselfe hee made, that wee, In Him, the righteousnesse of GOD might bee, Mat, 4, Mark, 2, 12, Luk, 4, 1,Hence by the Spirit led, hold on thy pace, Thy SAVIOVRS footsteps to the deserts trace, There shalt thou view in single combat foyld, By proper armes, troad vnder foote and spoyld, 1, Pet, 5, 8, Apoc, 20.2,That pow'rfull Aduersare, the dragon old, Who to assaile the SONNE of GOD was bold. Fullnesse of grace when thou in him dost see Truth, mercie, pittie, loue, humi∣litie, All wisdome, meeknesse, patience, prudence, peace, Nothing can expresse Christ his growing age & variety of vertues ex∣cept the holie Scripture.Which in perfection but in him found place, No wonder then this Mirror thee amaze, Since in no corner Thou heereof canst gaze
Which doth no liuely set before thy sight A lanterne to thy lyfe, the LORD of light. Deluded soule, these who for∣sak'st to view, Of living waters in the fountaine true The Scripture, digging to thy selfe in vaine Such cisternes as no water can containe,Ier. 2.13. What can the Pencils most indu∣strious art, By pictures dumbe to Thee of these impart? But you (poore soules) beare not alone the blame, In others chiefly lyes the fault, the shame, Dumbe Doctors ceassing when for ease to preach, Or would not, or els could no peo∣ple teach, Least men by vse should loath, at length despise. Their often-mumbled matins, did devise,
Guyses to gaze on, showes mens soules to feed, An vncouth language for their dayly bread; To charme the Eare did mixe a sweete concent Of Melodie, by voice, by instru∣ment, With choise divisions of an hun∣dreth kinds, If picturs did decipher the corruption of the doctrine and life of Church-men als clearelie as the Scrip∣tures do, they should bee in lesse request among the Roman Cler∣gie.About to moue, and melt the hardest minds: Books turnd in blocks, blind do∣tards to delyte; These, they were sure, would neither bark nor bite, For did they teach the Trueth, their faults expose, As Scripturs, which their lewd∣nesse doe disclose, They surelie should such inter∣tainment lake, And (thrust to doores) the Scrip∣turs bonds partake, Which ly in fetters of an vn∣couth leid, Keept vp from sillie soules, which faine would read,
Claspt by authoritie, that on this booke Saue privileged persons none may looke, Because in this engrav'd, Christs portrait true Is by the Spirit set to publike view, Plainely proclaiming, what doth them displease, Crying a WOE to Scribes and Pharisees Faind Church-men,Called blind guids. Mat. 23.6. Luke 11 52. Mat. 23.13. Mat. 23.2. Ibid. 4. &c. Luke. 11.46 who pretend the faint to feed, By lanterne of GODS Word, weake soules to lead, Of knowledge key, them mean∣tyme doe debarre, So both their owne, and others entrie marre. Who set in Moses chaire, doe over-charge With grievous burdens, imposi∣tions large The Peoples backs, denying ev'n the aide, That by their little finger may be made.
Luke, 11.42.In lifelesse ceremonies most pre∣cise To seeme who studie, to obseruing eyes, Yet soules committed to their cure neglect, And truth and mercie hold in small respect. Who cloaking by Religious pretence The grossest sinne, the grievous∣est offence, Mat. 23.14. Mark. 12.40. Luke. 20.47.Devouring widowes houses, doe betray The innocent, poore Orphans make their prey. Mat. 23.27.Like painted Tombs who clense the vtter side, Where nought within but rotten bon's abide, To satisfie GODS Iustice daring stand, For works of Righteousnesse of Mens owne hand,Ibid. 28. To doe who care no, much de∣light to prat,Mat. 23.3. Ibid. 24. Ibid 15. Hudge Camels swallow straining at a gnat,
A Proselite to make who spare no paine, Whom, with themselues they adde to Sathans traine. Whom so Ambition blinds, so pride transports, That life and beeing them no more imports, Then tumide Titles, Greetings,Marke, 20.38 Luke, 11.43. caps and knees, Prioritie of place of all degrees, Harke how in all sorts Christ doth Sinne rebuke, In These but chieflie, set to ouer∣looke, His flockes, lights in the chayre of truth to shine, Call'd to dispense his mysteries divine, O with what care their sacred charge to tend, Doth hee vnto his watch-men recommend,Luke, 22.24. Warning least they should by ambition slyde,Mat. 20.25. By wordlie grandour, statelinesse or pride,
LORDLY dominion, Raines of Sov'raignetie, Prohibiting by them vsurp't should bee.Mat. 15.23 Mark. 7.7.89 Him thou mayst heare establi∣shing His word, A rule from which vnlawfull to to debord, In matter of Religion, worship true Of GOD in doctrine to Salvati∣on due; Traditions all rejecting, to this square (How old soever) which repug∣nant are. Lo! now He comes in flames of sirie zeale;Psal. 69.1 9. Mat. 21.12. Isa. 2.13.14. Flie, flie, O yee, who of His house make sale, Base Simonists beware, the LORD of LORDS Hasts with a whip, a lashing scourge of Cords, All mercenarie misers to ex∣pell Buyers and sellers from His house, to Hell.
With frequent warnings (now) He armes His owne, By future errors least they bee o'rethrowne. Of Hypocrits doth (now) vn∣maske the face, How ere their outsids shine with showes of grace, Cowsning the world with a pre∣tence of goode, (Their fruits neere comming fur∣ther than the bud,) Who, tho they Vice can deck in Vertues dye, Yet sile they can not His all∣seeing Eye. Such doctrins as be these, not motiues least Haue beene, to bring dumb I∣dols in request, CHRISTS speaking purtrait such haue put to peace, (This stocks and stones admitted to outface,) But hearken thou, to his sweet voice giue eare, From His owne mouth, thou by the Sprit shalt heare
The word of Trueth, Him pow∣ring foorth sweet streams Of living waters, to the soule that cleams Refreshment, feeling want, in feare to sterue, Such (heere) shall find, what may to saue them serve. O! view HimMath. 14.25. walking on the raging waues, TheMat. 8.26. winds rebuking, sinnes possessed slaues FromMark. 5.9. Legions of foule Spirits setting free, Mat. 9.25.The dead recalling to mortalitie: Yea;Ihon. 5.21.25. raising vp thy selfe from sinnes dark cave, AIohn. 11.44. Lazare, stinking in corrupti∣ons grave To see the danger, the deserved wrath The guilt, thy trembling soule lyes drencht beneath, By which if humbled, Hee shall comfort speake, Thy wounds bind vp, vnloade thy conscience weake,
Invite thee with thy burden to draw neere, Offring for thee the Fathers wrath to beare; Whom, that thou may'st from filth of sinne bee purg'd, Thou shalt behold arraign't, condemned, scourg'd, Sighing and groaning,Onely the scrip¦tures expresse CHRIST his miracles and passion. with thy burden prest, Expos'd to paines which can not be exprest, Weeping, and bleeding, suffering death for thee. O Love! O Pittie, in a strange degree! Now in this combat entring Him behold Of his sad passion, tryed as purest gold By fire dissolv'd, in which no drosse is found,Mat. 26.37. Deeplie afflicted, prostrat on the ground, The Garden watering with a Crimson flood,Luke. 22.44. From all his pores distilling streams of blood,
His Gloryes beames obscurd, His Might allayed, His Courage seeming quaild, His Strength decayed; Crusht downe with weight of GODS incumbing wrath, HisMat. 26.38. guiltlesse soule made hea∣vy to the death, Thy Crimes the cause, thy sinnes inunding speate, The meanes from Him which drew this bloudie sweate, Whom (notwithstanding) Hee did (so) esteeme, That all His suffrings did most pleasant seeme Thee, wretched wormeing, to redeeme from death. Perditions heyre, sinnes slaue, the child of wrath; To thee, the Fathers favour to acquire, Not shrinking to drinke off the dregs of ire. The Popish crucifixe doth but mocke & not expresse the sufferings of Christ.These bee the suffrings, counter∣fits which scorne, Which lyfeleffe draughts deface, but not adorne.
These be the suffrings, which per∣plexed soules Most sensibly conceiue, sunk deep in scrouls Of tender bleeding hearts, The only way, Most liuelie felt which make his Torments may; Who (heere) the dolors of his death engrosse, Best feele the fruicts and comforts of his crosse O wounderfull respect! O loue vnheard! O deare affection matcht with misregard! Loe, Hee who bought Man at so deare a rate, By Man is sold,Math. 26, 14, 15. Mark, 14, 10. Luk. 22.3. betrayd by Man vngrate, The traitors mouth, which flowd with fraud, with hate, His lips dare touch where found wasIsa, 53, 9, 1. Pet. 2, 21, Mat. 26, 50. no deceit:Luk. 22, 47, Friend whether comst thou? (Christ his friend yet is:) The SONE of MAN betrayst thou with a kisse?
Iohn. 18.6,Hee who those armed bands did cast to ground, Them, with his breath, all able to confound, With this soft speech, this grati∣ous checke alone, Doth wound, not wonne, the tray∣tors heart of stone. Mat. 26.52.See how Hee doth His forward∣nesse represse, Who preasd, by arms, this offred wrong redreesse, And healing instantlie the harme receav'd, Yet did not mease the causelesse spight, conceau'd In hardned hearts so farre from grace, from loue, That miracle, nor savour them can move. O see Him in a most opprobrious forme Mat. 26.56. Ibid, 27.2.Led hence, transported with this raging storme, Left by His owne, yeelding His conqur'ing hands, Thee to set free, to ignominious bands,
With lamps with lanterns led,Mat. 26.47. Iohn. 18.3. they apprehend The Sonne of truth,Ihon. 18.37. incarnate to this end, That glorious Beame of vncreated light, By flesh and bloode invaild, hid from their sight, Thus all foretold gainst actors of this Ill, Against themselves do perfitly fullfill. O Earth! O ashes who thy selfe turmoylst, And with vindictiue flams of furie boylst, Tormenting others, darst revenge, avouch, Vpon thy reputations slendrest touch, See, with what patience, with what silence deepe, While Iews disgrace vpon disgrace doe heape, Thy Sauiour,Esa. 50.6. Mat. 26.67. to the Smiters giues his backe, Doth from the Nippers not his cheeks keepe backe
To shame, to spitting, doth ex∣pose his face, The path not only pointing thou shouldst trace, But treading euerie steppe, hath taught the way, From which t'is shame, yea dan∣gerous to stray. Isa. 53.7. Act. 8.32 If 10000. pi∣ctures were forged, they shuld all come short in shwing that which the new Testament de∣clares of Christ cruci∣fied, yet Christs Testament is in small estem with many in comparison of a fond & fals picture. The BBLE sets not so well as the crucifixe doth, where poperie pre∣vailes.Loe in this hight of scorne, depth of disgrace, With cheare vnchang'de he dares his foes outface, Yet from his lips not one intem∣perat word, His mercilesse tormenters doth remord. CHRISTS Testament which these and all contains, That Hee did suffer, shame or outward paines, Needfull for Thee to know, in one small Booke Is found, on this in steade of pictures looke: This beare, this weare, this re∣verentlie reade, When read, at least attentiuelie take heede,
This doth make known the Will, the legacie, Which thy deare LORD a-dying left to thee. With this love-token Hee re∣membred hath, Each loue-sicke soule to Him be∣troathd by fayth, His loue thus showne, to kindle loue againe, That mutually love wee might intertaine; If Christ thy loue be then what hee hath left Nor let by wrong nor violence bee rest, But striue to know what written for thy well, With's owne deare blood thy louing LORD did seale. See our true Samson yeelding now at length,Iudg. 16.16. Spoild of the hayres of his vnmat∣ched strength, A bloodie butchrie suffering for thy sake, Stript naked, torne with whips, faint, pale and weake,Mat. 27.28,
The Souldiours mocking His en∣feebled might, Combining, in His torment, sport with spight, His offices all branding with reproch, Luk. 25.32.37With blasphemie Him charging, they encroch Vpon his Priest-hood with a bitter blow, Luke. 22.64.Now siling vp his eyes, Hee streight must show Who him did most with causlesse strips infest, As Prophet this by him must bee exprest: Mat. 27.29.Then, cloathd in purple, crownd with pricking thorne, As king, is made The object of their scorne. But ah! behold He comes: O heavie sight, Bright Eye of Heaven, O now shut vp thy light; Salt fountains all of tears be now enlarg't, Gen. 22.6.Weake Isaaks tender shoulders (loe) are charg't,
With wood, Himselfe to sacrifice prepar'd; Lo: neither is from shame Thy Saviour spar'd,Iohn. 19.17. From pressing loade of that dis∣gracefull Tree, The means appointed of his death to bee; See, faintlie staggring, how Hee grones beneath The pondrous weight of GODS incumbent wrath. O see the bloodie banner now display'd. The SONNE of GOD by Souldiours disarayed, Cladde only with our sinnes, In Garments red, The vine-presse of the Fathers Ire doth treade,Efar. 63.2.3. Fixt to the crosse, his hands, his feete transpierced, Exposd to paine, to horrors vnrehearsed, His gratious armes foorth streat∣ching all the day, To rebells walking in an evill way,Rome. 10.21. Es. 65.2,
Phil. 2.6.Who (GOD not robde) equalitie did plead, Deut. 21.23. Gal. 3.13,With robbers matcht, for thee a curse is made, And even to death, endures vpon the Crosse, In soule, in bodie, pains of sense, of losse. Mat. 27.46Heavens suted to their Makers mournefull state, Mask't vp with clouds, in their owne kinde regrait, Ibid. 51.Loe, Earth doth tremble, flintie Rocks doe rend, 52. ibid. 51Graves backe to light their sleep∣ing guests doe send, And loe, while ev'n his lifes last spunke is spent, The Temples vaile is to the bot∣tome rent. See, now through tears, how He himselfe presents, Col. 2.14.Nailling vnto his Crosse Thy oblishments, Cancelling those Inditements which did tye GODS wrath in iustice Thee to vnderly,
Resoluing more by sinning,Heb. 6.6. to abstaine To crucifie The LORD of life againe; On his owne death,Rom. 3.23. who freelie of his grace, Did ground thy life and euerlasting peace. THIS,In short their is nothing thou needst to know of Christ but all is in His testament and what more to search for, thou aspires, What faith can wish or what thy soule desires, The Spirit in this mirrour shall disclose, And to thy sight of Him as much expose, As may thy soule heereafter serue to saue, And guide thee (heere) with comfort to the graue, Except His inward vertues thou neglect, And but his outside carnally affect. This, GOD hath thought vn∣necessare to show, This farre vnnecessare for thee to know,
Sufficient that, which These who knew Him best, And best did know to make him knowne, exprest Haue left, enregistred in holy write, Which They did penne, GODS Spirite did endite. Thus hath the Lord his will most clearelie showne, Luke. 16.29. These who saw Christ with their bodilie eyes knew him not to be that Christ till hee opned their eyes to behold him in the scripturesBy other means refusing to bee knowne Then by his word alone, where faiths bright eye, His hidden graces may most liue∣lie see, So that (except this way) no knowledge true, Accrest of Him, vnto the outward viewe Of These, admitted in his humane state, To touch Him, ev'n with Him to drinke, to eate. THIS being then the course by God prescriv'd To Man, of other means of grace depriv'd,
To know the Sonne, and in the Sonne the Sire, The Sonne, concealler of the Fathers Ire,Col. 1.19.26 O judge what Spirit this great worke to marre,Christ to make men know him hath set foorth the Scriptures and hidden his bodilie shape But Sathan strives by meās of the Roman Clergie to ex∣presse his bodi∣lie shape which can not show Him and sup¦resse the scrip¦tures which might make Him knowne. This course to crosse, the Scrip∣tures would debarre And hide this Mirror, from the longing sight Of Soules, which faine would see this Sunne of light, Enjoyning such, this knowledge to attaine, By pictures false, or some resem∣blance vaine Of that externall shape, which GOD did hide, Least any in this fruitlesse search should slide? No Spirit doubtlesse els, but Hee, whose slight Seeks GOD and Man, to seuer day and night, With envy boyling, at mans good who griev'd, Hath ay a lyer and a Murtherer liv'd
Gen. 3.6.His point for once who gayning, seeks yet still, To disconforme man to his Ma∣kers will; Even Hee, who since his fall, with wondrous art, From GODS true worship man did still divert, 2. King 23.5.By whom to such prophanenesse mortals driv'ne, Haue worshipt Sunne, Moone, Starrs, the host of Heaven; 1. King. 11. Iudg 6.25. ibid. 3. 7. 2. King. 23.5.For Molech, Milcom, Baal, Ashtaroth, Who made the nations Gods true worship loath; Who Images of GOD, hath oft devysd, And Mens deluded fantasies en∣tysd A furtherance in GODS seruice to conceat, By means engendring his eternall hate; Exod. 32.Thus Aaron did the golden calf erect; Iudg. 27.These vaine surmises Micah did infect.
A house of GODS, a Levite to his Priest Who having This of blessings held no least; Of the Messias who possest Mans braine With fond conceats,The error of Christ his earthly King∣dome was so commonlie re∣ceiued that the Apostles were possessed with it & not delivered of it till after the Resurectioun, Act. 1. Imaginations vaine Before Hee came, that when in humble state, Not seconding their expectation great, Hee did a servants shape assume, whom they Conceiv'd, the scepter of the world should sway. An earthly Monarch, a trium∣phing King, Who by resistlesse force should freedome bring To their subjected state, Himselfe oppose To tyranizing pride of conqu'ring foes, Whom finding Other then they did surmise, With strong delusions led,2. Thes. 2, 11, the world agrees,
The true Messias cruellie to kill, Expecting their fore-fancied Saviour still: Although our LORD, inviting ost there view, In Scriptures to behold his paterne true, Which, holy Prophets livelie had exprest, Ere fleshes vaile His God-head did invest, Yet He, this Glasse who hid, their eyes did sile: His guiltlesse blood must needs their hands defile. The same is Hee, who trauells in excesse, Yet from the world the Scriptures to suppresse, And from the knowledge true of CHRIST therein, The world debarring keeps the world in sinne: Cous'ning poore people by deceit∣full slight, Of, paynters arte, affording false delight,
Filling their hands, robt of GODS sacred word, With pictures, from their paterns which debord, Which bold blasphemers, desti∣tute of shame, Now CHRIST, the holy Crucifixe now name. What Spirit els, except GODS auncient Foe, Would striue to hide what God hath meant to show? Or who, except alone that Spirit bold, That dare raike vp, which GOD¦ly buried would? What Spirit els the world to looke would let In that pure Mirror, whence faint soules might get Refreshment, by the sight of Him alone, Who in His word is seene, is rightlie knowne? Who els would sweate the mul∣titude to leade, By lying Images, GODS peace to pleade,
By which the world is rather led astray After dumb Idols in damnations way? Iudge then whom These, who willfull Agents bee, Antichristian hatred & the Spirit of Sa∣than may bee seene in these who blas∣pheme the Scripture, for if any man at Rome should say but the same of all the popes writ∣tings and the writtings of popish doctors which they say of the holie Scripture, hee should bee streight way declared a eni¦mie to the kirk of Rome, and put to death for a deuilish heretick.Patrons prophane of this impietie Doe serue, who superstitiouslie maintaine This forg'rie, Man in darknesse to detaine, The Romane Clergie, who of pow're too weake, The words pure light to make the world forsake, By craft doe cast about another way To dimme the luster of this Lamps cleare Raye, The holy Scripture branding with disgrace, Which to traditions they but se∣cond place, Making the world It, with a just neglect, Corrupt and poysond in the source suspect,
Impersyte, and in vulgare tongues to bee Translated, needlesse, not from danger free. Thus from foule mouths mali∣ciouslie they spew, Aginst the Scriptures not as∣persions few, Furthering the world (so farre as in them lyes,) GODS word as hard, yea hurt∣full, to despyse, Yet, CHRISTS pretended Image on the Crosse, Their leaden braines with super∣stition grosse Doth so distract, that This, they madly seeme, To honour more than Him did them redeeme, To which they teach, as CHRISTS Resemblance true, Religious worship, yea divyne is due, Yea that same worship, which to CHRIST they owe, If Hee Himselfe did personally showe.
The suppres∣sing of the com¦mon reading of the Scripture makes such way to all er¦rors, that the Romane cler∣gie rules secur∣lie and rainges over all king∣doms, coūtries, and commoun∣wealths, while they get place over Kings crowns, mens consciences their soules, bodies, lands, rents, and mo∣vables, and all at their plea∣sure.The Scripture thus defended from the Lay, Traditions vncontrold fynd patent way, Their Canons, constitutions, Popes decrees, False definitions, legends stuft with lyes, Doctrines deboarding from the written word With Scripture equall credite thus afford, Yea of the Scripture thou mayst nought beleeue, But in what sense the Pope is pleasd to giue: Thus, to the blinded worlds astonishment, Their Lying wonders with be∣leife they went, Thus from the People they their Errors hyde, Which, by the sharper sighted if espyd, The word withdrawne, their labour lighter is, To make them thinke they did decerne a-misse.
Thus must the People found their fayth on trust, For as their Church-men, so be∣lieue they must. This fyner threed doth to their arts-men giue, A net of merits, of good works to weave, By which they fish, (from such as may be brought, To apprehend that Heaven may thus bee bought, With excesse to maintayne Those who have charge, Of convents, cloisters) Rents, dot∣ations large, And if this fully doth no worke their end, A larger Net of Pennance they extend, From which to bee exem'd, they waird, they watch, The Rich-ones by Indulgences to catch, Who by their purse chuise rather to bee purgt, Then fast from flesh, then suffer to bee scourgt,
In one Church diverse, to a diverse end, Which men enabled with new meanes must tend. No wonder then they vrge a strict restraynt, Of Scripture, Seene, which would the World acquynt With these Imposturs, damnable deceats, Indang'ring vnder trust, so great Estates, Which if they licenc't were GODS Word to view. Should doubtlesse bide those for∣g'ries all adiew. Act. 19.24.For Images looke what did set on fire Popishs cruci∣fixes bring more gaines to the Popish craftesmen and Clargie, than the Ima∣ges of Diana, or any Idoll to the Crafts∣men of Ephes∣us.What earst did kindle the Ig∣noble Ire Of that EPHESIAN confused crew, All in a Mutinous concurse which flew, While of this Monster the sediti∣ous Head, Demetrius for Dianas shrines did plead,
What motives then did these in∣cense, the same, Place now for their Imagery doe clayme, Them stirring vp more turbulent, how much Their trade doth breed them greater gayne, then such. For but the mettels worth and crafts mens paynes, Did breed Ephesians answerable gaynes, But of their Picturs what the eye espyes, 'Tis nought; their worth in forme nor matter lyes, These valued are, on these the world doth doate, As Church-men holinesse to them alloate, As sacred vertue Men in them conceave, Which Pope or Prelate, at their pleasure gave, Thus by conceit, the Simple to entyse, These by opinion, not by worth who prise.
Thus doe they farre those Silver∣smiths out-flee, In witty traffiquing, in poli∣cy, Masking their avarice with grea∣ter slight, Than these who sold, but what they set in sight, Their consecrated Crucifixes be Most prisd for their supposed sanctitie. It is strange that their be∣ing so many pretended Crucifixes and sensible diffe∣rences betuixt everie one of them, yet men will beare it out that every one of them ar purtraits of Christ.But this in mee, moves great∣est admiration, Tho every day bring foorth a new creation Of these false pictures, an adulterat brood, So that in number, number they exclude, Yet all of them, though of a di∣verse frame, Each diffring from another, boldy clame, CHRIST vively to exhibite to the eye. Stretcht foorth to death vpon an abject tree;
So that, it seems more CHRISTS they either make, Or CHRIST doe for the damned thiefe mistake, Sith neither Gravers toole, nor Paynters arte, Doe other difference, saue in thoght impairt, Yet howsoeuer, whether This, or that They doe resemble, all of them they rate, And doe in as high estimation hold, (Though infinite in number) as of old, Ephesians did their One Palladium prise, Which they did fancie Iove sent downe from skyes. CHRISTS purtrate thus in Scripture is supprest,The Bible serues not for Poperie as fai∣ned Crucifixes doe and their∣fore sell the worse yea are thrust out of the Market. Lest their abuses It should mani∣fest, And lying Pictures in its place are thrust. Yet vnder colour of a reason Iust,
Since Images (say they) by silent speach, As bookes, the rude, the ignorant doe teach, Since Scripture to the vse of all, least free, Oft misconceiud doth, lead to here∣sie. The pretense of Images ser∣ving for books to the Laicks, answered.But who but poore deluded soules can trust, That Images, inventions but of dust, In teaching truth GODS sacred word doe match, That Scriptures serue but heresies to hatch? Shall Idols dumbe, be speaking Teachers prisd? Shall speaking scriptures be dumbe rules despisd? By Crafts-mans arte on mettle, woode, or stone, Shall CHRIST more lively to the world bee showne, Then by Their dytments who did him behold, And left His words, deeds, life, & death enrold?
If holy write some Impiously abuse, This to maintaine lewd heresies who chuse, Must guiltlesse soules, must people Innocent, Of their offence endure the pu∣nishment? Thus should wee shunne the Sunnes conforting light, Which (happily) hath hurt some stairing sight, Thus losse the comfort of GODS creatures goode, Since some that poysons which is others foode. If heresies (by which are most misled) In learned, but vnhallowed brayns are bred, Since hatcht, nor nurst by the simplicitie, Of vulgar braynes these deepe de∣lusions bee, Why then doe holy harmelesse peo∣ple smart, For heady Churchmens fault, without desart?
The 4 answer Mat. 21.16. & 42.If Error (which wee should as death despyse) Doth from not reading of the word aryse, Mat. 22.29.As CHRIST doth teach, why then (in Christs despight) To keepe from erring smother they this light? But all that to their minds doth disagree, Is repute Error, held for heresie; Though Peter, Paul, or Prophet did perswade, Though CHRIST Himself affirmd the contrare hade, Their words must either not bee hard at all, Or vnder Popish dispensation fall To passe for Scripture, so a sense receave, In other meaning than the Spirit gave A glosse the Text confounding quyte; because For Error all they hold that hurts their cause.
The Mirror pure,The scripture such a mirror to shew Christ that it changes the student in∣to the liknesse of Christ while there he be∣holdeth him by fayth. in which CHRISTS face doth shine The Scripture is, that register divyne Of holy write, that sacred saving Booke, In which our LORD hath licenc't vs to looke, Where, if wee labour earn'stly for His sight, The skailes of darknesse which our eyes be-night, He doth remove, and maks vs clearly see With open face, the beames of Majestie, And true Beholders by a manner strange,2. Cor. 3.18 Doth peece and peece in His owne likenesse change, And in this study as wee pro∣gresse make, Wee of the Glory which wee see partake, Changt in our soules by CHRISTS renuing grace,Exod. 34.29 As on the mount was changed Moses face.
Why doe they syle poore moc∣ked peoples sigh, CHRISTS face from viewing in this mirror bright?The impietie of suppressing the scripture. Why hinder they faynt sin-chargt soules to see, CHRIST whom they search for, where hee found may bee? The Spirits working which doth men renew, By means of this true sight, this inward view, The change of soules from sinne why doe they marre, Why saving knowledge from the world debarre? What helpe can all their pow'r∣lesse purtraits make, From forgers fancie which doe fashion take, Truely to teach CHRISTS Naturs, Essence, Will,, Or in CHRISTS Image men to change from ill? Shall Their false picturs, Cruci∣fixes faynd, CHRISTS Mirror bee (that sacred fountaine staind,)
In these or shall the Spirit men make see,Popish Cruci∣fixes doe marre the true know∣ledge of Christ and teach the people lies. Or what CHRIST is, or what themselves should bee, O three times impious! O blasphemous speach! These nought to lookers on but lyes do teach, And like themselves, their fa∣vourits they make, As heads they have,Psal. 115.8. Ibid. 5.6.7. & Psal. 135.15 but vnder∣standing lake, As mouths which speike no, feete which never move, As eyes that see no, yet doe set on love, And justly doe of wit, of sense bereave, Disciples all, such Teachers as be∣leave, Suffering themselues to bee debard the sight, Of holy write, which truely teach them might. Great is the miserie of man by Sinne, The Ignorance of GOD Man binds therin.Ephes. 4.18.
Christs incom∣parable love of mans sal∣vation hath set his wisdom (Luke 10, 22. Mat. 11.27. Iohn. 17.3.) on worke to de∣vyse the fittest means to make himselfe knowne to the world, and what his wis∣dome thought fittest for that end. his love hath mad him cairefully set downe in his testament, but no word of the lineaments of his face or shape of his bodie or pi∣ctures to ex∣presse it.The way to freedome from these heavy bands, In GODS true knowledge princi∣pally stands; GOD truely's knowne but in his Christ to none. And GOD in CHRIST who know fynd life alone. Now CHRIST, who onely GOD Himselfe who so, That man may GOD, Man must Himselfe make kno. The fittest meanes Himselfe to manifest, To His owne searchelesse wisdome knowne are best. Hee knows what neede wee of this knowledge have, And how without it nothing vs can save, And how the losse of Mankynd he doth beare, Doth by his Death, to bring vs life appeare. His loue to saue vs, Him who did despise, Did set on worke His wisdome to devise,
All Meanes which of Himselfe the knowledge pure And so of GOD, might to our soules procure, And so in Him bee reconceild, so fred From wrath, so to eternall life bee led: And what His Wisedome for our well devisd, His constant care, in holy write comprisd Hath left, the Meanes thus setting in our sight, Which of Himselfe the saving knowledge might Sufficiently disclose; Meanes onely meet To make Him knowne, Meanes in themselues compleet, Without the forg'ry hatcht in humane braine Of lying pictures, Crucifixes vaine, Which for His knowledge Hee hath thought vnfit, Since mongst His Meanes these He doth not admit.
Thus hath Hee not the Means alone prescriv'd, Which point Him foorth (Means in His Word contriv'd,) But All doth charge, who warm'd are with His loue, And Means to make Him rightly knowne would proue, To search the Scriptures, if for life they looke; In all mens hand CHRIST puts this saving Booke: This, Hee doth warrant, to eternitie, A constant witnesse of Himselfe to bee. But Picture-mongers, mad De∣metrius heires, Vnlawfull gayne to make of worth∣les wares, By other Means then CHRIST, to lead to Heaven, New bookes haue fayned, new directions given, Therefore the skarring of pe∣ople from the Scripture, and putting in their hands Images & pictures vnder whatsover pre¦tence, is a chalenging of Christ, either as witlesse or lovelesse or cairelesse who did not recom¦mend in his testament such a meane as they aledge the artificiall crucifixe to be.Poore simple Laikes (they in substance say,) By searching of the Scriptures erre yee may,
Pictures are plaine, these harmelesse bookes doe show What needfull is for you of Christ to know, In Scripture darke t'is dangerous to prye, Such curious search concernes not you to trye. Thus Impudently teach the world they dare, That both vnfit and vnsufficient are CHRISTS Means; their owne devices more import The well and safety of the weaker sort. Thus argue they of Ignorance our LORD, The Means most fitting, who could not afford, Of Envie, means who would not recommend, Which choysen, most might to our safetie tend Of Carelesnesse, sith He forgot to give Charge, in his Latter-Will these meanes to leave,
For peoples Well thus will they seame to be More Wise, more Loving Care∣fuller than Hee. What else is this, by a pretence to teach CHRISTS knowledge, but Christs knowledge to empeach, By faining a false Christ, to barre the way By which the True attayne wee only may Who, not attaind, GOD neither can wee know, Since GOD in Him alone Him∣selfe doth show? Thus are the bonds of Mans most wretcht estate By Nature, straitned by the Devils deceate. Albeit civile Images for civile vse bee lawfull, yet no religious I∣mages of mans device for re∣ligious vse are lawfull.Let civile Images, for civile vse Haue place, we challenge only the abuse. That paynters Pencil pleasure doe impart Wee hinder no, let crafts-men vse their arte:
But howsoever humane wit de∣bord, GOD in Religion must alone bee LORD.Exod. 19.18. While from Mount Sinai Hee the Moral Law Promulgate did,The 2 commād of the first Table, which is the law for re∣ligion, expresly forbids relig∣ious Images of mans de∣vice. (where Him no mortall saw) Incompast all about with flames of fire, As Royall Roabs which Majestie attire, Hee, onely as His owne Prerogatiue, Did, of Religion, plead the Rule to giue, And Man, (with vaine presump∣tion swolne) at large Madly with This to meddle doth discharge, Binding His hands, by words expresse and plaine,Deut. 4.15. Exod. 20.22. We may make a Image which resembles Something, but not an Idole which resem∣bles Nothing, sayes the Papist: no says the Lord, you shall not make the liknesse of any thing in Heaven. &c. Deut. 4, 23. Of Him, no foolish Counterfit to faine, No Image, for Religious vse, to make, Of ought, in Heaven or earth did being take;
Nor made, to honour, with the least respect, Save They with Him their Co∣venant would breake, Kindling gainst them His iealousie most just, Rankt as Adult'rers, (from His service thrust) Who, worship with Him, or be∣syde Him, gave, To others, due for Him alone to have. Thus GOD hath banisht, from Religions bounds Exod. 23.24, & 34.13.This worship vaine, His worship which confounds, All vse of Images, by Man de∣vysd, 2. Thes. 2.3.4. Why may not the people and the Church a∣point Images sayes the pa∣pist. I am the Lord says God, that is, It is Gods Royall prerogatiue to apoint the meanes of his owne Honour.To GOD Man hatefull rendring and despysd. But Hee who doth exalt Him∣selfe to raigne, Of Princes all Monarchick So∣veraigne, That Man of Sinne, perditions Sonne, the slave Of Sathan, yet pretends CHRISTS place to have,
Dare gainst this Law most Impu∣dently stand, And GODS great VETO boldly counter-mand. Of GOD, of Man, hee Images dare make,Why may wee not give some Religious wor∣ship & honour to Images say∣eth the papist. I am a Ielous God sayes the Lord, that is, Religious wor∣ship is due only to God the hus¦band of the Church, what¦soever is given to another is adulterie, that is Idolatrie & provoks Gods Ielousie. Our fore-fa∣thers vsed Ima¦ges sayes the papist, I will visit the sinnes of the fathers vpon the chil∣dren sayes the LORD. Thus Mocketh CHRIST, even suffring for our sake; To these, Religious worship Hee allowes, And This their Due most shame∣lessly avowes. Whyle of this Rav'ry wee a reason crave, O how themselves they will∣fully deceave! The custome of their Fathers They pretend, The love of GOD, of CHRIST, this is the end Why they Their purtraits re∣verently respect Whose persons They so dearely did affect. But O weake shifts! pretences worthy tears! Evasions serving more to mocke the eares,
We make and honour Images out of loue to God, sayes the papist, They hate mee that keepes not my commandemēt sayes the Lord.Of simple Hearers, than this Er∣ror vaine With meanest show of reason to maintaine. Gods Law most clearely these de∣tects: the same Excuses for this foolishnesse they frame Which clearely are condemnd, (shifts farre amisse,) When the Church of Rome scraipt out the 2 command out of the vulgare books, & made two of the 10 Command, they saw that their Images could not abyd the assise of Gods law.In that Command which Rankt the Second is: Which, GOD of purpose, gainst this Sinne did place, This wickednesse so staring in the face, That when heereof, they can not stand in sight, Accusd, convinc't by their owne conscience light, To burie It from vulgare eyes they striue, And this of place amongst the Ten depriue, Braunching the Tent in twaine; to hide the thift, Vsing a shamelesse sacrilegious shift,
Least seene the people should these snares forsake, Layde (doubtlesse by the devill) their soules to take. Thus, though our LORD,To elude Gods Law Image lovers haue vsed as (they yet vse) many pretences, but notwithstand∣ing of them all, God reiects this invention refts, it con∣demnes, and curses both it and the main¦tainers of it. as a religious Meane, Condemned hath to Images to leane, Yet still doe Image-doatars GODS decreit Striue to make Irrite, as vnjust, vnmeet, Thus pleading profite to the Sim∣pler sort, Who come of knowledge by the Scripture short But by the Eye Inform'd, are brought in mynd, Of what by These they repre∣sented fynd. But harke O fondling, who thy GOD dost faine, GOD by his Spirit cals this custome vaine.Ierem. 10.3. Those creatures of thine owne, nor care, nor feare Thou needst, which Thee can neither see nor heare.
Ier. 10.8.How foolish they who doe on such depend, v. 5.Which neither Friend can help nor Foe offend? v. 8.The Stocke which GOD they to resemble frame, Doth doctrines but of vanity proclame. v. 11.These perish shall from Earth, from vnder Heaven, Their Founders to confusion shall bee driuen, Whose arte but Error serves to vnderproppe,v. 14. Whose worke is falshoode, forgt in Sathans shoppe. This foolish Toy, this hell-de∣vised slight, Men charming with a naturall delight, Loe, GOD doth scorne, the work∣mans fruitlesse paynes, The zeale poore people which hood-winkt detaynes, Him seeking whose pure worship they professe, By some Resemblance fondly to expresse.If. 40.18.19.20.
GOD to a dispute challengeth in end,Isa. 4.20. Such as dare graven Images defend, Deluded soules and blinded by deceate GOD proves them, who trans∣ported with this spaite Of madnesse, basely doe crouch downe before The crafts-mans worke; which ought to have no more Respect, then as much mettell, timber, stone, Appointed for the basest vse,Is. 44.9.10. or none. Hee laughs to heading their con∣ceats, to see, What lavish chairges spent in Making bee, In Consecrating, what obsequious care, What Superstition, straitning Sathans snaire, What base Devotion madly they bequeath Vnto their Idoles, which, (tho voyde of breath,)
On shoulders mounted they on high doe reare, Isa. 46.5.6.7And in ridiculous Procession beare. Let blind Idolaters with Er∣rors streame Transported headlong, vse and pro¦fite dreame, Isa. 44.9.By these devices; GOD professeth plaine, Hee knows no profite by these Meanes profaine, Meanes to bee made vnworthy, Meanes to trust Intolerable; teaching lyes to Dust, Whence beeing they did take. The Curse of Woe, Of Ʋengeance, thundred foorth they vndergoe, Hab. 2.18.19.20Who Prayers sweete perfume to such present, Whom words nor vows can with or wants acquent. Cursd by the Law, is Hee, who toole doth take Deut. 27.15.Or grav'ne, or molten Image for to make,
GOD this abhominably to dis∣grace. Cursd, for devotion, who in secret place, The Crafts-mans worke, GODS worship to confound Set vp, the People all Amen re∣sound. Harke,Psal. 97.7. how the Prophet doth confusion threat, A Curse denunceth both to Meane and Great, That boast of Idols, Images doe serue. The reason why Such do this curse deserue,Rom. 1.23. Saint Paule expresseth. For, from GOD estraingt His Glory Incorruptible, trans∣changt By them into an Image, made in all, Like Man corruptible, proclive to fall, They even GODS Trueth,25. have turned in a Lie, Ascribing worship, in more high degrie,
Vnto the Creature subject to decay, Than the CREATOR, who is blest for ay. Obiection. But O sayeth the papist I find my affect∣ion stirred & my devotion helped by Ima∣ges & name∣lie the arti∣ficiall Cruci∣fixe. This pretence answered,Yet notwithstanding all, Some dare avouch, That while before a Crucifixe they crouch, Or on a well done Image fixe their eye, Their frozen Zeale they fynd en∣flamt to bee, Their half-dead Faith reviv'd, their faynting Loue To CHRIST, incitements wonder∣full to prove, Passions of joy, of feare, of griefe increst, Fitting to further their devotion best, So, though the world, (they open∣ly avow,) Though all authoritie these disallow, Which in their brests such strange effects doe bread, And whence such motions of the Sp'rit, procead,
They can not bee induc't, so much as doubt, But GOD aproves, even to bee borne about, Sollicitously keept, devoutely kist, To bee falne downe before, these Means most blest, Means, of that worship worthy held to bee Even due to CHRIST; though not in like degree. But O Blind soules these folyes which frequent,Affections and motions accom¦panying Image worshiping, are but the who∣rish allurments of the spirit of idolatrie. If with GODS will yee truely were acquent, In holy write reveald, and did be∣lieve, These Means suspition should not faile to give; Thus narrowly yee should, that Serpents slight, Examine,Cor. 16.14. in an Angel changt of light, GODS Spirit counterfitting, whose deceat, Vnder pretence of peace procuring hate
By bastard Motions of the minde doth make, Deluded soules grosse Lyes for Truths mistake. 'Tis most absurd, even in the least degree, To thinke GODS Word, and Spirit disagree, This, striving to restraine and stop the way, That, grounds to this impiety to lay. GODS holy Spirit by no other Meanes Doth worke, but such as GOD Himselfe ordaines, What ever superstitious dotards dreame, Forbidden Meanes He hates; and these by name. A contrair Spirit then This hold wee must, Insinuating Himselfe to settell trust In the deluded soules of such, as find Such seeing-sacred-Motions of the mind,
Warming with woontlesse flames their frozen hearts, Enveigling mans conceit with won∣drous arts. These (doubtlesse) must the whoorish Motions bee, Even of the Spirite of Idolatrie; The fire of worship false: enty∣sing traines Layd by that crafty Foe, who spairs no paines Wretcht Man to make vnlawful∣ly delite In what GOD most condemns, in sacred write. Such were the Motions Iewes made daunce for joy Before the Calfe,Exod. 32.19. Deut. 9.21. Exod. 32.2 which Moses did destroy. Such, made the Prophet by those Tribs contemnd,1. King. 13. In Dan and Bethell, who their calues condemnd. Such earst (wee reade) was the deluding dreame, Made Micah happy in his owne esteeme.Iudg. 17.13.
Such vncouth flames made men the Temple leaue Worship toDeut. 7.5. & 12.3. Images in groaues to giue. Such zeale made Israelits of sense denude, BatheIsa. 57.5. Deut. 12.31. Levit. 20.1. Ibid. 18.21. Molechs Image with their childrens blood. The Devill, who Them did to this madnesse driue As subtile now as earst, is yet aliue: And still goth on, by all the craft hee can, From service of the Living GOD, fond man To tempt, Spirituall whordome to commit With Idols dombe: who, desti∣tute of wit With the inchaunting Motions of the minde Is charmd, in Scripture which no warrant finde. Though Motions follow not Mean vsd in Faith Which for His service GOD ap∣pointed hath
As men would haue, or in their hearts project, Yet such (wee find) haue ever good effect. But Motions which without GODS Meanes doe worke Are still to be suspect: the Snaike doth lurk Beneath the blooming flowre: the deadliest blow Is to bee fear'd from a disguised foe. Who so, come by such Motions, can not flee By Sathans snaires but must en∣tangled be.Isa. 53.2. Before Christ came, Isaiah prophesied that Christ should neither have forme nor com¦lines for which we should loue Him. There∣fore the lying resemblance of our Lords form in the artifici∣all Crucifixe, must haue los∣ser force. By GODS Prophetick Spirit when inspird Isaiah CHRIST made (long ere seene) admir'd, Nor Forme, nor Comelinesse hee did foretell Should make His outward feature to excell, No beauty admiration to moue. For which, wee should Him or de∣sire, or loue.
And so it did succeed: for, who by sight Of His externall shape, Him knew a-right To bee the CHRIST, who Man to God conceald, Math. 16.17.Such thing of Him, nor flesh, nor blood reveald. Since CHRISTS true lineaments set to the eye (Which any Painter could haue wisht to see) The bodily beholding of our LORD, So little force, or furtherance did afforde, To kindle Mens affections, or to draw Whom even the Princ'pall, not the Purtrait saw To His obedience; O what mad∣nesse then What fury strange doth fill the braines of Men, With dreams deluded, fondly to conceate, That lying Pictures are of powre more great?
That counterfites of His exterior frame, Zeale can make servent, or with loue enflame? As greater vertue did from Pictures flow Then Persons presence they are set to show? Since of a Servants shape, the outward sight, Which in the flesh did clowde CHRISTS Heavenly light Did, nor with Motions nat'rall, nor divine, Make men to loue, or seeke to Him, incline, Shall Motions by this Shaps vaine picture wrought Iustly, or nat'rall, or divine be thought? No certaine: else the Crafts-mans toole should proue On wood, or stone more forcible to moue Then GODS owne hand, CHRISTS frame, and featurs true On superfice of humane flesh which drew.
Faith in Christ is necessar, the seing of Christ bodily is not necessar, far∣lesse is the false counterfitting of His shape necessar.How ever Men conceate that Faith, by sight Is fostred; thus that loues decay∣ing might Is quickned, yet CHRIST doth the blessing giue To such as haue not seene and doe beleeue. The artificiall Crucifixe is a fleshly meane to know Christ after the flesh, which the A∣postle doth reiectAfter the flesh Paul CHRIST refusd to know Resolv'd Him thus no more, if e∣ver so: How should these Means of know∣ledge then content After the flesh CHRIST made to represent? Naturall con∣siderations of the art of pain∣ting, or gra∣ving, may show the artificiall Crucifixe to be but the mock∣age of the World.BVT, of these Pictures, poys∣ning not a-few With Error, yet to take a nea∣rer view, Each Image should bee like its Patterne made, From imitating which, it name doth pleade, And if heereof it no resemblance leaue Beholders Eyes, it serues but to deceaue.
The Painter then the Prototype must see, Which in his brest must first en∣graved bee Before his Pensill, with deserved praise, Can with its semblance ravisht Eyes amaze. The Shape, the Lineaments, the Features right His fantasie must apprehend by sight His hand directing, as hee did con∣ceaue A viue impression to the Eye to leaue, Els both deluded is His simple braine And Men but mocked with an Idole vaine. For, of the Patterne if though Ignorance, A bleare-eyed Leah hee should draw by chaunce, A traytrous Iudas, being of in∣tent Rachels, or Peters purtrait to pre∣sent,
Needs force the picture (yet) of that must bee Which it most liuely sets before the Eye. Though Hee His work should cristen with the Name Proper to that to make which was His aime, Yet must it bee that which it true∣ly is, Not what proposd it was, though nam'd amisse. Tho with Apelles skill, Men now should striue Pictures, procuring wonder, to contriue, If from the Patterne diffring, wrought by guesse, What serue they, fruitlesly but to expresse And (valued though with vnde∣served worth) Conceptions but fantastick to set forth? Since these (how ever by opinion great) Yet births abortiue of some vaine conceate,
What can they els bee but resem∣ble though, The fond Imagination them which wrought? Though Popish Church should au∣thorize the Dead Church, Painter, picture, All to Error lead. For, as the braine the Patterne doth conceaue So doth the Image-Maker paint or graue: The Patterns faynd Idaea, in his braine First must bee forg't, next the im∣pression vaine Not of the Patterne, but of His conceate, (A fantasie, hatcht in his head of late) Finds on the Table, or the mettall, place, As arte can his Imagination trace; Thus, hold wee must each Image of this kinde, The first Resemblance of the crafts-mans minde.The definition of an Image made by arte.
How falsly then doth a mis-sha∣pen masse Of mettall for our SAVIOURS Image passe How fondlie men perplexe them∣selues to mixe Colours most fit to frame a cru∣cifixe? Which when perfited by the best of arte The most accomplisht Crafts-men can imparte In no respect with CHRIRT re∣semblance hath Triumphing on the Crosse o're Hell, o're death, No not so much as in His out∣ward frame By lines which they to counter∣fit doe clame.The artificiall Crucifixe hath no ground but the Crafts-mans guesse, seing never one that drew Christs pur∣trait saw the true Paterne. For, nor the Paterne blessd the Crafts-mans Eye CHRISTS living face who did no living see, Nor saw He Any who could show by speach And of our LORD the features truely teach,
But as conceate him ledde, hee boldly gues't, And, as the Blind-man casts his staffe, exprest Vpon his table: meerly igno∣rant Whether in shape, this new-cre∣ated Saint Lookt liker CHRIST, or either of those twaine Like shamefull death who did with CHRIST sustaine. But (to giue place to trueth) it lookes like neither, But, as the Child resemble doth the father, This new-borne issue of the crafts-mans braine, Got by imagination, hatcht for gaine, Like to the fancie of his fond con∣ceate Who brought it forth, with paine, with labour great, Must only be supposd; An IDOL right By Romish definition; (else but slight)
The Semblance of a thing but faind to bee, Which no subsistance hath essenti∣ally. Put case, a Painter, for a proofe of arte, Three pictures did most exquisite imparte, Of Men, streatchd foorth vpon the crosse to death,When the Crafts-Man hath made the portrate of a crucified man, it is at his plea¦sure to appoint it for a picture of one of the thieues cruci∣fied with CHRIST, or of Christ, with the change of some draughts as he thinketh meete. This Master-peece while he ac∣complisht hath Is't not to his arbitriment left free By CHRIST to cristen any of the three? Or, at his pleasure, all three theeues to make, Resolving (least they company should lake) Three other Christs to forge? or, to affixe The Superscription of CHRISTS Crucifixe Aboue the purtrait of a Thiefe of late, (Adjudged so at least in his conceate)
It calling Christ? or, if hee rather please The superscription new affixt to raise So make his Christ a Thiese, for some wrong draught Which nearer observation him hath taught, Can Pope, Priest, Prelate, alter his decree? Which hee thinks fit, that Picture Christs must be. His Word must for a sentence stable stand, What Hee determins, none can countermand, None can His worke controule. For, if the sight, The Iudge which onely can de∣cerne aright Of Picturs, never hath the Pat∣terne spyed How can in such the grossest faults be tryed? Sense, lacking thus a rule to cen∣sure by In vaine, but in the Painters arte doth pry.
What greater Glory set they to o view Then to the basest Malefactor  due, That on a gibbet, e're depriv'd  breath Endurd like shamefull execrabl death? Christ crucifi∣ed was quick∣ning, and con∣verting soules, & conquering principalities, and powers. The artifici∣all Crucifixe faines a Christ as dead as the drosse of which it doth subsist.True CHRIST, to death whil yeelding on the crosse, (Life to giue life content ev' life to losse) Though dead for vs, at all wh could no die, Ceast never living LORD of li to bee Quickning, converting, strength¦ning Soules, even then When seeming most contemp¦ble to Men While Bodies, long agoe con∣sumd in graue Raisd by His pow'r, of Him twice life receaue. How doe their Crucifixes this expresse Than a Triumphing CHRIST like nothing lesse?
Of their owne Patterns (yet) true shads they are, Viue Idols of a lifelesse Corps, as farre From any force in working, by their view, Or bodyes to raise vp, or soules renew As is the basest Earth, or fondest braine, Which first gave birth to these Inventions vaine. Christs Bodie (farre above our sin-tost Masse,Christs bodie was ioined in personall vni∣on with the Godhead. The Popish cruci∣fixe faines a Christ whose body is sepa∣rate from the Godhead.) Not of an onely Man the Body was But of that peerlesse Lord, true God, true Man, Whose neare conjunction sunder nothing can, Whose humane soule, though from it's mansion forc'd, Vpon the crosse by painefull death divorc'd, Yet in the God-head, even o'recome by death The Body Being had, while robt of breath,
Which, lying even in graue, His soule possest In highest Heavens, that Paradise of rest, Inviolable yet the Ʋnion stoode; Nor Heaven, nor Earth (one mi∣nute) could seclude The Godhead from the Man-hood, life, nor death, Nor hellish horror, nor the sense of wrath Could hinder, still (yet so as none can tell) Col. 2.9.The Godhead bodily in Christ to dwell: Which caus'd, (though buried hee behov'd to bee) Psal 16.8.9. Act. 2.27.GODS Holy-One, corruption not to see, Preserving thus (while dead, in coffin layde, By putrefaction, as all flesh, to fade) More pow'rfully the Body of our LORD Than all the means the world could els afford
What madnesse then to thinke (though painters arte Some shadow of Mans Body can impart, Which from its soule may sev'red bee by death, And turnd in dust, while banished from breath,) That by the pensill, may resem∣bled bee The Sonne of Man, the GOD of Majestie? Who, having once a mortall shape assum'd, Can, (without danger) never bee presum'd, That from his Manhood (not in any cace) His Godhead to dis-vnion can give place. If this wee should (of this as who may doubt?) How madde are Men, who fond∣ly goe about Their Crucifixes false, means to to appoint, CHRISTS Body blest, without the Godhead joynt,
To represent; and set before the Eye The artificiall Crucifixe teacheth a Christ who is only man, or whose two na∣turs are not vnite, or who hath two Per∣sons, as the old heritickes did.CHRIST-Man, cut short of divine Majestie; The Word made flesh denying, or in death Loosing that Vnion, lasting but with breath; Or, faining such a CHRIST, a Onely Man Even by it selfe subsist whose Body can; Or, of one Nature, or of Persons twaine, A CHRIST Imaginary, therefore vaine; Injuring thus those ever-blessed Three, That Trinall One, which was, is, ay shall bee, Thus venting blasphemies against our Lord, Whose soule abhorreth thus to be ador'd, Is 42 8.48.11And whom His Glory and His Praise to giue To graven Images, doth highly grieue.
CHRISTS Image mockt thus by audacious hands,Christs Imag stands in righ¦teousnesse and holinesse, and can not be seen with bodilie eyes. In Righteousnesse and Holinesse which stands, The object of the soules spirituall eye By Carnall sight can not discerned bee: And,If it be a filthy dishonor to li∣ken the worke of mans hands to God the fa∣ther. It is no les disgrace to liken the work of mans hands to God the Son. as no meane presumption 'tis in Man To liken ought his weake inven∣tion can Produce, to GOD, Beginner, Vnbegunne, So to set foorth his Ever-procreat Sonne, In nothing to his great Begetter lesse, By ought or toole or pensil can expresse, No lesser madnesse: if wee GOD esteeme,Christs abais∣ing of himselfe giues not liber¦tie to man to abase him more, but obli∣geth rather to honour Him the more. That Holy One who did the world redeeme, Who, though for vs, His Glory layde asyde, Did meanly in mortalitie abyde,
Should wee, Himselfe cause hum∣bling, more neglect, Or should his Man-hood, breed him lesse respect? Though painters lines might possi∣blie present His Counterfite as Hee with shame was shent,Put case it were possible to find out Christs Linea∣ments, and to expresse them by art, yet still the glorie of His person dis∣charges to doe Him such dis∣grace as to liken Him to the worke of mans hands. And of his Servants-shape some shadow leaue, (Or ayming so, at least the world deceaue) Doth possibilitie a warrant plead, Or to excuse or Iustifie this deed, Since every Sinne hath possibilitie, But none for this as lawfull held may bee? In humane Shape, if GOD the Fathers saw Yet no Resemblance durst pre∣sume to draw, Why rather now, since Flesh the Word assumd, May GOD by Man to bee drawne foorth presumd?
Sith that the Law, this madnesse to restraine, Midst flames of fire was not gi∣ven foorth in vaine, Nor now is made lesse valide than before A Mortall vaile the King of Glory wore.1. Cor. 2.8. If not Apostles durst transgresse this law,The Apostles durst not, nor would not draw his pur∣trait much les should a pro∣faine Crafts-man. Nor cause draw foorth or grave the Shape they saw; If none of all Our Lords obsequi∣ous Trayne, His Will durst write, but whom Hee did ordaine Beyond commission;None may preach Christ without a calling from Christ, much lesse make fai∣ned pictures of Christ. ev'n if none of Those That wrote, His Shape might to the World expose; If none may, by Himselfe, this honour reach Except by CHRIST thrust foorth CHRIST yet to preach, Shall it to painters only bee left free, CHRISTS shape and Lineament to falsifie
Even though no warrant doth their worke invite, Nor having seene what to set foorth they sweate. 'Tis like those dreamers, who poore soules deceaue, CHRIST Crucifi'd ne're right considred haue, Whyle once for all, and Once for ay our Lord, Ne're more to bee repeated, did afford Himselfe a living Sacrifice for Sinne, Christ would not bee seene to suffer but once, but will bee heard to have suffred ever His suf∣frings He will have set before the eye of the minde by His owne ordinances of Word and Sacrament, but not to the bodi¦lie eye by mans invention.Vpon the Crosse, lost Man from hell to winne, Himselfe Hee did expose to suffer death, Shame, paine, and dolour, ev'n the Fathers wrath, No more to bee the object of the Eye, Though by the Eare oft crucified to bee. As deaths tormenting throw's, as sense of payne, Hee for a season was but to sustaine,
So was the Shame which Naked∣nesse did give, Not all his other suffrings to to sur-vive. When therefore having (mortalls to reclame,) Sufficientlie now suffred open shame, Even at mid-day Hee drew the vaile of night, About His naked Bodie, so the sight Of gazing eyes (with clowds eclipsd) did stay, Enlighning Some,Christ dark∣ned the Sunne and made it as Night at Mid-Day while He was suffring, to show that hee would not have men to gaze vpon his naked bodie after hee had suffred suffi∣cient shame The Popish Crucifixes doe crosse Christs purpose. who midst those mists did stray, Them making see, while weakest made, His Might, Sinnes clowds dispel'd, which did their soules benight. But (loe) Their antichristian Crucifixe With vaine Inventions who Gods worship mixe, Serves to no other end, but as it may, CHRITS Body naked to the eye to lay,
And to expose His long-past Shame to sight, Hiding the Glorious vaile of darkned light, By which more honord was that Prince of Peace Than Nakednesse, or Iews did Him disgrace. CHRIST, of the Cover Hee drew on, they striue (Though all in vaine) thus bold∣ly to depriue, Preassing presumptuously, in CHRISTS despight, To prorogate the shortned shame of Sight. But such their CHRIST, such Crucifixe they fame, Such Paterne, such the Purtraite: both most vaine. The Painters fantasie the pat∣terne is: The Purtrait only must resemble this, The Genealo∣gie or Pedegrie of the Popish Crucifixe.That lying Spirit; Father of deceate, That Man true CHRIST should know, who boyles with hate,
And studies still to forme in mans fond braine, False Christs; or of the True, con∣ceats prophane, Doth Parent to this purtrats Patterne proue, Hatcht in the Crafts-mans head as hee doth moue. The Crucifixe, Child of the Payn∣ters Thought, O ye to this Lying Spirit, thus forth brought By arte, as carefull Midwif's help∣ing hand, Is from the painfull wretch recei∣ued; who fand, And did more labour, in this Birth sustaine, As hee opinion did conceiue of gaine. This new-borne Saint thus be∣ing brought to light, See how the wretch doth in his Worke delight, Hee gazeth, wondreth, narrowly doth pry, Striues if hee can the least escape espy,
Proport'oning by due esteeme Its worth, As longsome paines, and labour brought it forth, Which in each feature, finding now compleat, As to adorne some Temple only meet, Hee to the Preist presents't, who streight doth giue It Name; yea, Holinesse, as some beleeue. By Charmes, by Exorcisme of Magick art,The profaine and wicked christning of the artificiall Crucifixe. With Salt, and Water Christned thus a part, With Pardons priuiledg't, with Odors sweet Perfumd, with Altars honord, Head and Feet Anoynted, Torches lighted, Gifts presented, Made fitt for Pilgrimes now to bee frequented, Erected last, in place most eminent, The Never-Erring-Clergie giue consent,
That it shall stand to bee admir'd, ador'd, Kissd, reverenc'd, crouch'd before, embrac'd, implor'd, The Holy Crucifixe from hence forth cald, Or, On His Crosse the KING OF GLORIE nail'd, The Blinded peoples foolishe superstition, The base credulitie of their condition, Approues the Error, ratifies the Deed, With them this Crucifixe doth cre∣dit plead, Which in affinity or Shape more neare As they conceiue, the Holier doth appeare. Loe now the Crafts-man,The devilish deifying of the popish Cruci∣fixe. Priest and vulgar Crew, Ioyntly fall down, and with devo∣tion due, As many Pater-nosters doe repeat By number of their beads, as they finde meet,
To this New-Christned-CHRIST and, as acquent With Tongues their sutes in Latin must bee sent, To This not sparing with blasphe∣mous breath, The Honour of Latria to bequeath, Preferring it to all the Heauenly Quire, Or Crownde aboue, or Militating heere, Of Angels, Saints; euen to that Mother-Maide, The Queene of Heauen, (of Her If truth be said.) But when for foule Idolatrie arraing'd, Some shift in place of Reason must bee fain'd: These subtile Sophists, wittie in invention, Doe pleade by vertue of their good intention, The honour to the Crucifixe ascriv'd, The Purtrate first, by Crafts-man hand contriu'd,
Doth hit, but streight sent back,The pretense of good inten∣tion doth no more excuse the popish Ido∣latrie than if a woman should abuse her bodie with every one that she thoght like her husband and then say shee did so of good intention willing to loue all that were like her hus∣band. is vpward's driven, And by Reflexe doth sklent hye way to Heauen, Possessing such as see with others Eyes, This By-way worship CHRIST no lesse doth please, Than on these Tables earst by Gods owne hand Engrav'd, it had beene left th'elea∣venth Command. But let those Doctors licence me demand, Who in Intention make Devotion stand, If simple Women in their Husbands places, May warrantably yeeld to strange embraces, And if it passe may for a just excuse, That their Intention Them did not abuse, Supposing, they did by obedience due Themselues subject, vnto their Husbands true,
And, If those Husbands, wrong'd in such a sort, Thus to bee mockt and cousind, ought comport, And over-looke this as a light offence, Which Ignorance doth challenge in defence? This, without shame, these Clerks can not approue, Except some Intrest having in this Loue. How easily it selfe doth Error roote, In such as on GODS Light their eyes doe shoote, That on all hazard will goe on Their way, With them or walke, or stumble, stand or stray? NOW, this great Idole, set to publick view,The profane ofspring and broodie gene∣ration of little Crucifixes. Yet can not serve; all of this num∣brous Crew, For private vse One must peculiar haue, To beare about Him, even vnto His graue.
Enricht with gold and Iewels, These are borne The breasts of Dames of Honor to adorne, Which not beseeming Ʋulgars (as too deare,) The Poorer sort doe Poorer Christ∣lings weare Of polisht Ivorie, of gilded Glasse, Of glistring Horne, of Copper, Tinne, or Brasse, Which by the Priest if hallow'd, so much more Held worthie are of Worship, than before. If any living Saint,A Holy man is more like Christ than all the artificiall pictures in the earth, & more worthie of ho∣nour for His cause; yet if any man for holinesse were so worshiped as the popish cru∣cifixe, a honest hearted papist would scoūder at that Idolo∣trie, and why not now, but because he be∣liveth the Ro∣mish Church cannot erre. heere suck∣ing breath, Who with our LORD more neare resemblance hath, To Him more deare, and held of greater worth, Than all the Images art can bring foorth, In whom this Spirit, Life, and Grace doth shine, Whom a most neere conjunction doth combine,
And whom CHRIST (one day) though despised now, Shall not think shame HisHeb. 2.11. Brother to avow, Yet if this Saint of God, adored were, Cald on, as senselesse Crucifixes are, The World anone the sacriledge should fee, Cry out against this vile Idola∣trie, Abhorre, to any Mortall vnder Heaven Worship, or divine Honour should bee given, But now when greater measure they bequeath, To Stockes, to Stones, to Idoles voyde of breath, They neither can, nor will their Error spy, 2. Cor 4.3.4So darkned hath the devill their Reasons Eye, Or, to damnation poasting on amaine, Rom. 1.18.Dare in vnrighteousnesse the truth detaine.
Since then those Wares so slen∣der are in worth, To mocked sight lyes only set∣ting foorth Bookes which pervsd, leaue Ig∣norants more rude, Gulling the World but with i∣magind goode, To CHRIST disgracefull, breeding in mans braine Conceats of Him but carnall, and prophaine, What Hee left buryed preassing to proclame, His Glory darkning with disgrace and shame, Loosing these bands insep'rably vnite, By which both Natures in one Person meete, Mens Faith diverting from that solide stay The only Rocke, the Life, the Truth, the Way,Iohn. 14.6. Vpon a Shadow fondly to re∣ly Which CHRIST shall (one day) to bee His deny.
All the wor∣ship and re∣spect that is given to the artificiall Cru¦cifixe is given to a filthie Idole.As being only the Resemblance vaine And Birth fantastick of the Pain∣ters braine, Who, though hee boldly playde the cunning Ape, Did never see, nor could set foorth His shape, The Honour then to This be∣queath'd, must even Neids-force, bee to a filthie Idols given. The way to get a right sight of Christ shi∣ning in the mir¦ror of the scrip∣ture, and to be changt in the likenesse of Christ seene there.BVT leaving more to stirre this noysome Sinke, Poysning pure Soules with a pe∣stifrous stinke, To bee abhor'd, and held in just neglect, Of all, true CHRIST who truly doe affect, And on that Purtrate long to fixe their eye, Drawne by his Spirit, which the soule must see, In Holie Write, that Mirror most divine, In which His Image Gloriously doth shine,
By preaching of His Word which set to view By Faith is seene, and doth by Sight renew, So working on the Soule which doth behold, That thus it lookes as from another mold, Both to the selfe and Others seeming strange, Turnd in its liknesse by a gracious change;1. Cor. 15.49. So by the Spirit quickned is this Meane, That heere if CHRIST thy Faith hath truly seene, Thou shalt His Shape take on, bee like Him made, Adornd with Glorie which shall never fade, In Thee this Image, whence all Grace doth flow, From Glorie shall to further Glorie grow, Each faithfull Looke on This, of force shall bee Some gracious effect to worke in Thee.
Come then, draw neere, Thou who to see aspires Sweete IESVS CHRIST, the Crowne of thy desires; Come, Thou who loues on Him to looke aright (Abhorring Counterfits which mock the sight) Whose face alone doth true con∣tent afford Come, heere behold thy Loue, thy Life, thy LORD. BVT if thou Him would'st to Salvation see A man must see his owne vglines in the glasse of the law before hee can see Christs beautie in the Gospell.Thy Soule must glas'd in this fame Mirror bee, Thy breasts most inward Cabins must bee sought, Thy selfe made Center of thy Circling thought: Ezek. 16.3.4.5Thou must not skarre vpon thy Soares to looke To read thy dittay in that sacred Booke As thou by Nature art from Grace exild Rom. 5.12.14With Miserie surchargt, with sinne defyld,
Procliue to fall, to perish by and by Without remeed, if pitty CHRIST deny; As dead in Sinne,Ep. 2.1.5. till quickned by His Grace, Already damn'd till Hee the doome deface Lost, on His shoulders till Hee home thee take, GODS Enemie till Hee the friend∣ship make,Rom. 6.17, The Devills bound slave, still ragging on in Ill Till He redeeme thee, and renew thy Will; An Atheist vile, Erroneous,Eph. 5.8.14. Ibid. 4.18. short of sight, Till Hee thee teach to know thy GOD aright, Thy heart a Seminary,Gen. 6.5. Mat. 15.19. which doth breed And nurse of all kind wickednesse the seed Till by his Spirit purg'd;Eph. 2.3. a Child in short Of Sathan, miserable in each sort
Iohn 3.5.Till hee Regenerate, thy soule endue With Grace, and make of thee a Creature new. If the sight of thy owne sins doe not humble yet the terror of an lust & angrie Iudge may bring the low. Deut. 9.3. Heb. 12.29.BVT if this Sight doth vertue lacke to lead Thee, thy estate to mourne and seeke remeed, Behold that Lambe a Lyon, full of Ire, An angrie Iudge, a hotte consu∣ming Fire, Thee citing, whom no misery can draw, By terrifying Trumpet of His Law, Araign'd, before His fearfull Throne to stand, Condemn'd in Conscience, trem∣bling foot, and hand, His awfull Eyes, which Flames and Lightning dart, The deepest Darkes of thy decea∣ved heart Iohn. 2.24.25. 1. Cor. 4.5Shall search: none needs to tell Him what thy breast Heb. 4.13.Keeps buried from the World: the Most the Least
Nor of thy Words, nor Deeds, can Him escape: The Thoughts most secreit, which thy Soule did shape, Even ere outbreaking wilfull Involution Thee guiltie made by Actuall pollution, Before Him muster: Hee can open lay All that make vp thy dreadfull Dittay may. Thought vse of Sinning Thee secure hath made, Though with the foole Thou in thy Heart hast said Their was no GOD thy foule Misdeeds to marke,Psal. 53.1. Thy Words to view committed in the darke, Or to avenge the wrongs thou boldly wrought, As to a reckning never to bee brought; Though while the LORD dd patiently forbeare, But like thy selfe, Hee did to the appeare,
Thou shalt Him comming vnto thee behold These sinnes which thou commit∣ted vncontrold In order ranking All before thy face, No circumstance omitted; Time nor Place. These grosse Offences, which (to thee but slight) Thy Nat'rall Conscience rub'd, by Natures light, In their commission, beeing set to view, Then, shall another sight of sinne enswe: Thy former actuall Roll Hee shall enlarge Sinnes of Omission laying to thy charge, Math. 25.42.43.The Good vndone requiring at thy hand Which to performe, or Law or duty band, Thus shall hee judge thee guiltie of neglect Of things which thou didst ne∣ver wrong suspect;
Thy Idle Words shall not vn∣challengt slide;Mat. 12.36 The vnadvysed Passions of thy Pride Which thou couldst never curbe, a cause thou must Acknowledge now of thy Dam∣nation just. Thy heart exposing lust-intang∣ling Hookes By wanton gestures, by lascivi∣ous lookes, Thee shall Hee make convince,Mat 5.28. a Wretch most vile Whom Whoredome and Adultery did defile. Each Word from thy deceatfull lips sent foorth To wound thy Brothers fame,Ibid. 22. or wrong his Worth No light or veniall sinne (as men now speake) Hee shall admitt, but such as Wrath shall eake Thee rendring worthy of eternall Ire, The wofull object made of quench∣lesse Fire.
From His owne Deare-Ones, His selected Sheepe Iohn, 10.3, 4,His voice decerning who his wayes did keepe. Thine Eares what then thy Doome shall bee, may heare, If thou from sinne doe not in time reteare; Once Hee hath sayd, and yet againe will say Depart Accursed, to be damn'd for ay,Mat, 25, 41. Yee workers of Iniquitie, (and none More guiltie than thy selfe thou maist suppone,) In endlesse Fyre, in everlasting Paine Prepared for the Devill and all his Traine, Of which are all, who drencht with sinfull spaite, Lye buried in their Naturall estate, Even thou, as long as Ʋnrenew'd by grace, And dost vnchangt continue in this cace
Deferring to that gracious Iudge to sue The SONNE of GOD, by ab∣solution true Who only can thy free Remission seale, Cancell thy debts, thy Conscience calm'd make feele The fruit of his forgivenesse; give thee Peace, That true Tranquillity, which finds no place In Pardons given by men, for gayne procuird, In All at least, who ever haue endurd The Inward tempest of a sin-tos'd soule, Looking aright vpon that feare∣full Scroule Of accusations, having layd to heart The Nature of GODS Iustice, Sinnes desart, If a man be humbled in the sense of his sin, & Gods deser∣ved wrath, then may he get a comfortable sight of Iesus Christ in the Gospell.If in thy selfe, thou hast this vgly Sight, Perceav'd, the Vengance due to Thee by right
If thence, thy soule with inward Terrors shaken, By Iustice, trembling stands, to be o're-taken: If feele thou dost a gnawing Worme torment Thy vexed conscience, but with ease acquent, Stinging thy heart, which with remembrance bleeds, Of long-long buried, and of late Misdeeds Kindling in thee sparkes of that quenchlesse Fire, Sent foorth as Messingers of fur∣ther Ire In time to warne Thee what abids for ay All, that in Sinne without Re∣pentance stay; If from Aboue some sharpe cor∣recting Rod Hath made thee see an awfull angrie GOD Quickning in thee some Spunke of true desire His Peace to haue, gainst whom thou didst conspire,
Renouncing henceforth to bee Sa∣thans slaue, In life renew'd resolv'd thy sinnes to leaue, In this pure MIRROR thou mayst then make bold Sweet IESUS CHRIST thy SA∣VIOUR to behold A readie MEDIATOR full of grace,Heb. 8.6. Idid. 9.15. and 12.24. Pleading thy Pardon and eternall Peace; A Fountaine open'd,Zach. 13.1. living streams distilling In Davids house,Apoc. 22.6. Ibid. 7.17. Mat. 9.12. Luk. 10.35.43. with Heavenly water filling Thy thirsting Soule. That true Physitian The precious balme of grace who only can Powre in thy wounds, Thee can alone make cleane Though nought but leprous spots in thee bee seene; The Angell of the Covenant,Mal. 3.1. who brings To Sinners,Ibid. 4.4. healing vnderneath His wings
A Mercie seate, theExod. 25.21. Tables of the Law To hide, whose challenge Thee in Iudgment draw. An Altar, from whose1. King. 1.50 Hornes of safe protection GODS justice most severe gainst sinnes infection Man never banishd, forIohn. 6.37. refuge who fled, Or whom to Him the Hope of Mercie led. ANumb. 35.6. Deut. 4.41. Ios. 20.2. Citie, where in safety to re∣side And beare the Devill and all the World at fead, WhoseApoc. 21.25. Ports shoote never, ever patent bee To all, that from persuingEsa. 60.11. Iu∣stice flee. A savingGenes 6. Arke where Thou se∣cure mayst rest Where inward feares, nor foes can thee infest, Where thou most safe mayst ly, though Heavens should weepe Even floods of wrath man from Earths face to sweepe.
A gratiousNumb. 14.46 Aaron, reaching forth his hand Who doth with Incense in his Censor stand To stay the Plague of sinne, on thee begunne (Without Remeed) ere thou bee over-runne. Draw neare in time, and labour to perceaue How such as went before Thee furthred haue: ToMath. 9.10 eate, to drink, Loe! He did not disdaine WithLuke. 7.36 Publicanes, with persons most prophane Curing their sinnes: viseLuke. 4 Ihon. 8.3. Luke. 7.38. Whoores, adultrous Goates Hee gathers in, and purgeth all their spots. Most covetousLuke. 19 5. Extortioners find grace, None are debard who mourne to Him their cace. Behold as He doth stand! Doth sweetly call, Come, O yeeMath. 11.28 Weary, Come yee loaden all,
Draw neare myMath. 11.29 Ierem. 6.16. Deare-Ones, I will giue you rest, Your Soules in peace shall hence∣foorth bee possest; "Who come to Mee faint, com∣fortlesse, and weake "For succour, in no cace I can forsake. If thy consci∣ence be not qui∣eted at the first looke on Christ, yet a continu∣ing to looke v∣pon Him, and His offices, and natures, and gracious wor∣king with o∣thers, may doe it.BUT YET, if still thy faults thy conscience vexe, If still the sence of Wrath thy Soule perplexe, If still thy hope-exyling feares remaine That justice shall, with never∣ceassing paine For sinne, at last, sease on thy guil∣tie Soule, A righteous GOD, who boldly durst controule: And, if thou canst not yet be brought to see How GOD can pardon such a wretch as thee, So vile a worthlesse wormeling, by desart Who worthie of hels deepest dun∣geon art,
Looke on the Mirror then; See, from aboue, Of GOD the FATHER the vn∣bounded loue Who, when He All haue damnd in justice might, So lov'dIohn. 3.16. 1. Iohn. 4.9. the World, that He His chiefe delight His SONNE Eternall, Second of these Three Which still make vp a Trinall Ʋnitie, To mortall Man did gift, in time a Child Heere to be borne, to Man from grace exild, Whose Name and Nature there∣to made agree Our blest IMMANUEL,Esay. 7.14. Math. 1.23. GOD with vs, should bee, The MightieEsa. 9.6. GOD in humane flesh, and feature, GOD reconcealed vnto manly Na∣ture, That Hee mans Persons might to GOD conceale And that through Him GODS friendship Man might feele:
Whose searchlesse Wisdome so pro∣found appeares That thence the name ofIbid. WON∣DERFULL He beares, For, wonderfully Hee found out a Way Man to set free, and fully to de∣fray His debts, the Iustice Infinite con∣tenting, And of an angrie GOD the rage relenting; A Way, to make on Thee, while evenCol. 1.21. Gods foe The boundlesse Fountaine of His Mercie flow While thou (deservedly) groaning lay'st beneath Sinnes pressing load, and GODS Eternall Wrath. Behold for Thee HeIohn. 1.14. Math. 5.17. MAN be∣comes, GODS will In ev'ry point compleetly to ful∣fill, ThyHeb. 7.22. Cautioner, who to procure thy Peace (A bankrupt vnthrist, prodigall of grace)
That from Rebellion thou relax'd might bee ByHeb. 9.14. satisfaction full did set thee free, Himselfe for thee aHeb. 7.27. Sacrifice pre∣senting, Ere loue thou couldst Him, thee with1. Ioh. 4.19. loue preventing. See how He stands, as if withMath. 3.13 sinne defild, Even in thyMark 1.8. Luke. 3.21. Name and Roome, by sinne exild, Washd as a Sinner, by the clen∣ging streame Of Baptisme, sinfull in the worlds esteeme, TheMath. 17.5. 2. Pet. 1.17. Father audibly from HEA∣VEN expressing, And fully pleasd in HIM, HIM∣SELFE professing That Hee should Suretie bee, thy burden beare, And charging thee againe His voice to heare. How canst thou then, (while lying vnder ire) But boile with flames of vehe∣ment desire
To heare Him calling, Come, O weary wight If vex'd with inward feares, or outward spight, Come mourning Soule, in conscience opprest Vnder my wings securely take thee rest? If thou belieue, if thou in faith doe heare And follow Him that cals, thou needst not feare That thou assaulted, shall a shelter lake, That wrath shall thee persue, or overtake. Why still then trembling stands thou? still agast? Twixt GOD and CHRIST (now) covenant is past In thy behalfe: and CHRIST accordingly Hath suffered, absolv'd and ran∣sond thee. Iohn. 3.16. 1. Iohn. 4.9.Since then of GOD the free, and endlesse Loue Thou for thy d warrant hast, what should thee moue?
Since of thatEzek. 37.26 Covenant new which lasts for ay The Truth and Strength not sub∣ject to decay Twixt GOD and CHRIST for Man, twixt GOD and Man In CHRIST, which nothing change, or alter can, Doe thee secure; what need'th thee doubt or feare? That thou shouldst perish, CHRIST thee bought too deare. What lackst thou? what defi∣cient is to sound And build thy faith on a most so∣lide ground? The MAN, who doth thyAct. 20.28. Heb. 9.14. Me∣diator stand IsPhilip. 2.10 also GOD: doth all this All command. Hee, worthy Pardon is for thee to pleade: When Hee maks sute for what thou standst in neede The FATHER can not what Hee asks forsake: Hee Greater is than a repulse to take.
Hee High is as the Highest to appeare And GOD for sinne offended, to draw neare, Before whose face no creature dare be found When frowning Hee His anger doth vnbound. Againe, that GOD, thy glori∣ous1. Tim. 2.5 Heb. 7.24 MEDIATOR, Man likewayes is, Mans Sonne, and Mans CREATOR, ThyGOEL. So stiled by Iob 19.25. Kinse-Man in the flesh, to thee more neare Than any Saint, or was, or can bee, heere. Though He that LoftieEsay. 57.15 One, that Great One bee Who Ever-blest, endwelth Eternitie Yet daind He hath (thee to lift vp and saue Though even the basest and most abject slaue) Himselfe to humble, and stowp downe more low Then any other able was to doe
Himselfe HeeIohn. 19.17 Philip. 2.7. emptied, did the Crosse take on, Was made of reputation small, or none, Was peircd, was presd with paine, to clenge thy score, A shamefull death endurd: What wouldst thou more? Behold Mans Nature wondrous∣ly combind (By vnion such, as nature can not find) Vnto the Godhead, in His Per∣son: so How easie thing it is for GOD to doe Thence see thou mayst, tho Sinne hath made dis-vnion, To make thy Person haue with Him Communion. Behold, how by this vnion personall Of Persons not, but Natures: naturall Sense all transcending, Sathan con∣quered lyes, Even by that Nature He did first entyse.
Thy LORD on Him assum'd thy humane Nature That Hee of thee might make  divine creature, Abaisd Himselfe the Sonne of man to bee To make to GOD a chosen child of thee. Behold His Worthinesse who pleads thy peace Thus shalt thou see how thou vn∣worthy grace Mayst bee receav'd, through Him mayst favour find Who, though thou faultie, loving is and kind. Behold1. Tim. 2.4. how GOD, in CHRIST, most willing is To saue, to comfort, and to che∣rish His; The Soules of trembling sinners doth sustaine While seeming swallow'd vp, with sense of paine, With inward anguish, and thou nought shalt see In GOD from grace to let or hinder thee.
Behold thy LORD, how not without delite, The Worke of Mans salvation to perfite Such Offices did daine to vndertake As for thy well and safety best did make. Thus strengthned Thou moreHeb, 4, 16. boldly mayst draw neare The Throne of grace, to bee ex∣eemd of feare, Set free from thy rebellion, so e∣schue The Ʋengance to thy disobedience due. Behold how Hee, asEsay, 9, 6, Counsel∣ler most wise, To the Eternall Monarch of the skies, While in the FathersIohn, 1, 18. bosome, GOD alone Mans flesh as yet not having ta∣ken on, By Patriarchs, & Prophets mouths, did breath GODS Mysteries, to man deser∣ving death,
From thraldome to set free all that desire To bee releev'd from wrath, from Sinnes Impire. Behold Him gifted with Domini∣on free MONARCH of Monarchs,1, Tim. 6.15, KING of Kings to bee, With vniuersall pow're, to rule, to raigne GOD over all All's onely Soveraigne, Of all things at his pleasure to dispose, For well of His; thoseMat. 18.6. Proud∣lings to oppose Who boldly dare presume to vexe or wrong The meanest member that doth Him belong, To whom Hee lists eternall1. Sam. 2.6 life to giue, To damne to death, from death or to reviue, Psal. 2.His foes to make his foot-stoole: pestring downe, All godlesse Atheists, traytors to his crowne
That Him contemne, or dare His Scepter slight Them making feele His powre, His boundlesse might. What fearst thou then,No inlake in thee but thou may see how it is supplied in Christ. if thou thy Sinnes forsake And seeke that Hee in friendship thee may take? GODS loue is free, andHosea, 14, 4 firme; no change admits, Continues to the end, and never flits; His Truth both seald, and sworne, doth thee secure By way of Cov'nant,Esa, 54, 10, which shall ay endure. The LORD of lyfe, CHRIST IESUS set to sight In this cleare Mirror, Thine by double right Is made, to thee twice sibbe who groanst for grace, The Sonne of GOD, the Seede of mortall race, Twice Brother's Hee become; by Incarnation Himselfe for thee to make a fit Oblation:
By thy adoption; even with Him to share The Heritage, of Heaven to bee madeRom, 8, 17, 17, heyre. If Blind thou bee, and of a guide hast neede From Sinne and wrath thy straying soule to leade Loe, Hee a Prophet is, whoIohn, 14, 6, peace doth preach.Deut, 18, 15, 18, Eph. 2, 17, Draw neere, Him hearken: Hee the way shall teach. Twixt GOD and Thee, if thou the feade dost feare, Behold, aHeb, 7, 17, priest Hee doth for thee appeare, Who all His friends, or friends that seeke to bee, Hath by one Sacrifice, for ay, set free. If Lame and Impotent thou art, vnmeete To runne to GOD, or flee from Sathans feete, To strengthen hee, hee is a MightieLuke, 1, 32 33, KING, Who can rayse vp the weakest vnderling.
What long agoe, as Priest, hee hath procurd As Prophet Hee expones, perswads; assurd To make His owne of safety: shall at last As King apply, conforme to Paction past. What Hee, as Priest hath pur∣chast, foorth hee drawes From GODS great Treasure, opned for his cause To our behoue, who as he dayly pleads For vs, byRom. 8, 34. priestly Intercession speeds. What Hee as Prophet hath ex∣pond, by Word In holy Write, as Prophet doth afford Perspicuous, by his Spirit made most plaine, That Gratious Doctor, Teacher of His Trayne. What Hee as King hath gifted and applyed, (And what in Him can bee by GOD denyed?)
Hee doth as KING gainst all thy foes maintaine To settle Thee, in peace with Him to raigne. Now, if to Him His weaklings bee so deare Courage dejected soule: thou needst not feare; Ryse, follow on, Thou in this Glasse shalt see CHRISTS GLORY shinning more and more to thee. How Christ may bee loo∣ked vpon for strengthning of thy fayth,IF THou from feare bee in some measure fred, If hope of mercie Thee to feele hath led Some spunk of life, some woont∣lesse warmnesse glow Within thy bosome, making tears to flow Of godly sorrow, mixd of Griefe and love, Thy frozen heart begunne to melt and moue; Behold how hee doth breath, as thou dost Mourne To make thyMat, 12, 10, Esa, 42, 3, faintly-smoaking flaxe to burne
And tenderly, till greater strength it breed, Of thy weake Fayth doth touch the bruised reed. Behold howMat, 9, 2 Mark, 2, 3 Luke, 5, 18, One, brought in his bed, by force, Layd at his feete, his pittie doth enforce, Departs, of sickenesse and of Sinne made cleane, Rejected not, because despisd and meane; How much more Thee shall Hee receaue in grace Who running comst, layst out to Him thy cace, With bleeding heart dost His compassion plead Seeking to thy diseased Soule remeed? Thy LORD thou mayst, with Thee a part who beares, Behold His bottle filling with thy teares, With that Sweete SAINT, for sinne, in senseLuke. 7.38. of wrath With luke-warme floods when Thou thy cheeks dost bath.
With Her sitts mourning, powr∣ing from thine eyes In heartie love, thy greeved LORD to please, Streames to be-dew and washe His sacred Feete, That Hee may cleanse, and for Himselfe make meete Thy spotted Soule, who nought esteemest too rare Too pretious, on Himselfe, or cause to ware. Though men doe mock, and with contempt doe prise Thy mourning, thy devotion doe despise, Thy LORD, who (one day) shall thyMat. 5.4. paynes compense Thou speaking mayst perceave in thy defence: Loe Hee, a BannerCant. 2.4. of His love doth spread And to his owne Wine-sellers thee doth leade, That by hisCant. 2.5. flagons comfort thou mayst fynd, Hartning thy sorrow with hisIh. 16.20.22. favours kynd,
The earnst Thee giving of that gratious day When from thine eyes, tearesApoc. 7.17. Ibid. 21.4. Hee shall wipe away. Hee shall his Seale vpon thyEz. 9.4.5.6. Apoc. 7.3. fore-head set That the Destroyer thus may warning get The wicked World whise floods of vengance bath Thee to discerne, from mongst the Sonnes of wrath. Hold to thy shoulder,How hee who beleiueth must looke to Christ presenting his burthen, and his yoke. sturre not to take on His lightsomeMat. 11.30. burthen, which re∣penteth none That ever it did beare: which all makes glad On whomsoever Hee the same hath layd. Behold Hee stretcheth foorth His hand, to lay His Law vpon thy back, thy sinnes to slay, So to presse foorth thy old Im∣postumd soares, But not to harme Thee, who his Peace implores.
Thy flesh and vitious Nature, must bee slayne: Thou must not shrinke at sense of outward Payne. Behold, HisMat. 11.29. Yoke Hee brings! How loath to part? Stretch forth thy necke, thy hands, thy feete, thy heart, That Hee may bind it on: that, (hence) for ay None, saue thy LORD, thy service challenge may. Loe! that thy yoke may light and easie bee Hee goes before Himselfe and drawes with Thee, Yea both thy yoke and thee Hee drawes; and beares Thee, wrestling with thy burthen who appeares. Goe on: O never never leave thy LORD Where ere Hee leads thee; Hee will strength afford. Hee no where els Thee shall In∣vite to goe But where before, the way Him∣selfe did show
BVT NOW doth Sathan rage with greater spight Then when secure thou layst in sinnes dark night,How a man vnder tentati∣on may looke v¦pon Christ in the mirror of His word. Redoubling his assaults, Thee vex∣ing more, Presenting bayts more frequent then before? Behold thy LORD, whom HEA∣VEN, whom Earth obeys, InMat. 4. Mark. 1.12. Luke. 4.1. Wildernsse, alone, twice twentie dayes With apparitions visible frequented, Not from that Ill-ones firie darts exempted. If CHRIST hee durst attempt to make his Thrall Whom gainst his dints Hee knew a brazen wall What wonder thee a weakling hee entyse, To His persute whose soule oft guardlesse lyes? But seest thou CHRIST pre∣vaile? His powre confine? Him streight dis-arme? the Ʋicto∣rie is thine,
O stand! O heere beholdEx. 14.13. the LORDS Salvation! This Combate to thy safety hath relation, Heere Sathan also made before thee flee Thy selfe in CHRIST victorious thou mayst see. Sathan is not affrayd though sometimes hee faine feare for holy water or crossing.But holie water in the Ayre to tosse And with the finger heere and there to crosse Scorne thou, as fruitlesse freets, least Sathan slight And scorne such weapons should resist his might. How a man vnder cōtempt of the word, or despised of his friends may looke on ChristDoth now the World a mock∣ing-stock thee make? ThyPsal. 38.11. friends (before) thy fellow∣ship forsake? Now art thou hated, since by gratiousIohn. 15.19. change Thy former life become to thee is strange? Now pointed at? because to sin thou shunnes And no more to thy wonted1. Pet. 4.4. ryot runnes?
Now doe the wicked louse their tongues to lyes Traducing thy profession as they please, Not sparing even thy person, cen∣s'ring thee Or madde, or foolish, or precise to bee? Behold thy LORD, exposd to like despight, Ʋexd, mockt, persued, with malice greatest might, Despysd, opprest, the marke of envy made, A common foe for all men to in∣vade. SeeIohn. 1.11, how Hee comes vnto His Owne by Blood, By bonds of nature, even by them withstood, Rejected, not receiv'd, but mett in place Of kindlie acceptation, with disgrace. A Man, beside r Himselfe, in their esteeme Behold the SAVIOUR of the world doth seeme:
Him they mistake, and seeke to apprehend As if His countriesLuke. 23.2. foe, not Cae∣sars friend Even one whose course, (which they not rightly saw) TheirIohn. 11.45, State might touch, them∣selues in danger draw. Each day that did His lifes short terme compleet Heere, with a severall affront did meet But while His course Hee closd, O griefe! O teares! See howIs. 33.3. Mat. 27.41. &c. vnmov'd, what bitter taunts Hee beares? With what vnvtterable anguish torne While suffring midst His Paines, the Hight of Scorne Which more than all the Stripes, His Soule did racke, Which scourging Burrio's layd v∣pon His backe? Behold they nodIbid 27. 29. 30. the head, they bow the knee; Who Wisdome was, to them a foole must bee.
The Honorable SONNE of GOD they floute, And put a PurpureMath. 27.28 garment Him about, A Crowne of Thornes, vpon His holy head And in His harmelesse hand a brit∣tle Reede Worthy no other Scepter, in their thought: With shame, with scorne to death He thus was brought. "LORD Thou, that I should liue, who daind to die, "Thy servant and disciple make of mee, "Though I with Thee should suffer, even while heere, "Scorne, spight, contempt, wrong most vnjustlie beare, "Which, to my sight, thou standst, by my procuring "Before the eyes of liuelie faith enduring. If Povertie thee pinch,How a man vnder Pover¦tie may looke vpon Christ in the mirror of the Word. if want thee vexe Looke on thy LORD, whom care did ne'er perplexe
Of wordly Wealth; who heere did liue content To serue Himself with what His servants lent; Those holyLuke. 8, 3, Matrons who did Him attend Vnto His death, who did permit to spend Their proper goods, forth for His vse to lay, The charges of His Iourney to defray. Who being tax'd didMat, 17.27 Tribute-money lake: WhomMat, 8, 2. house, nor hold did ever owner make: In poore estate most meanely who wasLuke, 2.7. borne; Whose offring, which theIbid, 24, Altar did adorne In His behalfe, in stead of fatnedLevit. 12, 8, droaves, The poore-mans Pigeons was, the Turtle doves; In Iosephs house his life not Rich could bee: A poorer spoyle the Sunne did never see
Than at His death His foes did part by lote, His greatest wealth aIohn. 19.23. sober seame∣lesse coate. If this communion with his povertie Griefe of all straits can not asswage to thee Looke on the riches of spirituall grace Which hee on all bestowes, His steps who trace. Loe, heyre Hee is ofHeb. 1.2. HEAVEN and Earth: of all And with HimselfeRom. 8.17. Co-Heyre annexe thee shall Yea will not (heere) with thee so sharply deale But (as best sutes His Glorie, and thy well) Both will, and can provide, that Thou nor lacke Foode for thy bellie, cloathing for thy back. And, though thou seest not how, yet take not care His providence toLuke. 12.6. Sparrowes in the ayre
To Lillyes of the field, to every thing Which His eternall Word to life did bring Extended is, and (as to him seemes best) Thy Portion furnish shall amongst the rest. By speciall care, thy LORD, can make thee feele, Enlarg't, the lytle measure of thy1, King, 17 14 16 Meale, 2, Kings, 4,Thy Cruise of Oyle sufficient, thee to feede Till more Hee send, to last as thou hast need. Can in thy greatest troubles thee vphold,Deut, 84, Cause that thy Garments, nor thy shoes waxe old Dan, 1,And if Hee but a dish of Pulse propine Aboue thy fellows can thy face make shine; Hee multiply thy lytle, even thy least, Can, though a dayes provision thou but hast,
As easily it make to hundreths streach As for fineMat, 14.19, Iohn, 6, 11, Thousand Soules hee earst made reach (With plentie fed,) those Loaues and fishes few, For Fyue alone which els were but enew. If thou for Him doe thirst, by manner strange He, for thy vse, in wine canIohn, 2, 8, Water change: Yea livingIohn. 4.14. streams can give thee, if hee list, Which tasted once, thou never more shall thrist. A fish, with money in its mouth,Mat. 17.27. be driven Shalt on thy Hooke,1. King. 17.6 Ravens feede thee Noone and Even, HeavensEx. 16.14. Psal. 78.27. Manna rayne, the flin∣tieExod. 17.6. Numb. 20.9. Psal. 78.15. Rocke shall serue Thy thirst to quench, ere thou for want doe starue. "O that I may (LORD) for thy Kingdome care, "Thee aboue all things serue; so shall I feare
"Adversitie nor want: thus what may ayde "My vext estate, shall to my hand be layde. If Rich thou bee, take heede vncertaineTim. 16.17 How a man in wealth & pros∣peritie may behold Christ with profite. wealth Steale not thy heart, thy soule de∣prive of health: Trust not therein; be not puft vp with pride Of things, onProver. 23.5. Eagles wings which swiftly slyde, Fixe thou on Him alone thine heart, thine Eye, To make Thee Rich,2. Cor. 8.9. who poore did chuse to bee. O! let thy humble Cariage, modest mynde, Thy thoughts with moderation confind, Beare witnesse, that thou pure in Spirit art, That thou dost thirst and hunger in thy heart To bee inriched with that Righ∣teousnesse Which CHRIST still gifts, yet never is made lesse.
Bee greedie of his golde; O begge to weare His Garments, that thou glorious mayst appeare. That truly rich, thou mayst thy selfe present To GOD;Phil. 4.11. in wealth, in want, a∣like content. These earthly things, but solide as a dreame, More worthy than they are, doe not esteeme, But for thy LORDS vse, seeke to vse them, so That on their Owner thou mayst them bestow: Whom if thou see, or in his Churches neede Or Any of his Saints, thy pittie pleade, O then thy superfluitie to spare To help the cause belonging to His care, His poore distressed Brethren to relieue In whom His grace and Image shineth viue,
A horrible Ingratitude must bee, Yea even a damnable Impie∣tie. How a man in sicknesse may get a helpfull sight of ChristIf sense of payne, if soares of any sort Thee so assaile, as hard is to com∣port, Looke on thy LORD, how torturd for thy sake, Scourg'd backe and sides, GODS wrath, thy paynes to slake, See how his pretious bloode for Thee is shed To Calvary with shame, along while led, With which the senslesse streets all red, seem'd blushing, While bathd with Rivers from his woundes foorth gushing. Behold the Nailes, driven both through foote and hand, Not in a masse of mettell, which doth stand Him suffring to set foorth: a living Man Thy object is; what spight, what malice can
Enduring on the Crosse; a pub∣licke wonder Whose Legs and Armes streatchd foorth, neere rackt a-sunder Not suffered were to stand, as to His griefe The least-least meanes afford might of reliefe, But as most obvious to the Soul∣diers minde They might bee found, His Bones to breake combinde. Behold, by burthen of His Bo∣dy blest, His flesh doth yeeld (while being down-ward prest) Gaping and growing Wounds, still made more large As more His Weight His tender Hands doth charge. Harke how He cryes, IIohn, 19, 28, THIRST, complaines of drouth, For other Paines who opned not His mouth, Though passing great, most sensi∣bly though felt, With this of all most vehement∣ly delt.
O see, how He His wearyIohn. 17.29 Neck extends And languishing, with ready mouth attends To drink the offred Ʋinegar and Gall His burning Thirst to quench, to FINISH ALL, Of which the bitterMath. 27.34 sowrenesse proving, straight A very Tast to Him becomes a draught. This Ruefull sight presented to to thine eyes Inward or outward Paynes may serue to ease Grieues all allay, giue Patience to comport, Till GOD thy Dolours slaken, in some sort.How a man in health may looke vpon CHRIST. If healthy, sound, and strong, from trouble free, Looke on the Price that purchast All to thee, His1. Pet. 2.24. Stripes did make thee whole: thyEsa. 53.4. LORD did beare Thy o Maladyes, that thou mightst sound appeare.
Hee thy Infirmities on Him did take Thy Health to thee a Blessing thus to make And that thy sicklie Soule might whole bee found Whose stat's oft worst, thy Body while most sound. "O that I may LORD whollie heere imploy "My selfe, while health, while strength I doe enjoy "In serving Thee; and, to my dayes as length "Thou addst, I loue Thee may with greater strength, "That so, while health and strength, as shads shall flee, "Both sound and strong I may bee found in Thee. Doth long discent,How a Noble or base borne person, may behold Christ for their in∣struction. vn-discontinued race Of hon'rable Ancestors, make thee place, Worldly Preheminence to thee beget Aboue the Simpler sort, below thee set?
Art Thou a Noble, or some spe∣ciall Peere So Great as thy Inferiors thee admire? Or (tho Enobled not by Place) doth blood From the Ignoble Ʋulgar thee seclude? In this forbeare to glorie; but behold Thy LORD of Royall Linage, Race most Old, A BRAUNCH whose blood deriv'd from Davids stemme Did make Him right to weare a Diademe, A KING, respecting even His Manhoode, borne; Yet, all proud thoughts of Pede∣gries to scorne Himselfe abasd, in Grace to make vs Great, And (though a Personage of High estate) Became most low, vs Hon'rable to make Even our Dishonour on Himselfe did take.
"O seeke Nobilitie, which ne'er shall fade, "Honour from which thee no man can degrade, "By seeking right in Him, a Child to bee "Of GOD; true Honours most supreme degree. Art thou by birth Ignoble, Base, Obscure? Behold thy Glorious KING in state as poore As meane as thou, descended, thee to raise, Even with Himselfe thee to pos∣sesse and sease, Not in a State, but lasting for a day, But of a Kingdome made secure for ay Vpon a Throne thee freely to set downe To swey a Scepter, and to weare a Crowne. If Base thou bee, yet still to climbe assayes The bruckle braunches of vaine glorious wayes,
If Noble, yet to swell with Pride dost chuse And seekst ambitiouslie all meanes to vse To proppe thy worldlie Credite, with profane And worthlesse wretches, who no Course disdaine May further their base Ends, affe∣cting Praise Of Men, their Names vpon Fames wings to raise, Blind to behold that Glorie, to bee found With GOD, which seene, ad such Desires doth bound; O study then more steadfastly to stare And on thy LORD to looke with greater Care; Yea neede thou hast to Touch, from Him that so Ʋertue to heale thisLuke. 8.46. Vanitie may flow. Behold,How a man may learne hu∣militie looking on Christ in the Scripture. He sits as Doctor, teach∣ing thee (Himselfe thy Patterne) true Humilitie
Inviting thee who to His Schoole dost seeke To learne ofMath. 11.29 Him, who lowly is and meeke. See, how to purge thy Soule of stinking Pride The God of Glorie, Glorie layes aside APhilip. 2.7. Servants shape assumes, a Man most meane Becomes;Math. 9.10. mongst Publicanes and Sinners seene To winne them home: Himselfe associating Even to the Basest, Good to them to bring, Accesse and speech to None when askd denying, Most homelie with His friends, on Him relying. Behold, (not pampred with delicious fare) With these Hee sits whose Table turnes their snare, His traine attending, till He base∣lie haue By surfetting become his bellyes slave,
ButMath. 21.28. hungring oft, and thirsting for thy sake His sober Trayne doth His Companions make Serv'd at one Table, feeding even as Hee, WhoseIohn. 13.5. feete from filth that He might wash, O see How with a Towell girt about Hee stands, And stowping downe, with Ba∣sen twixt His hands, With humble Heart performes that service meane, And wipes them with the Linnen, thus made cleane, The Greatest teaching who His Schollers are, For Him their Pride to mortifie so far That to His Least-Ones, though despisd they lye The meanest charge in loue they not deny. If He, thy LORD and KING, became so low, Wilt thou, to be His Servant who makes show
Lodge in a haughtie heart soule-poysning Pride, Who glory canst, as thine, of nought beside Sinne, Miserie, and Shame? Thy Pride disclame Or in thy Lord no part thou needst to clame. Humble LORD IESUS mongst His lowlie traine Doth no ambitious Servants intertaine. Both Paradice and Heaven spewd out once haue The Proud, and such can never back receaue. If Honours smoakie vapour blind thee so,How the Am∣bitious may be∣hold Christ, & bee humbled. Thy GOD, thy selfe nor suffring Thee to know; Thee, if High place so please, that nought beside Can serue to feed the fire-brand of thy Pride Why thus O Foole! art thy affection fir'd? With what thou canst nor haue, nor keepe acquird?
Why doth their worldly Greatnesse thee intyse, Who nothing lesse than Vertues worth can prise? Why pin'st thou for Preferment? casts thy care On things which may thy inward Peace impare? Is earthlie Dignitie to Thee so deare In it thy Happinesse esteeming heere, That (with all danger) thou dar'st it imbrace By this prejudg't though of a better Place? Vaine Glorie-hunter change in time thy course, Leaue taynted Stream's, seeke Honour in the Source. If meanes thou vse, with CHRIST thou mayst obtaine In Glory which shall never end to raigne. His Crosse to Climbe, by suffring bee content, The Scale by which the Saints to Heauen are sent;
There shall thy Honour, (never to take flight) By GOD bee given, in Men and Angels sight, Where Time discourt, nor Envie thee can harme, Nor flattring Straines of Sycophants can charme Thy Princes eare, from Honour to degrade Thee, Great but for thy greater ruine made, Nor Life bee short, toile-conq'red Sutes to brooke Some anxious Dayes, but lasting as a Looke. If Loue of Money, whence all1. Tim. 6.10 How the ava∣ritious man maybe healed by looking on CHRIST. Evill springs, Thee, (prickt with thornie cares,) in bondage brings, Moue thee to scrape, to scart, to pinch, to spare, To rake, to runne, to kill thy selfe with care, Things most secure to doubt, to waite, to watch, Of Penny, or of Penny-worth to catch
Some Gnat, by chaunce, in Spi∣der-web arriv'd, Of Bowel-wasting-wretched-wayes contriv'd, Draw neere, heere learne but for theMath. 6.34. Day to care, Vncertaine to suck vp To-morrows Ayre: Come see thy LORD and His poore Traine, preparing Things, for another life; no tra∣vell sparing About this Task: For worldly goods content With what by GOD to serue the Time was sent, Like Pilgrims, passing to their blest aboade Not over-charged with superflu∣ous loade. Alace! what meanst thou (while in soule most pore) Thy selfe to toile, to conquesse cankring Ore? Heaps to hoarde vp of Pelfe? Whose Rust at last Shall Witnesse bee, thatIam. 1.2.3. Sentence just is past
Of thy damnation? O! in time forbeare On drosse, on dunge, still to bee doating heere, Care for these Treasures, which in CHRIST are found In which, all grace, all wisdome doth abound: That Pearle. Himselfe, aboue all price, who is, Than all the world beside, more deare to His; If thou enrichd wouldst by some Good-thing bee Sell all thou hast; and with af∣fection free Prefer to part, with all things earthly twinne, Losse even thy lyfe, this peerelesMat. 13.45, 46. Pearle to winne: And though no Coine thou dost command, nor ware With this Equivalent thou canst compare Hee withoutIsa. 55.1. Apoc. 3.18. price, or money wilt bestow (As thou thy wants and Indigence dost show)
Both gold and garments,Ih. 6, 33, 35. livelie foode, and all What wish thou canst, yea even Himselfe withall. How the Li∣centious may learn Tempe∣rance, by look∣ing on Christ.Mongst those diseases, to thy soule which sticke, If of the fever of Intemp'rance sicke Selfe-rotting fleshlie pleasure it affect, Thee carying headlongs to eternall wreake, If with this beastlie Sensualitie This soule-besotting sinne, thou grieved bee, That poyson casting vp, which (late) seemd sweete And with delight thy senses did invite Even to a surfet, Longing for remeed, Looke on thy LORD, who all His dayes was dead Isa. 33.3. ibid.To Earthlie pleasures: who with grieues acquented A man of sorrowes liu'd, heere vnlamented,
Whose breast did beare, brash't with displeasures dart, A bruisedMark. 8.12. Spirit, and aPsal. 69.20. broken heart, On whose sadMat. 26, 38. Mark. 14.33. and 34. soule did heavie sorrowes light When wrath sustaining (due to vs by right) In Him our sinfull pleasures were persued, Eternallie which wee had not e∣schued. If GOD and vs Hee not had stept betweene Even with his owne Heart-blood to make vs cleane. Hast, sensuall slaue thy filthie soule to hyde Vnder his shadow: least thy da∣ring pride With wrath bee punisht, who forbidden Tree, Of false delights durst taste, de∣fended Thee. Behold HeeHeb. 5, 7, mourns, for what thou madst thy sport While check't in Conscience: O! with tears resort
To Him in private, lest for light∣lie prising His Tears, for want of tears in thee arising, Anguish and sorrow, which shall never slake, Teares, never finding truce, thee overtake. Behold how Horror on his soule doth sease Forth-wringing sighs and sobs, for thy disease With wrath brunt vp for sinne, in which of late Thy foolish soule did false content conceate. "O change thy minde; Thoughts sometime seeming sweete "Iudge causes now for which thy cheeks to weete. See, how all baithd in His owne blood Hee lyes Thy lewd delights how He most dearely buyes, Torne, beaten, stabt, with thorns nailes, cruell speare Stript naked, sham'd and slayne; yea more, doth beare
Persuing wrath, to expiate thy Crime Thy beastly swine-like bathing, all thy time, In brutish lusts, still wallowing in the myre Of fylth, no limits set to thy desire. O! See His veynes, their pre∣tious Treasures spending, His heart yet hot, a double streame foorth sending Of blood and water. Quicklie, quick∣lie haste With mournefull soule, which truely doth detaste Thy vile licentious life: most humbly craue Those guiltlesse streames in Thee no guilt may leaue, That (hence) by vertue of this Ransome fred, Tears thou to Him, who bloode for thee, mayst shed. Soft ease exile, till by vnfaind confession Thy pittying LORD for thee make Intercession
Those pois'nable delights, dis∣gorgd now having Once greedilie drunke in, thy soule deceaving; Resolving (hence) by action, nor consent More to licke vp thy sins loathd excrement To sense though seeming sweete, which now turnd sowre A flood of bitternesse on thee doth powre, Thee, stinging with soule-wring∣ing sad remorse, The more represt repining with more force. But, gainst this Tyrant having now prevaild, By time, this hundreth-headed Monster quaild, Beware, once i foyld, Thou never set it free, Once damn'd, ne're after it ab∣solved bee, Least by that Righteous Iudge, whose sentence stands, Thou bee adjudged to eternall bands,
Whose trampledHeb, 10, 19 blood Hee shall at rhee require, A Sow turnd backe to wallow in the2, pet, 2, 22, myre. If with thy selfe, for Sinne, to live at strife In detestation of thy vitious life Thou truly dost desire, to find true peace, Looke, looke vpon thy LORDS most lovelie face, Perpending, pondring, laying deepe to heart, No midst there is, but Thou with Him must part For ever sev'red from His Holinesse, To pyne in Torments which no time makes lesse, Thy Back in time or turning; with thy Sinne (As thyMat, 5, 29, 30. right hand or eye though deare) to twinne. 'Tis base to thinke (if soules not to betray) That CHRIST and2, Cor, 14, 15 Belial can together stay,
A man must either renunce his sinfull lusts or Christ: hee can not haue both.Thy LORDS chast loue, and thy licentious lusts From thy divided soule one other thrusts. Pleasure in Him, and fleshlie pleasure fall So foull at strife, they can, nor mixe nor wall. To bee conform'd to Him, take pleasure; so As thou makst progresse shall thy pleasure grow, Pleasure without compare, which Thee shall make Sinnes deare bought seeming plea∣sures soone forsake. No Concupiscence e're defild his minde, Nor sinfull Motions least-least place did find In His affections, Him to lead astray, Darkning in Him the weakest shining Ray Of perfite holinesse, mou'd but draw neare That beastly Idole, as thy life held deare,
The which to serue thou all thy dayes hast doted To sinfull, sensuall delights, devoted. O runne to Him for grace:Mat, 7, 7, 8, Mark, 11, 24, Luke, 11, 6, Iohn, 16, 24, Iames. 1, 6. Hee can deny None, who in patient hope, knock, seeke, or cry, If thou but mourne to Him with sorow true Of lusts vncleane thy Devill hee will subdue. His Fathers service, Him in such a fashion Did ravish with continuall meditation Wholly with This tane vp, that in his minde No Idle Rav'ryes place besids could finde, Such as thy time doe waste, doores open make To Sathan and his Trayne; who course doth take On Wings of vaging thoughts, before to send His Messingers; comes then a∣pace in end
Himselfe; These, in securitie possest, And having rowme prepaird for him to rest. His Calling painefully hee did persue At all occasions: teaching thee thy due, To watch, to fast, to pray, Hee giues the ground, Least thou by Sathan shouldst bee Idle found. Hee vs'd the meanes, of which hee had no neede But by example that He thee might lead. In solitarieLuke, 28, 37 Mat, 14, 23, Mark 6, 46, mountaines, all alone, Hee oft for thee hath mournd, till night was gone Hath all the day-long in theIohn, 8, 12, Temple stood Feeding the famisht soule with HEAVENLY food, Delighted more his FATHER to obey, His will to doe, to HEAVEN to teach the way
WhenIohn, 4, 31, 32, 33,, Thirst or hunger vrg'd, then drink or eate, Though length of Time and travell did invite. ,,Now if a Patterne this to make, thee please, ,,A Scope to ayme at, standing not for ease, ,,Bee diligent to follow, spare no paine, ,,Thus are thy lusts subdu'd thy sinne is slaine. O giue mee LORD, with floods of teares vnfaind To bath my bosome, with vnclean∣nesse staind; Looke on a sorrie wight, in mourne∣full state, A Lazare lying at thy mercies gate: O passe not by:Ezek, 16, 8, let mee thy pitty proue, Cast over mee the Mantle of thy loue: Though I bee out of measure vile, yet LORD I cleane shall bee, if thou but speake the word.
Thou who hast proudly the op∣pressor played, A rav'ning vulture on the Pigeon preyd The Tyranni∣zing extortio∣ner, by turning to Christ pro∣cureth pardonThe faces of the poore hast grunde, laide watch The very morsels from their mouths to snatch Runne, runne, make hast, thy SAVIOUR comes along, Climbe with Zacheus to eschue the throng Luke, 19,Of sinnes, which happily in silence lye, Yet to the Heavens for wrath and vengance cry, And, on thy selfe if lookt thou hast aright, Thou canst no misse a comfor∣table sight Of Him, the lost who came to seeke, and saue, Of whom thou shalt not a repulse receaue. ,,None ask in fayth and doe vn∣pardond part, ,,Those suts alone lack successe which lack heart.
Behold no readier thou art course to take Due reparation for thy wrongs to make Than Hee, to bid himselfe thy guest to bee, Salvation offring, even vnaskt of Thee. If Envy,How the En∣vious may be helped by loo∣king on Christ harbord but in worthles breast, With plentie pind, disquieted with rest, Evill with good, with soundest health most sicke, With wellfare wretched, doth thy soule afflict, Looke on thy loving LORD, and blush to see Him for his Foes, in loue, content to die, While causlesly, thou dost thy Brother hate. Who harmd thee never, but in thy conceate, Or, as the bleard-mans eye the light offends, Whose hurt vpon his owne de∣fect depends.
Impatient passions, healed by looking on Christ,Thou whose proude heart doth boyle with furyes flame Who canst not thy vndaunted Passions tame, O bee ashamd the Meeknesse to behold Of thy provoked LORD, betrayd and sold, By words, by deeds injurd; in whom did shine Such patience, that even those who did repine To see Him liue He pittyed, yea procurd Luke, 23, 34, Isa, 53, 12,For them, by whom Hee cruell death endurd: Learne, as thou lookst, thy beast∣lie rage to bound, To bridle Furie, least it thee con∣found, Which as a fire, still readie is to burne As to revenge, or malice thou dost turne, Yea to devoure, if finding once a vent, Though for the least conceated discontent.
Base FEARE,Feare to doe right, in evrie estate, cured by looking on Christ. who darst not in thy place discharge Thy duetie, Iesning what thou shouldst enlarge, Looke heere, and learne wise Cou∣rage, to persue Thy righteous Ends, what's to thy Calling due, For fead nor favour which thou canst no spare, Thy LORDS Commission if thou not empare. Hath GOD thee cald his Counsels to disclose, His will to publish?Ezek. 2.6 standst thou who oppose Thy message? what1. Sam. 1 7, Goliah Thee assaile? What raging2 King. 18.17 Rabsaketh against thee raile? Fearst thou distresse?1. King, 22, 27, what though constraind to feed Thy famisht Bodie with afflictions bread While heere thou breathst, wilt thou to speake forbeare But what may pleasing be toIbid Achabs eare.
Art thou a2. Chr. 18. 1. King. 13.1. Man of GOD, a Prophet true? Ez. 3.18. & 33.7.It lyes thee on thy life, what ere ensue, Wrath to denounce gainst a re∣volting Land: Though1. King. 13.4. Ieroboam should streatch foorth his hand Nor death nor danger thou by sense must scan. Thou must not shrink to say,2. Sam. 12.7. Thou art the Man. Him, who thy hand hath charged,Heb. 4.12. of his word With the two-edged soule-divi∣ding sword Thou canst not but to Indignation moue If thou a Coward in His cause shouldst proue. To speake doth thy commission warrant beare And dost thou of the Arme of flesh take feare? Behold though to the1. King. 19.4.5.6.7. desarts forcd by flight To shield thy life from tiranizing spight
Thy LORD can send, who best doth know thy neede An Angell, in thy Famine thee to feede. Can strengthen thee, thatIer, 40, 1. Chaines norIbid, 20, 2, Stockes, norIbid. 32.3, and 38, 6, Iaile Shall in His Service hence thy Courage quaile; Even for thy cause, can make theAct, 16. Earth to quake, All the foundations of the prison shake. Thy boults of brasse, thy bands to brust a-sunder, Thy Keepers overcome with feare and wonder To stoupe before thee, and to wash with teares Thy strips, the badges which for CHRIST thou beares. If GOD bee for thee, panse no who oppose: His2, King, 19 18. Hooke can haill the haughtiest by the nose. What ere thou art, beware for Feare, to wrong Thy LIEGE or Lord, to whom thou dost belong,
Least, for a Counseller, of faith vn∣faind, A Servant, with no imputation staind, Disloyall and Ʋnfaithfull thou be found; To thy base Ends to lay a sliprie ground While thine owne Ease, (of all true worth denude) Thou setst before GODS glorie and their Good, And, from the Right made sla∣vishlie to swerue, Stoupst downe their Will, though not their Well to serue. Although (transported with the Times disease) Thy selfe and Men thou for a space mayst please Base Temporizer, yet when better Light The Weaknesse of thy wayes shall set in sight, In thine owne Colours then bee seene thou must: For loyall Subject, Servant wor∣thie trust
To GOD, thy PRINCE and Lord thou shalt apeare A slavish Drudge alone to servile Feare. Behold, that Nomans face should breed affright Or turne thee but a haire-bredth from thee right Thy LORD Himselfe doth in the Mirror show As to his faythfull Servants friend∣lie,Mat, 10.32, 33 Mark, 8, 38, so Most terrible to All whom Feare doth draw Of Man than GOD to stand in greater aw. THOU whose leud tongue and lips to lyes did moue,To looke on Christ for brid¦ling and rule∣ing of the tongue. Isa, 53, 6, Looke heere, and learne the Truth to speake, to loue. No Guile was in his mouth. No faire Pretence Of Complementall kindnesse mockt the sense Of Any, His Societie who sought; His speaches never varyed from his Thought.
None Hee did1, Pet, 2, 22, cousin, none with lyes deceaue, Did flatter none, of none would flattery haue. While fouleMat, 11, 19, and 12.24. Iohn, 8, 48, reproach His Patience did assaile, His peace He keept:1, Pet, 2.23, raild on, He did no raile. Hee No-man slandred, but who did offend In time and place most fit did reprehend In All rebuking sinne: Hee Cursed none But when of Heaven and Earth as Iudge alone Gainst Hypocrits, Professors but in show, Hee thundred foorth damnation, wrath and woe. Chast were His speeches, sober were His words, To nought vndecent His discourse debords. No Time Hee did in Idle purpose spend But such as did to edifying tend:
Hee knew, in things committed to His care, The fittest season both to speake and spare. By hurtfull Silence He did Nought conceale, His FATHERS Glory, or his Peoples well That might prejudge; in speache, nor word at all Vntimely vttred from his lips did fall. "Thus to thy Good, as Hee did frame His speach "Him make they patterne; speak as He doth teach. "What by exemple hee doth set thee to, "According to thy measure,Everie mala∣die of soule maybe helped by looking by faith on Christ in the scriptur and everie vertue may be¦gotten this way. ayme to doe. IN SHORT, cause All heere can not reckned be, To reade thy lifes past legend leaving Thee, So, in the Mirror, for thy help to looke, To turne the volumnes of that sacred Booke
Where, CHRIST is seene aliue, dead, raisd againe To life, for sinne ne're after to bee slaine, That looking heere, faults of what ever kinde By light of Scripture in thy selfe thou find CHRIST thy Consulter thou alone mayst make What course most meet for thy remeed to take. What ever Sinnes thy Conscience on thee draw By looking in the Mirror of the Law CHRIST make thy glasse, (tho with thy faults offended) To show thee how thy misses may bee mended. What ere deforme doth in thy soule abide In Him looke something that de∣fect to hide, No leprous spot vnpurgt in thee is seene The which in Him thou mayst not haue made cleane,
How ere in thee Sinnes Plague Its poison spread Seeke out, in Him and thou shalt find remead. To GOD, to Man, by what∣soever bands What thou to doe, or suffer oblisht stands, How e're extended bee thy dutyes lines Looke still on CHRIST, as in His Word Hee shines By light of which thy minde lift vp to see HIM in the HEAVENS, dispen∣sing vnto thee These vertues which hee craues; and what hee showes By Lifes rare Patterne, working even in those In whome His loue a true desire doth bread To bee conforme, made like Him∣selfe their Head. True faith,Truth of re∣ligion may bee learned of Crhist seene in the scriptur not firme but for a day, or houre, But such as stedfast stands, in ev'ry stoure,
True Loue, possessing all the soule and senses, The pow'rs all drawing, (free of faind pretences) To GOD, in full obedience to His will In absolute submission, suffring still With patient heart as pleaseth Him to deale. Who best doth know, what best is for thy well, Pure worshipping of GOD, in maner chast For warrant as His ordinance thou hast Without all mixture of Inventions vaine, The bastard broode of mans pre∣sumptuous braine, Him teaching thou shalt heare, Him showing see; Himselfe in Person even preceed∣ing thee, A blest exemplar, a most graci∣ous guyde, And if thou loue, (sinnes luggage layde aside)
To follow on, to thy eternall well In thee the like Him working thou shalt feele. What ever bonds of neighbour∣hood doe clame Thy LORD will fitt,Dutie to Pa∣rents and friends how to be learned at Christ. and by de∣grees thee frame Thy Duty to discharge, to Great, to Small As equity requires to doe to All; Mercie to show vnto the mise∣rable As neede in them exacts, as thou art able: As Lazarus, as His Disciples deare Hee did esteeme, loue to thy friends to beare, Kindred and bloode with due re∣spect to prise, But those whom Nature thee more nearlie tyes Most to regard, thy Parents, who did spare No paynes for thee, while for thy selfe to care
Thou couldst not, in more speciall degree In greater measure, loe Hee teach∣eth thee Io, 19, 26, 27:While from the CROSSE, to IOHNE, his loving friend, Now in His place, HER hee doth recommend Who gaue Him birth, His Ʋirgine-Mother blest By speciall care HER singling from the rest. Servants may learne their dutie by loo∣king on ChristServants may looke, in servants shape, how Hee Good proofe did give of his fidelitie And diligence to HIM did Him employ So, follow on with cheerefullnesse and Ioy Eph, 6, 5, 6,That to what ever Charge their Place them call As done to CHRIST their service may bee all. And masters their dutieMaisters remarking how their LORD did lead These twelue, who speciall priviledge did plead
To serve Him as Disciples: how most kind, Most affable Him all of them did find, Their faults so wisely checking, that no eye Did no their well sought in His service see, May learne in meeknesse,Eph, 9, 6, lenitie and loue To rule aright, not Tyrannizers proue, Their servants in obedience due to draw By wisdome more then force, loue more than awe. The Maryed may that strait conjunction see,And the mari¦ed their dutie, Of matchlesse loue that sacred mysterie CHRIST and his Church combining, thence to loue May learne as wedded to a LORD aboue Who lov'd them first, so from this patterne draw In earthly wedlock a religious law
Of holy loue a lesson, how to frame These dutyes chast which mariage bands doe clame. The fitted Soule, which hath its lusts subdued, Singly to liue with strength of grace endued, Mat. 19, 11, 12A NAZARITE to GOD to which is given To liue, an Eunuch consecrate for HEAVEN, Hath for a Guyde, to follow who invits, Iohn, 1, 45,IESUS of Naz'reth, prince of Nazarites. And Parents their dutie.Heere carefull Parents how to trayne may see Their Children, Them how nurse in pietie, How in their hearts to sow the seeds of grace, How vice and inborne Error to displace, Hereditarie Evils, faults foreseene, Sinnes ready to break foorth how to preveene.
How keepe from leavenning with doctrins vaine,Mat, 16, 6, 12 From course of life corrupt how to restrayne. Heere Subjects study may subjection true Submissiue loyalty,By looking on Christ as Hee shines in the Mirror of the Scripture Sub∣iects may learne their dutie to Ma∣gistrats and namelie Churchmen. obeysance due, But Church-men chiefly, by am∣bition blind, Whom CHRIST sore-seing should affect to find Worldlie Prheminence, Respect, and Place Aspire the steps of sov'raignety to trace, That ONE aboue the rest, should (thus made weake) The yock of Civill Iurisdiction shake From scornefull shoulders, raysd those Men aboue Whom GOD hath called Gods (how ere they proue In this submission lesse then Men) to beare In Princelie Pow're,Exod, 12, 13, 22.28, ibid His Royall I∣mage heere
Though therefore He exemption might haue peaded And not beene Caesars Tributary needed To teach obedience yet, to Subjects true Mat, 22, 21, Rom, 13.7,Would giue to Caesar what was Caesars due. And though hee might attaynd haue to a crowne, Iohn, 6, 15,Himselfe made Great by throw∣ing Others downe, To voluntary offers giving eare Of such, repining Caesars yoke to beare As gladly would haue Insurrection made, Conspird by arms a bloodie cause to plead, Yet did He flye; and (by exemple rare) To solitarie Desarts to repare Preferring, did all loyall Subjects teach To shunne Seditioun, though a Crowne to reach.
Yea when His life was most vn∣justlie sought, A weapon to bee drawne He suffred nought In His defence, but chuisd Him∣selfe alone To suffer, rather than by armes oppone The Lawfull Magistrat, so Authorrize Seditious men, for private Injuries Persu'd by Iustice, who dare set their face Against their PRINCE or Deputs in his place. Not of this world His Kingdome He profest To conquesse rents and Lands Him troubled least. Mens soules alone He sought, and these to saue; No Prince by Him did prejudice receaue By civile challenge, by pretended right By open violence, or secret slight,
Let Church-men follow as Hee did preceed In Imitation of their LORD and Heed, Or quite the false pretence them∣selues to call His Servants, while with Him at strife they fall, Proudly practizing what they con∣trare find, Both to His Mouths direction and His minde, For (bee they sure,) no TITLES of respect, No rev'rend Stiles which proud∣lings so affect, No name of Fathers in his house, no place Of Honour, which so eagerlie they chace, No scugge of PETERS chayre, no vaine pretence Of powre, by soveraigne preheminence, No casting out of devills shall ought availe, Preaching nor wonders working; all shall faile
Proud wordlings from that dread¦full doome to saue I know you not:Luke,  with mee no part yee haue. As Subjects Him beholding humbled,Kings and ¦lers may le  their dutie  looking vpon Christs pur∣trate in the Scripture. see A pearlesse Patterne of true loyaltie, So Kings may looking on this KING of Kings Who proudest Tyrants in sub∣jection brings Learne to bee truly Royall, Rule as Hee To whom all earthly Monarchs vassels bee. As Subjects prosper best, when to their King They Loyall proue, and to his Lawes to bring Obedience due, no paynes esteeme too great The well to stablish of His royall State So Princes then, when Subjects good they proue To IESUS CHRIST, a KING all Kings aboue,
His Kingdome seeking to advance, to plant Relligion in Their bounds, thence to supplant Contemners of His lawes, His Throne enlarge, Ezra. 7, 23,With noble Artaxarxes giving charge That what enjoynd is by the GOD of Heaven His House concerning, Order may bee given It to performe with speed, wrath to keepe backe Which may the Realme, the King, his Sonnes o're take. Let Kings behold this KING, how Hee who stands Nor by His Subiects wisdome, wealth, nor hands, Yet so doth seeke the wellfare of their State As if, they weakned, hee could not bee Great, Behould, how Hee All such as dare injure The hurt or Prejudice of His pro∣cure
Foes to Himselfe professing: no pretence Of fayned friendship, show of Inno∣cence Admittance finding to abuse His Eare, All Flatt'rers false defended to draw neare, Whom He will (one day) to their endlesse shame (As if He them had never known) disclame. As DAVID than, to whom GODS Counsells deepe Revealed were, of this true KING the Type, Looking vpon the Prototype, his LORD, His Kinglie Cariage did to His accord;Psal. 101, Learnd GOD his Ioy to make; GODS Law alone His Rule, in life,v, 1, and in Relligi∣on:v, 2, v, 3, Apostasie, and Apostats to hate, And every wicked man, or Meane or Great:v, 4,
v, 6,All such to curbe: the Godlie in their place As Favourits, Friends, Counsellers to grace Raysd to preferment, in his Eyes to stand, v, 8,GODS foes degraded, rooted from the Land; So let all Kings, anoynted from aboue, GOD for their Portion, Davids Lote who loue Him who doth both vnscepter and enstall Beholding, learne to do the like in all. Every estate may profite by looking on Christ n the ScriptureLet every Soule in end, of what condition Of mind, or case of present dis∣position Of Body, goods or name, of what degree Sexe, age, estate or Ranke so-ere they bee, Seeke by the eye of liuelie Fayth to looke On CHRIST, described in the sacred Booke
Of GODS two Testaments, the Mirror true From whence alone reflects His perfite view, And All in Him (if rightlie seene) shall find For each defect of Bodie or of minde Some seasonable good, Some soveraine cure To doe away in them, sinnes spots impure. No looke on Him shall bee be∣stou'd in vaine, For Hee in Mercie shall looke backe againe, And from each looke shall liuelie vertue flow Which difference sufficient shall show Twix CHRIST (aright) thus by His owne Means sought And that deceaving; shamefull Idole, brought In place of CHRIST, as CHRIST to bee adord, And (now) is by deluded soules implord
For Christ, and cald (what blas∣phemie more vile?) By Christs owne personall and pro∣per stile. The particu∣lare vses of Christs discrip¦tion in the Scripture left to preachers.Which things, as more than equall to my strength▪ I leave to Preachers to informe at length, Whose Calling is, (not in the Bed of slouth Reposing,) from the Chayre of sacred Truth That LAMBE of GOD, by Scrip∣tures, to point foorth, Mat. 13, 44That Treasure of vnestimable worth Hid in the Gospels field in sight to set, Whence needie soules may last∣ing riches get, CHRIST sacrifizde for sinners to present (By preaching of His death and Testament) Vnto their peoples eyes, by vses due Quickning dead soules vnto o∣bedience new
O that not Pastors may a few bee found Gold, pretious stones,1, Cor, 3.12, who build∣ing on this GROVND With hearts right set, their Maisters will to know Him to their flocks may chieflie strive to show, His Honour, and safetie of his Sheepe Preferring, to what els the world doth keepe. As CHRIST to All Himselfe a patterne gaue,Christ, a pat∣tern to preach∣ers in a speciall maner. To These so chieflie Charge of soules who haue, Hee, not Himselfe Intruding, sent from HEAVEN, As Aaron cald, vnto the Iews was given To Them the Gospells joyfull news to preach:Heb, 5, 4, Thus in Gods House no charge at all to teach Place ought to haue, but such (by GOD designd) As warrant doe from His apoint∣ment find,
And that in such None ought them∣selues to thrust Iohn, 10, 1, 2But whom alone GOD daind hath to entrust With His Commission, in His worke to sweate, Found Messingers for His Em∣bassage meet, Who scorning Means which worthlesse men doe make By doore of lawfull calling Entrie take. The charge to beare of GODS peculiar flock Iohn, 12, 29,Thus when thrust foorth, the Truth of God Hee spoke Him in Commission given, and still did care Of all His words, Gods word to make the square. No sinne Hee spar'd, Him No mans face did feare; Hee neither whipt in spleene, nor did forbeare For favour; so their saftie might bee wrought Mens well and not to please their will Hee sought.
Glory of men Hee gloryed not to get,Iohn, 7, 18, Nor Honour to Himselfe Him∣selfe did set To purchase (though to Him was due by right All Glory, Honour, Majestie and might) To seeke GODS honour was his maine intent Him who to Labour in His Harvest sent. No curious Phrase, applause of men to breed, (To Ignorants one with an vn∣couth leid) No Eloquence of words, no swel∣ling stile Did from His mouth His flock of foode beguile; In all Simplicitie, in termes most plaine, His minde Hee vttred, to the vulgar braine And Iudgement weake of All Himselfe applying Eares had to heare, vpon His charge relying.
To further mans Salvation Hee did spare Paynes, nor by night nor day, nor late nor ayre. Iohn, 4, 34,His meate his drink it was, soules home to bring His Fathers will to doe in everie thing. Wordlie Preferment, Honours Titles, Place, Hee did not with ambitious wordlings chace But vtterlie refusde, and lookt a∣farre On what so ere his maine Intent might marre. With things His Presence which did not exact Or from a better worke Him might destract Hee did no meddle, would no lay aside His Calling, matters civill to de∣cide Though in pretence twixt Bro∣thers peace to make Luk, 12, 13, 14.Vrg'd, Hee the Iudges office did forsake,
His Preaching while Impugnd by sinners bold, Hee suffred patientlie to bee con∣trold,Heb, 12. 3, Mat, 22, 15, Mark, 12, 13, Luke, 20, 20, Not with the obstinate by Iang∣ling vaine To tempt Him set, and of his words to gaine Advantage, Hee by dispute did contend: Or peace Hee keept, or some few words did spend Sufficient to convince, the conscience check Of such as thus their Envy durst detect. When as not loyall scandalizd,Luke, 23, 2, hee pleads Fidelitie, in suffring, doctrine, deeds, Though KING of Kings repining not to bee Heere subject to Supreme Au∣thoritie.1, Tim. 6, 13 When to the Romane Gover∣nour accusd As on whose doctrins false the world abusd
1, Tim, 6, 13,A good Confession witnessing, Hee stoode Fast for the Truth, and seald it with His bloode. To this His Patterne, perfitlie espyd, If true conformitie had beene applyd, His Ʋicar, Him at least who steales this stile But from His life, and doctrine doth resile, Mat, 4.8, 9,Those Evill Offers never had entisd Nor bad condition, by our LORD despisd. Nor should ambitions Men, puft vp with pride, With loue of worldlie Glory led aside, Haue turnd, their Earthlie pompe to entertaine, CHRISTS Heavenly Kingdome in a temp'rall Raigne. Apoc, 2, 4,Nor should the Dragons taile haue drawne from Heaven (By greed of gaine, and filthie lucre driven)
So many Stars to Earth, and earth lie wayes, Depriving both of light and heat their Rayes. Nor should vaine Men, in dam∣nable pretence Of Pietie, with windie Elo∣quence And falsely cald Philosophy, haue dard Themselues to Preach, of GOD the Truth haue mard. Nor should such Errors, bree∣ding onlie gaine To blinded Guids of a deluded Traine Haue Scriptures made despisd, so farre suspect, And Toyes and Trifles cary such respect. Strenghen LORD IESUS and stretch foorth thine hand To ayde thy Servants, for thy cause who stand, And reddy are to suffer fyre and sword For Thee, thy Truth, and credite of thy Word,
Sufficient Workemen in thy Harv'st thrust foorth, Fitted for those pernitious Times in worth: Come clense thy Kirk, discover by degrees The Man of Sinne, to All whose darkned eyes Blind to discerne, yet can not trulie see Midst such a glorious Sunne∣shine, who is Hee. Thine owne deare Lambs set free, who captives lye, Which chains of Ignorance and Error tye; That hence (no more in by-paths led astray) Iohn 14, 6,In seeking Thee, the Truth, the Life, the way, Their Crucifixes faind they may disclame, And of their Idols, and false Christs thinke shame Amongst their hands, their hearts lift vp to Heaven, Where Truelie Thee to see by Faith is given
To All, that in the Means or∣daind by Thee, With Souls right set, seeke in SINCERITIE. . GAL. 6.14. GOD forbid that I should rejoyce, but in the Crosse of our LORD IESUS CHRIST, whereby the World is cru∣cified vnto mee, and I vnto the World.
SONET. 1. WHILE (mine owne glasse,) vpon my self I looke Examining how (heere) my part is plaid, Reading in Consciences accusing Booke Of pretious Time how meane account I made, What hideous Formes my frighted Eyes vpbrade Reflecting from the Mirror of my mynd? Abortiue Flowrs which in the blossome fade Most of my labours past alone I find Eternall IVSTICE, Thou who (vndeclynd) To everie Worke Proportions the Reward, Pittie my folyes past: with Sprite refynd So shall I praise Thee, who my paths repaird; So from Egyptian Brick and Clay set free, My Songs shall only only bee of THEE. SONET. 2. BVT while my Sprite aboue the sphears aspyres And from the World would Separation make, Myne Eyes repyning at my Soules desyres With Lot's fond Wife, relenting looks cast backe. Thou whose consuming breath her Soyle did sacke All Lets, my flight which doe empeach, remov Wing my affection, that in word, in act From Earth sequestred, I may vpwards move There, where around Thee, wisdome, Iustice, Lou Truth, Mercie with extended wings, abide With numbrous hostes, all number farre oe, Of Sprits, which in eternity them hyde O lead mee thither, thither make mee runne Perfite thy worke (good LORD) in e begunne.
SONET. 3. MY wayes, my wandrings all to Thee are knowne, No strength to stand (LORD) of my selfe I haue; I breath in bondage, so am not mine owne, Emancipat to Sinne, so Sathans slave. No stinking carion, halfe consumd in graue, My leprous soule, in loathsomenesse exceeds. Thy glorious Image, how defacd I haue While I record, my heart for horror bleeds, Sweete Reconcealer, Thou who pardon pleads To sin-chargd soules, which faynting, groane for grace, Thy Mercie measure not with my misdeeds, Thy wandring chyld, turnd home at length, embrace, who brutishly mongst beasts, (with ackorns fed) Too long, a shamefull, swynish life haue led. SONET. 4. O Three times happie, if the day of grace In my dark soule did (though but dimly) dawne, If to my strugling thoughts proclamd were peace If from mine eyes the vaile of darknesse drawne. If once the seed of true Repentance sawne Made gushing streames leave furrowes on my face, Sinnes menstruous rags in pure transparent laune Were changt, O then how happie were my cace! o darknesse paths no more my feete should trace So, ever on a quyet conscience feast, Repent planted so should vice displace, So, clenst from Sinne, sinnes filth I should detest. Grce, Light, Repentance, inward peace I crave, Grat these good LORD, for mee thy selfe who ga
SONET. 5. AWake mee (LORD) from fancies charmi m My Sprit rouze vp from lethargie With doubled pace, O give mee to red. My Time mispent, the errors of my yoth. Hence let my taske, bee thy eternall Truth Free from vaine fictions of distempred brains: Grant what thou addst vnto my years of grouth Good seed may prove, cast on more fertile plains. Set to the key of grace, tune all my straines From lawlesse stuffe, fred from conceits prophaine Which poyson doe with gall the sweetest veines, And with the Sprit of lyes, most sprits enchaine. My Sprit with thine inspire, on wings mee raise, Lord, henceforth let my tongue sound foorth thy praise. SInce that vast Orbe, which doth the rest embrace More swift than thoght, still whirl about times eele Since years Serpentine course, with speedy pace Doth a continuall revolution feele, Since houres still slyde, still life away doth steale, Why then my Soule, heere art thou hd asleepe? As if on Earths low stage were placd thy In streams of slyding pleasurs, drencht too dee Breake off thy dreame: from worlds basse fetter teep Thy Soveraine Good with eyes vnsyld to view Ryse from earths vaile to climbe that Mountain steepe The only station of contentment true, Sooth no thy selfe, my Soule; shake of Lifes Flowre both spreidth and fadeth in a
SONET. 7. AS waue doth waue, so day, doth day displace, Times clock goes quickly: Moments swiftly slyde: The longest Age, scarce doth a minuts space If with eternity compaird, abyde. Yet Mortals, chargd with madnesse, fraught with pryde Day-livers dreame to see the worlds last date: Guyle held no guilt, craft they with craft doe hyde, Sinne heape on sinne, deceat vpon deceat. No paine is spaird to gaine the name of GREAT, Prizde with contempt, aymd at by few, is Good. But ah: and buildst thou vp a slipry state With pressing vsury, with bribes, with bloode. Madde Man, yet dost not, neither wilst take heede Thy Life ore hell, hings by a slender threed. SONET. 8. IF Lines, which Sphears, in equall shares divyde. But once the Center, twice the Circle touch, Like slow-pac'd 'snails, why then still doe wee crouch Still craule on earth, on earth still grov'ling bide? Let fayth our flight aboue Heavens circuits guide Where wee should dwell, redoubling our desires. The Doe, no rest heere finding streight retyres, But in our Prison plac'd is all our pride. As all the Vast inferiour Orbs of Heaven By proper pace, vnsensibly are rold But hurld about, with motion vncontrold, Are by the Highest, violently driven, O Mov first, let mee thy motion proue In grace, who rather retrograde than moue.
SONET. 9. A Constant course, heere, LORD each Creatr keeps Not swarving from thine ordinance, their end Earth vnsustained stands, in showrs Ayre weeps, Fyre vpward, water to its Center tends, The Sunne, in his Ecliptick, mounts, descends Oblicklie runnes, with Tropiks two confynd, Whose course the years alternat seasons sends; Seas ne're transgresse the Limits thou assingd. But Man, in whom thy vive Character shynd, That Lytle World, of all thy works a Breefe, Made Lord of All, of all hath most declynd From thy obedience. O tears! O griefe! Man to the Angels, whom Thou didst preferre, From his Creations end, doth only erre. SONET. 10. MY Lifs fraile Barge, with an impetuous, de Is on this worlds tempestuous Ocean tost: For me, as for our second Sre, provve A saving Ark, O LORD, or I am lo, Or as thy people (while proud Pharaohs hoast Seas over whelmd) through floods firme passage and A Vessell weake, Mee save, at too much cost Redeem't, to bee depriv'd of promis'd Land, As earst to Peter, LORD streach foorth thne ha On liquid floare while as his Fayth did fa Let not betwixt mee and thy mercie stand That I a sinner vile, hee liv'd a Saint, Thy Glorie greater, greater is thy Prais Mee a dead Lazare, from sinnes grave
SONET. O THE BLESSED TRINITIE. ce vnmovd, whose Word made all things move, ths pondrous Orbe midst Ayre who ballanst even, iscords sweete, who tund the ten-stringt Heaven, GO rich in Mercie, infinite in Love. LIT out of Light, O life who death didst prove Lo arthlings to redeeme, deprivd of grace, Chil full of wonder, glorious Prince of peace, B, from Eternitie aboue, O  GHOST, sweete sanctifying Sp'rit From oth proceeding. All, in essence One, Most sacred Trinde: first and last alone, Three, ndividuall, Trinally vnite, Father, Sonne, holy Ghost, God, one in three And three in one, for ever blessed bee. AMEN.
