D2950C [ocm]64551191 184535
Dolly and Molly. OR, The Two Countrey Damosels Fortunes at London. Dolly and Molly came up to the Town, To try their fortunes, wandring up and down; At length both marcht together to a Ball, There Moll a Gallant got, Doll none at all But Doll at last in town was richly Marry' Moll got a Clap, and shamefully Miscarry'd. To an Excellent New Play-House Tune; Or, Bacon and Beans. With Allowance, Ro. L'Estrange. depiction of young woman of pleasure depiction of young man of pleasure (a gallant) DOlly and Molly are new come to Town, Doll hath got nothing, but Moll a silk Gown; Dolly was handsome, though peevish and coy, But Molly was buxome and free to enjoy. Dolly and Molly they went to White-Hall, Dolly got nothing, but Molly got all; Dolly she scorn'd to have a Gallant, But Molly had all things that Dolly did want. Dolly and Molly were walking neer th' Court, youngster with Dolly began for to sport; But she put him off with a pish and fie, ing, Lord  be civil, else from you i'le flye, When Dolly refus'd him, to Molly he went, For one of the two to enjoy he was bent, He ask'd her a Question which made her to smile, Then a kiss and a Guinney did Molly beguile. He took her aside and he pleas'd her so well, That Mally consented with him for to dwell, There's nothing on earth that's to Mally deny'd, Her humour to please, and to pamper her pride. He gave her fine cloaths, and all things of th best▪ Because that her delicate body he prest, Her countrey speech did so heighten his charms, That Mally could seldom rest out of his arms. depiction of respectable young man depiction of respectable young woman Now Mally is rich, and Dolly is poor, But Dolly is honest, though Mally's a Whore; Doll said 'twas a pleasure to be modest and coy, But Mall swore 'twas pleasanter for to enjoy. Quoth Mally to Dolly, i'de have thee be wise, You'l never get any thing if you are nice; Observe but what state I do live in, and then You'l surely learn to be kinder to men. Oh Dolly the pleasures of Love are so sweet, When with equal desire together we meet: That nothing on earth can compare with that bliss Besides 'tis an honour to be call'd a fine Miss. Thus Mally tempts Dolly to go to the sport, And about her brave Gallants begin to resort: For Dolly was handsome in countrey gray, And was far more tempting then those that were gay. Says Dolly to Mally 'twixt anger and scorn, Oh Mally you'l wish you had never been born; Those immodest pleasures which you so commend, Will bring you to sorrow and shame in the end. Thus Dolly and Mally could never agree, Mally had Gallants more then two or three, She traded with all that had silver and gold, Till at length like Town-Miss she grew bawdy & bold. 'Twas Dolly's good luck a place for to get, To wait on a Lady whose fortune was great, Accounting it better a servant to be, Then a Lady of pleasure of the high  degree. This Dolly was pritty and cleanly and neat, Her body well shap'd, not to small nor too great: Her Mistris she pleas'd, and behav'd her self well, That Dolly most happily with her did dwell. Now Dolly is got into all peoples favour, & many young Shopkeepers strive for to have her; But Doll put them off with a modest reply; Saying, Sirs I'am resolved a Maiden to dye. But at last the coy Virgin was strook with loves drt Little Cupid hath wounded poor Dolly to'th heart, For one of those youngsters so cosely did ply, That Dolly no longer knew how to deny. Then marri'd they were, having all friends consent And happily live, to each others content; She proves a kind Wife, and a good Husband he, Then what greater blessing on earth can there be? But Mally despis'd her and call'd her young slut, Saying, Dolly there's more ways then one to go to't I'le take my delight with the blades of the times, Such pleasures as those without doubt are no crimes But a little while after such was her mishap, Poor Mally had got a most desperate Clap. Her Gallants forsook her and lest her forlorn, Crying out, you foul Whore we your company scorn Now Mally's distressed, and the pain must endure, She flyes to a Quack her distemper to cure; But Dolly lives bravely, and her wit I commend, For honesty always will thrive in The End. Printed for P B. and E. O. and are to be sold at their shops, in West-smith fi and o Snow-hill eld.
