E1831 [ocm]12018501 196736
AN ORDINANCE OF THE Lords and Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT; Constituting and appointing Sergeant Ma∣jor Generall Richard Brown, to be Sergeant Major Generall of all the Forces raised, or to be raised and imployed by Authority of Parliament, for the reducing of the City of Oxford, the Town and Castle of Wallingford, the Fort of Greenland-House, and the Town and Castle of Banbury; As also Sergeant Major Generall of the Forces of the coun∣ties of Oxon, Berks and Buckingham; And of the Forces of the said City of Oxford, to serve for The Defence of the King, Par∣liament and Kingdom, For this present Expedition. And to do any other thing whatsoever, for the infesting and destroying the Enemy in those parts. Also, the said Sergeant Major Generall Richard Brown is here∣by enabled to call together and assemble a Councell of War, for the executing of Justice upon Offendors. Die Sabbathi, 8. Junii, 1644. Hen. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com. London, Printed for Matthew Walbanck at Grayes-Inne gate. June 10. 1644.
Die Sabbathi, 8. Junii, 1644. AN ORDINANCE OF THE LORDS AND COMMONS ASSEMBLED IN PARLIAMENT: THE Lords and Commons As∣sembled in Par∣liament, Doe heereby Consti∣tute and ap∣point Serjeant Major Gene∣rall Richard Brown to be Sergeant Major Generall of all the For∣ces, raised, or to be raised and imployed by Authority of Par∣liament,
for the reducing of the City of Oxford, the Town and Castle of Wallingford, the Fort of Greenland-House, and the Town and Castle of Banbury: As also Sergeant Major Gene∣rall of the Forces of the Coun∣ties of Oxon, Berks, and Buck∣ingham: And of the Forces of the said City of Oxford, to serve for the Defence of the KING, Parliament, and Kingdom, for this present expedition: And doe hereby will and require the said Sergeant Major Generall Richard Brown, to take the said Forces into his Charge as Ser∣geant Major Generall, and to make his present repaire unto the said Counties, giving him hereby Power and Authority to Command, Lead, and Conduct the same into any part of the said Counties or parts adjacent;
or in the absence of the Earle of Essex Lord Generall, as Ser∣geant Major Generall to do a∣ny other Act or thing, as he in his Iudgment shall think fit for the defence and security there∣of: And also to draw forth of the said Counties, such well-affected Souldiers as will fol∣low him for the Service afore∣said: And also to secure the se∣verall Forts, Castles, and Towns within the said Counties, for the safety of King, Parliament, and Kingdom as aforesaid, and pre∣servation of the aforesaid Coun∣ties and parts adjacent from Spoile and Rapine. And the said Lords and Commons doe hereby likewise Authorise the said Sergeant Major Generall Richard Brown, to nominate and appoint all such Officers as shall be by him thought requisite for
the better Conduct of the said Forces, and diligently to Exer∣cise the said Forces in Armes; as also to call together and As∣semble a Councell of Warre, to consist of Twelve Colonells or o∣ther Officers, or more, as he in his discretion shall think fit, none to be under the degree of Captains: And do Constitute and Appoint him President of the said Coun∣cell, to Examine upon Oath all such Witnesses as he shall finde necessary for the cleering of the Truth, in Cases which shall de∣pend before him; and to heare and Determine all and every Crimes and Offences to be com∣mitted or done by any Officer or Souldier under his Com∣mand, by vertue of this Ordi∣nance; and to Punish and Exe∣cute Iustice upon them, and an Enemies which shall be under
his power, as he in his Iudg∣ment, by the advice of his Coun∣cell of Warre, according to the rules of Martiall Law publish∣ed by his Excellency the Earle of Essex Lord Generall of the Forces for the King and Parli∣ament, shall think fit: And to doe any other thing whatsoever as to him shall seeme requisite, for the infesting and destroying of the Enemy in those parts, and Reducing the said City of Oxford, Town and Castle of Wal∣lingford, the Town and Castle of Banbury, the Fort of Greenland-House and parts adjacent; Com∣manding all Officers and Soul∣diers of the said Forces; to Obey him as their Sergeant Major Generall for the Service above-mentioned, according to this Commission given him: And the said Sergeant Major Ge∣nerall
Richard Brown, is likewise from time to time to observe and follow such Orders and Di∣rections as hee shall receave from both Houses of Parlia∣ment, the Committee of both Kingdomes, and the Earle of Essex Lord Generall, or any of them: And the Lord Generall is hereby desired, to grant a Commission according to the Tenor of this Ordinance. FINIS.
