E2118 [ocm]12174345 197187
A PAPER RECEIVED BY HIS MAIESTY from the Committee of both HOUSES, upon the eight of April. WITH HIS MAIESTIES Gratious Message to both Houses in Answer to the same. Printed by His MAjESTIES Command at OXFORD, By LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to the Vniversity. 1643. Aprill 21
April 8. 1643. BY Instructions this day received from both Houses of Parliament, We hum∣bly conceive, that we are to acquaint Your Majesty, That they have taken into consideration Your Majesties An∣swer to their Reasons concerning the Cessation, wherein there are divers expressions which will occasion particular Replies, which at this time they desire to decline, Their wishes and endeavours being earnestly bent upon the obtaining a speedy Peace, for wbich cause they doe not thinke good to consume any more of the time allowed for the Treaty in any farther debates upon the Cessation, concerning which they finde Your Majesties Expressions so doubtfull, that it cannot be suddenly or easily resolved, and the remainder of the time for the whole Treaty, being but seven daies, if the Cessation were presently agreed, it would not yeeld any considerable advantage to the Kingdom.
Wherefore we are required to desire Your Majesty to give a speedy and positive Answer to the first Proposi∣tion concerning the disbanding, That so Your Subjects may not onely have a shadow of Peace, in a short time of Cessation, but the substance of it in such manner as may be a perpetuall blessing to them, by freeing the Kingdom from those miserable effects of War, the effusion of Eng∣lish blood, and desolation of many parts of the Land: Northumberland. Jo. Holland. Wil. Peirrepoint. Wil. Armyn. B. Whitelocke.
His MAJESTIES Gracious Message to both Houses, in Answer to the Foregoing Paper. IF the Committee, according to His Majesties Desire, had had but Power to agree in the wording of Expressions in the Articles of Cessation, His Majesties (which are as cleare as the matter would beare, and as He could make them) had not appeared so doubtfull to any, but that the Cessation might have been suddenly and speedily resolved, and that long before this time. And if the Expressions of both Houses in their Reasons had not necessitated His Majesty in His owne Defence to give such answer as could not upon those points deliver Truth with∣out some shew of sharpnesse, no expression of that kind in His Majesties Answer had given any Pre∣tence for the rejection of, or refusing so much a to Treat upon the Cessation; Which (though it were at present for no long time;) yet was from the day named by themselves the 25 of March, Whereas His Majesty first moved for a Cessation and Treaty, without any Limitation at all in the time of either; and his Majesty was most ready to have enlarged
the time (so that in the meane while the point of Quarters might be so setled, as that his Armys might subsist) and which might have beene (if they had pleased) a very good and promising earnest and forerunner of that great blessing of Peace, for the obtaining of which the wishes and endeavours of all good men being earnestly bent, a farther debate in order to so great a benefit did not deserve to be stiled a consumption of time. And his Majesty can∣not but conceive himselfe to be in a strange condi∣tion, if the doubtfulnesse of expressions, (which must alwaies be whiles the Treaty is at such a Di∣stance, and power is denied to those upon the Place to help to cleare and explaine) or his necessary re∣plying to Charges laid upon him, (that he might not seeme to acknowledge what was so charged) Or the limitation of the time of seven Daies for the Treaty (which was not limited by his Majesty, who ever desired to have avoided that and other limitations, which have given great interruptions to it) should be as well beleeved to be the grounds, as they are made the Arguments of the rejection of that, which (next to Peace it selfe) his Majesty above all things most desires to see agreed and setled, and which his Majesty hopes (if it may be yet agreed on) will give his people such a taste of such a blessing, that after a short time of consideration, and compa∣ring
of their severall conditions in War and Peace, and what should move them to suffer so much by a Change, they will not thinke those their Friends that shall force them to it, or be themselves ready to contribute to the renewing of their former mi∣series, without some greater evidence of Necessity then can appeare to them, when they shall have seene (as they shall see, if this Treaty be suffered to proceed) that his Majesty neither askes nor denies any thing, but what not onely according to Law he may, but what in honour and care of his people he is obliged to aske or deny. And this alone (which a very short Cessation would produce) his Majesty esteems a very considerable Advantage to the Kingdome; and therefore cannot but presse again and again, that whatever is thought doubtfull in the Expressions of the Articles may (as in an houre it may well be done) be expounded, and whatso∣ever is excepted at may be debated and concluded, and that Power and Instructions may be given to the Committee to that end, that the miserable effects of War, the effusion of English blood, and desolation of England (untill they can be totally taken away) may by this meanes be stayed and in∣terrupted. His Majestie supposes, that when the Committee was last required to desire his Majestie to give a
speedy and positive Answer to the first Propositi∣on concerning Disbanding, His Answers in that point (to which no Reply hath been made, and which he hopes by this time have given satisfacti∣on) were not transmitted and received, but won∣ders the Houses should presse his Majesty for a speedy & positive Answer to the first part of their first Proposition concerning disbanding, when to the second part of the very same Proposition, con∣cerning his Returne to both houses of Parliament, they had not given any Power or Instructions to the Committee, so much as to Treat with his Ma∣jesty▪ And when his Majesty (if his desire of Peace and of speeding the Treaty in order to that had not been prevalent with him) might with all man∣ner of justice have delayed to begin to Treat upon one part untill they had been enabled to Treat upon the other; In which point, and for want of which power from them, the onely stop now re∣maines, his Majesties Answers to both parts of their first Proposition, being given in, transmitted, and yet remaining unanswered. To which, untill the Houses shall be at leisure to make Answer, that as little delay in this Treaty, as is possible, may be cau∣sed by it, His Majesty desires likewise, that the Com∣mittee may be enabled to treat upon the follow∣ing Propositions in their severall orders. FINIS.
