L449A [ocm]31355797 205892
Taxila, OR LOVE Prefer'd before DUTY. A NOVEL. By D. W. Gent. LONDON, Printed for Tho. Salusbury at the Kings-Arms, near Cliffords-Inn-Lane, by St. Dunstan's Church, in Fleet-street, 1692.
TO THE Accomplished and Highly E∣steemed Mrs. Elizabeth Whit∣tingham. TO find your deserving Name prefixed to so inconsiderable  Peice, the World may justly won∣er, and term it a presumptuous Ʋndertaking: Consideration, says ne, would have made him more dis∣reet, and had he ballanced it, he must have yielded to a less bold umour. Alas! how different is hat thought from the true occasion; rom thence I had the highest En∣ouragement to proceed: For pau∣ing one day seriously upon the mat∣er, the most affecting Object so trongly seized upon my active Prin∣iple, that I found my self disposed
in sp ite of all my force, to form with∣out delay this Dedication. I hope your goodness will prevent the Cen∣sure of the World; and of an un∣pardonable Crime, only make a too considerate Action. But had there been no other reason for it, methinks it had been an Egregious Fault to have neglected, if it could be pos∣sible, a Person in whom Beauty and Vertue are so eminently conspicu∣ous. One whose incomparable Hu∣mour, and obliging goodness, are no the least of those excellent Quali∣ties, which have acquired her the Esteem and Admiration of all tha have the Honour to know her The Considerations had been suffi∣cient to have raised me to the con∣fidence of laying this Diverting tho' Ʋnpolished Treatise at you Feet. I have heen eased hereby, o
some few leisure Hours, purely to avoid the intruding Cares of what might happen. The Subject is Love; So much the more curious, for who is not fond of knowing what they feel, besides the natural Incli∣nation of piercing into Secrets. The Scene, 'tis true, was acted in a far distant Climate; still the more en∣couraging, for what is more pleasing to the Sense than Novelty, that ne∣cessary Appurtenance of our Na∣ture. And then the Powerful Charms of our Tartarian Prin∣cess, Her Generous, unaffected Dis∣position, and more her Noble Soul, fit, and adapted to entertain true Love, bear such a near Resemblance to yours, that it were an irrepa∣rable Injury not to repose them un∣der your Protection. Do but ob∣serve to the least particulars of
what Relates to the adorable Taxi∣la, and I'm confident you'll find, that through every Circumstance of her Character, you may discern as thro' a Mirror, your individual Self. If the following Novel will but suf∣fice to entertain those Hours, that are disengaged from more important Business, 'tis all my Hopes can rea∣sonably wish for, and the full end of my Design obtained. Amongst the Crowd of your Admirers, be pleased to Accept the particular De∣votion of, Madam, Your most Obedient SERVANT, &c.
Taxila, Or Love prefer'd before Duty. A Novel. THe Eastern Tartary, after having enjoyed many Kings, worthy to govern that fine part of the World, in process of time found it self under the subjection of Ʋndkan, a feeble Prince, and at the disposal of an im∣perious Queen, that suggested to him nothing but Violence. The City of Cambalu, the usual residence of it's So∣veraign's, magnificent in all things, and illustrious by the Majesty of six Kings that were then at the Court of Ʋndkan, was upon the point of serving as a Theater to the cruelty of Zamur; that was the Name of the Queen.
Ʋndkan had an only Daughter by his first Marriage, called Taxila, who was the Object of the Admiration of the Tartars, whom he destined to the Son of the Queen his Spouse; this Prince, by name Timur, was King of Tenduc, and enjoyed as his utmost merit, the blind affection of an ambitious Mo∣ther, that was capable of sacrificing all things to her Grandeur. The Princess of Tartary, was born with admirable Qualities: Nothing was ever seen comparable to her. The Charms of her mind bore an equality to those of her Beauty: She possessed a a great Soul, a compleat Vertue and one may say, that Heaven had been in no wise wanting in its Favours to her. Her inclinations were very repugnant to the designs of the King her Father, and in spite of the pretentions of Ti∣mur, she along time avoided what ab∣solute orders could prevail upon her. But her heart, which the Son of Zamar could not effect, was by no means in∣sensible. Zingis prescribed at Cam∣balu, altho' he was guilty of no other
Crime, than that of being too deser∣ving, caused some tender Disquiets in the Princess. She saw all combined a∣gainst him, Ʋndkan, Zamar, Timur, and many other Kings, cowardly Adorers of a Tyrannical Power. Taxila alone was of his party, with a perseverance due to the Services of that illustrious Lover; but he was absent, and the jea∣lous Timur was Almighty through the Authority of his unjust Mother. One night, as Taxila was devoted to the remembrance of Zingis, she heard a great Noise, and saw the King her Father enter into her Chamber, who came with his Eyes full of anger, to reproach her with a private correspondence with his most mortal Enemy. After having vented an infi∣nite number of outragious Expressions, he commanded her to be strictly guarded in her apartments, where he left her alone. The Princess judged im∣mediately, that this Enemy of whom he spoke, could be no other than Zin∣gis; but she did not comprehend up∣on what motives Ʋndkan, who from
above a year past had left him some repose, renewed a persecution, which time feemed to have abated, and recal∣led in his Memory a Person, that he had sought to exclude from thence. An Officer of the Guards unfolded to her this Mystery, in acquainting her, that Zingis was lately surprized at one of the Gates of the Palace upon the Banks of the River Polizangi, where Zamar had heard him speak from a Terrass, where she was walking. That disco∣vering by his discourse, that he return'd to Cambalu for the Princess, she order'd him to be assaulted; that Valour yield∣ing to force, they had over-whelmed him without being conquer'd; and brought him loaden with Irons to a dismal Tower, where the vilest Offenders were usually enclosed. This discourse occasioned a mortal grief in the Soul of Taxila. She made the Tartar depart, and suffering her self to fall into the Arms of Axione, a Damsel; she tenderly loved, because she was all charming. Ah! my dear
Axione, said she to her, behold this fatal accident which I have so much fear'd and the generous Zingis is in the chains of the implacable Zamar. Alas! I support∣ed patiently his absence, because it secured him from this barbarous Enemy; but he has precipitated himself into her hands, and 'tis still the passion he entertains for me, that has conducted him thereto: All was sweet and pleasing, whilst I considered that he loved me, and that I was under no occsion of fear for him. I used to reckon up his Services, to pay them with my most tender affections, and I suffered the im∣portunities of Timur, in hopes that Hea∣ven would never abandon me to a person, so little worthy of me. The afflicted Taxila accompanyed these words with a Torrent of Tears; and the beautiful Axione, who by the liberty the Princess of Tartary had gi∣ven her, and the noble motions that encouraged her, did not strive with her, but said to her in receiving her Embraces, all that she judged capable of moderating her displeasure. No
Axione, replyed the sorrowful Princess, There's nothing more to hope for. My Fa∣ther is infirm, Zamar holds her Victim, Timur has no Vertue, and Heaven would make me know to what degree 'tis angry with me. But Madam, pursued Axione, do you think that the King has utterly re∣nounced all equity, and that he will give so many Princes, whose Eyes are fixed up∣on him during their residence at Camba∣lu, such just Subjects to detest his Cruelty? Axione, replyed Taxila, those Princes of whom you speak, are naturally Cowards, and besides incensed against the Valour of Zingis, who has made them Slaves, in im∣posing on them those Tributes that main∣tain the Pride of Zamar. Madam, an∣swered Axione, amongst the Kings we see here, there may be some free and gene∣rous. It is true, added the Princess, that of Thibet has a merit that extreamly di∣stinguishes him from the rest; besides, pursued Axione, he is powerful, and I am persuaded, that he'll attempt all things for Zingis, because he loves Vertue, and cn∣not dispense with Injustice. Whilst these two amiable persons
entertained themselves in this manner, Zamar was infinitely pleas'd to think that she was Mistress of the Destiny of a Man that had made her ambition suffer so much. Ʋndkan had a great share in this Joy, and Timur basely triumphed in the misfortune of a ge∣nerous Rival, to whom he was in∣debted for his Life and Liberty. The day dispersed this surprizing News amongst the Tartars. Those that had seen Zingis in War, and at Cam∣balu, wished his loss, or his safety, ac∣cording to their inclinations; yet there was but few, but were desirous to se∣cure him from the danger he was in. As soon as Ʋndkan was to be seen, the Kings of Tanguth, Cerguth, Ergi∣mul, and Ʋng, rendred themselves near his person, and a little after Philing, King of Thibet: The first expressed to him a great deal of Joy for the captivi∣ty of his Enemy; and the last, who with an Independant Kingdom, being much more considerable than the rest, had also Sentiments infinitely more noble and generous, spoke freely in fa∣vour
of Zingis, and did not stick to declare, that he was full of respect and esteem for his Vertue, and for that no∣ble Reputation, which made his name so illustrious in Asia. Ʋndkan frowned at the discourse of Philing; and Zamar, who was a witness to it, lookt upon him from thence as a suspitious person All his Qualities were truly Royal. His person was admirable, his Domini∣ons vastly extensive, & depended upon no Power. The Neighbourhood of Chi∣na, which bounded the Lands of his O∣beisance, might afford him great ad∣vantages, in calling to his Assistance, a People, who, being often attacked by the Tartars, were yet only upon the defensive part, and aspired to reduce them to Complaisance. All these rea∣sons rendred the King of Thibet formi∣dable to that of Trtary, who answer∣ed him softly, that Zingis was a Tray∣tor, and that his Captivity was owing to the safety of his Crown. Philing did not think it proper to be very urgent the first time with an irritated King and Queen, in favour of a Man whom
he knew but imperfectly, and with∣drew in casting contemptible Regards upon four Princes, that dishonoured their Character, in breaking so unwor∣thily before ndkan and Zamar. Philing pass'd from thence to the Apartments of the Princess, where the interest of his heart often called him: but by the Orders which had been gi∣ven, he could neither see her, nor the lovely Axione. From thence he direct∣ed his steps to Almundzar, a noble Tar∣tar, in whom he had found a great deal of Vertue, who had the chief Govern∣ment of Tartary, through his profound skill in the most-secret Affairs, & whom Zamar disaffected for that reason: He was a sincere friend of Zingis, and Philing found in his company a Man that was faithful to this Prince, who had saved himself by the favour of the night, and came to solicite Almundzar to endeavour for the liberty of his Ma∣ster. The generous Tartar had receiv'd him with all the courtesie in the world; but he fear'd with reason, that he could do nothing for Zingis, against the fierce
and artificial Zamar. They were up∣on this Subject, when the King of Thi∣bet entred. Generous Almundzar, said he immediately to the favourite of Ʋndkan, What shall we do for the illust∣rious Zingis against so many implacable Enemies? Hatred, Artifice, and Baseness, are armed against him, and 'tis to us Hea∣ven has bestowed the Favours of more rea∣sonable Sentiments, that we may unite Vir∣tue, Friendship, and sincerity for his Relief. The Servant of Zingis, who was unac∣quainted with Philing, and who admi∣red his incomparable meen, was ra∣vished to hear him speak after that manner. Almundzar assured the King of Thibet, that he was ready to expose his Fortune and his Life for the Ser∣vice of Zingis; but that he was igno∣rant of any means, that might bare∣ly balance the Authority of Za∣mar. I am not acquainted, answered Philing, with all the particulars of the life of Zingis, and I am only prevented of that glittering Merit, of which Renown gives so advantagious a Character: but, Almund∣zar can you give me no further infor∣mation?
Behold, my Lord, replied Al∣mundzar, in shewing the faithful Squire of Zingis, a Man that is better enaled to give you that satisfaction, than I am. Yes, my Lord, added Zerbin, with a respect∣ful behaviour, and my Master will be done a sensible pleasure, in being perfectly known by such a Prince as you. Philing oblig∣ed Zerbin to pass into another room, to leave Almundzar at liberty to pur∣sue the Affairs that ordinarily employ∣ed him; and being seated commodi∣ously, Zerbin began his Discourse as follows. The History of Zingis, and the Prin∣cess Taxila. YOu know, my Lord, that my Ma∣ster is the Son of Sakuh, or Baha∣dur, sirnamed the Valiant, King of the Monguls; and you are not ignorant, that amongst divers people of Asia, those have particularly distinguish'd them∣selves by their incomparable Valour, and the uninterrupted union that is a∣mongst
them. Bahdur is descended from our most ancient Kings; and as a worthy Successor of an infinite num∣ber of Heroes, he was always dreaded by his Adversaries, and extreamly che∣rish'd and respected hy his own Sub∣jects. His Territories are of an ample extent; the River Tartar, and the Lake of Coras, render the Country ex∣traordinary fertile in many places, and that solitary part which comprehends Bargu, and extends as far as the Tarta∣rian Ocean, is hardly known to those that inhabit near the Lands of Ʋndkan. Bahadur had by his Queen a double Off-spring; this illustrious Zingis whom Fortune exposes to day after so cruel a manner; and the Princess Zenelia, who was surprized and carried away by the violence and force of a company of Robbers, in a Journy the Queen took, to receive the benefit of an Air that was more conformable to her consti∣tution, which was in a languishing State. The loss of the innocent Zene∣lia made such a deep impression upon her Vitals, that she soon bad adieu to
the World, leaving the youthful Zin∣gis for a consolation to her Husband. He then went under the Name of Temuzin; but there was observed from his Infancy, such enlivening marks of Grandeur and Courage, that the People gave him that of Zingis which is a proper Title for a peculiar, distin∣guished person. Bahadur with this Son so worthy of his affection, cancelled the thoughts of a more ample Posterity, and de∣voted his utmost cares to the Educa∣tion of Prince Zingis, whom a few years rendred perfectly accomplished. The King observed the encrease of his Person and noble Qualities, with a profound satisfaction. He could per∣ceive by the progress of his first acti∣ons, that he would not derogate from so many excellent persons, from whose blood he descended, aspiring to the real Character of Glory, giving Ver∣tue the deserved preference of all things, and shewing none but gene∣rous Inclinations. As soon as he had attained the seventeenth year of his
Age, he appeared with so much cour∣teousness in his actions, and with so agreeable a behaviour, that nothing was ever seen comparable thereto. Bahadur encouraged his presence; but the young Prince who had yet tasted nothing but the sweetness of repose, and whose Courage demanded more tumultuous occupations, agitated in his thoughts how to absent himself for some time from the King his Fa∣ther. My Lord, said he one day to him, don't you suppose that I owe something to the honour of being your Son? Hitherto I have given you no other marks than my Respects; but my Lord, that doth not suffice to satisfie the blood from whence our Vitals proceed. The profound Peace that the Monguls are under an obligation to your Courage for, doth not require that I should remain at Molg in a per∣petual ease and obscurity: We may have reason perhaps one day to blush for shame, and in all probaility, to find unfortunate effects thereof. It is time for me to learn that Accomplish'd Art, which alone serves
for a worthy Employment to Princes. If so be there is no occasion for War in Asia, it's necessary to enquire after it in Eu∣rope, and return with a Reputation more Illustrious to the rest of the World. This discoruse flattered the invin∣cible Courage of Bahadur; but at the same time he was exceeding fearful of his tender youth. Zingis, replyed he to the young Prince, neither your noble Progenitors, nor the most en∣vious Nations have any just Subject to reproach you with; and you have all along from your Infancy, addict∣ed your self to those Employments which might procure you a glorious Futurity. I am sensibly satisfyed with your presence, & should be ex∣treamly afflicted at the news of your loss: But yet, my Son, don't imagin that I am desirous to confine you to a place, which in the opinion of the World, is more proper for the residence of furious Beasts, than for Princes, on whom Heaven has be stowed some Merits. I don't op∣pose this generous Emulation you
seem to be inspir'd with; but my dear Zingis, defer your intentions for a little time: You cannot be ig∣norant of the King of Tartary's threat∣nings to us all; perhaps he is ready to make a Declaration of War. The Tributes which he has exacted from several Kings, will most certainly extend to us, and then we shall have just cause for War. Ah! my Lord, interrupted Zingis, how uneasily doth a person of my age and humour dispense with such Projects. I don't know whether the King of Tartary confounds us with other Princes, o∣ver whom he designs to erect a So∣veraign Authority, but I'm of Opini∣on, that through the consideration of your exploits, he'll consult more than once upon the matter. In short, my Lord, these are but uncertain Conjectures, and if so be you are not disposed that I should exceed the limits of Tartary, suffer me at least to view the whole extent of it, that I may inform my self of a great ma∣ny Curiosities, which I have had but a confused Relation of.
The King of the Monguls found so much reason in the Prince's Design, that he at length assented to his departure, but not without some vio∣lence to himself, but under a proviso, that he should not pass beyond the li∣mits of Tartary. He gave him a per∣mission to visit the Court of Ʋndkan, with whom as yet he entertain'd no dispute; and Zingis satisfyed with the fruition of his Request, converted his thoughts to the preparation of his Re∣tinue. He would not take with him a numerous Equipage by reason of the profound Peace that reigned in all the places we were to pass. My self, be∣cause of my Education near his Per∣son, and the favour of his particular friendship, was of this Journey, and we departed from Molg with as much satisfaction as if we had escaped a Prison. The first things we made our ob∣servations on, were the Tombs of the Tartarian Princes: They are scituated amongst Mountains which obstruct not (at a great distance) the prospect
of an infinite number of magnificent Pyramids, which are erected higher than the tops of those exceeding lofty Hills. From thence coasting the De∣sarts of Belgian, we saw the Kingdoms of Tanguth and Ergimul, without stop∣ping our progress, or discovering our persons, and took the direct course for Cambalu, where we designed to take up a longer Residence. Coming near the place, we were informed that Ʋndkan with his whole Court were gone to pass the most di∣verting Season of the Year at Cingui, a very pleasant City upon the River Pazanfu. As my Master directed him∣self to Cambalu for the diversion of the Court, this News made him turn his course towards Cingui. The Royal Palace is Scituated without the City, and one of the most superb and state∣ly of all Tartary. The Gardens are extreamly large, and curiously culti∣vated. The Springs and Fountains add a thousand Beauties to the place. The Trees and Arbors form a charming obscurity, which the Sun with his
variety of Beams can hardly penetrate n divers places, besides the liberty of walking there at all hours. We dis∣covered at a distance this glorious Pa∣ace, and Zingis whom the heat of the Weather had wonderfully fatigued, spying one of the Garden Gates open, and without a guad, had a mind to nter, in order to refresh himself for some few moments, shewing us with is hand a place where he ordered s to attend him. Notwithstanding he vast Journey that he had already made, there appeared in him nothing of carelessness or neglect, and the magnificence of his habit joyn'd to the Splendour of his incomparable Meen, made him appear something more than a Humane person. He was extreamly taken with the Beauty of these Gardens, which is in∣deed extraordinary, and walked there∣in with abundance of delight, and was thinking to rejoyn us, when cros∣sing another Walk he discerned at the end of it several persons together, and distinguish'd amongst them some of
the Female Sex. As he is not subject to be surprised, he advanced with a great assurance, and the more he ap∣proached, the more clearly he appre∣hended that these Women were of the Noblest quality, by the respect that was paid them. His curiosity encrea∣sing, encouraged him to proceed a little further; but a Man separating him∣self from the rest of the Company came up to him, and regarding him with an Insolent Air, Who are you said he fiercely, that violating the sacred Laws, comes presumptuously hither without giving that respect that's due to the Majesty of the Prin∣cess of Tartary? Are you ignorant that no stranger durst appear before Her, without being introduced ac∣cording to the usual Customs? And is it for to brave those that attend upon her, that you come to expose your self to our just displeasure? Zingis was not accustomed to such a Language, and this Entertainment gave him a little surprise. His action appear'd to him very innocent, and
being somewhat moved at the Tarta∣ians incivility. I am one, answer'd He, that is not obliged to render an account of what he pretends to do: the Prin∣cess indeed may command so much from me, as will prove to my Vindica∣tion; but I must not allow that satis∣faction to any of the Subjects of Ʋndkan. He that heard Zingis was of too roud a nature, not to be moved at is answer. It was Timur, whom the Titles of King of Tenduck, and Son to he Queen of the Tartars, rendred roud, even to Insolence; and altho' hat Character of Grandeur, which ppeared through the whole person f the Prince of the Monguls, ought to ave detained his hand, yet seeing his aseness slighted, he drew his Sword, nd lift up his hand to strike Zingis; ut how fatal had his rashness like to ave proved to him! The invincible ingis prevented him by so weighty blow upon his Head, that he tumbled stonish'd at his feet, & had it not been r the goodness of his Hat, he had ever been capable of disturbing my aster's Repose.
The misfortune of Timur occasion¦ed the presence of a great number o Guards who would by all means seiz upon the person of Zingis. He mad a couragious Defence, and had demon¦strated to them the real Character o Vertue, had not Ʋndkan made his ap¦pearance in the same Walk. He im¦mediately informed himself of th Subject of this Disorder, and appre¦hending it inconsiderable, was muc displeased at the Accident of Tymur and entertaining but too good an Opi¦nion of him that was so fearless o danger, he made his approach wit the Princess. Ʋndkan has a venerable presence and would inspire respect in those tha are unacquainted with his person; bu yet 'twas the Beauty of Taxila, an not the presence of her Father tha prevailed with the Prince of the Mon∣guls to depose his Arms. This charm∣ing Object had such an imprinting in∣fluence upon him, that he found him¦self capable of nothing, but fixed re¦gards upon rhe Princess, and to yield
his youthful heart to the glorious Fet∣ers, which Fortune had destin'd for his Confinement. Ʋndkan, who had ot yet renounced Generosity, was ull of admirable thoughts relating to ny Master; and Zingis. approaching with a grace that was natural to him. I see, My Lord, said he, that you are the Soveraign of the Tartars, and tis to you alone, I ought to Justify my self. I am Zingis Prince of the Monguls, who came into your Terri∣tories to reside here for some time as a Friend and as an Ally. In pas∣sing near these Walls, Chance direct∣ed me to a Gate that was open; I am ignorant of the Customs of this place; I entred without precaution here, which I supposed to be free for all persons; and am insulted by a Man that is as little instructed in that civility that is due to Strangers, as I am in the Orders of your King∣dom. The discourse of my Master was surprising to the Tartarian King. He ad no Ally more considerable than
the King of the Monguls, and it wa a sufficient honour to behold th Prince his Son at his Court, and more a Prince of the most amiable Aspect and most admirable Meen, that e¦ver appeared to his Eyes. I was fu¦ly perswaded, answered Ʋndkan, tha you were no Tartarian, and 'tis n small rarity to see such persons as you But, my Lord, that which according to our Laws would be a great offenc in an ordinary stranger, is not so i the Prince of the Monguls, whom  shall always see at Cingui, at Cambal and the whole extent of my Domini¦ons, with a great satisfaction. A these words he embraced him, an presenting him to the Princess Taxila said he, Taxila, you must intreat th Prince Zingis to be unmindful of th unhappy reception that you were th principal occasion of. My Master who was sensible of the discipation o his Anger, and the cooling of his na¦tural fierceness at the Charms of Tax¦ila, saluted her upon his knee, an implored her pardon for what his ig¦norance
had caus'd. The Princess re∣plyed, that she had nothing to add to her Fathers instructions; and my Master, who could not turn his Eyes rom so Charming a Prospect, felt lready those powerful emotions which her extraordinary Beauty had xcited in his Breast. Timur by this time was returned rom his astonishment, and Zingis be∣ng informed that he was the Son of he Queen, approached to him with n Air that discover'd nothing of En∣mity; 'I am under a concern, my Lord, said he to him, that I have been forced to a behaviour that I intreat you, to forget, and to reconcile your self to a Prince who came not to Cin∣gui, to procure such Enemies as you. At these words he gave him his hand, nd altho' Timur received it with a old indifference, yet the presence of he King obliged him to accept the dvances of my Master. At length Zamar comes: She learnt n a few words the Adventure which had come to pass. Ʋndkan presented
Zingis to her, and she could not bu have a secret resentment of the Af¦front which her Son had received Notwithstanding she appeared civil to my Master, who having his Eyes no more at liberty, but to fix them upon Taxila, was not curious to examin the actions of the Tartarian Queen. Ʋnd¦kan who had secret prospects, would not suffer Zingis to go out of his Pa∣lace, and was not displeased to have so dear a Hostage of the King of the Monguls. We had orders to go and find our Prince, to whom was give one of the finest Apartments, and who was immediately apprehensive that this Adventure would be the oc∣casion of many others. He soon became the admiration o the Tartars; and the Princess Taxil had a judgment too exact to be un∣acquainted with his Merit: They li¦ved at Cingui with more tranquility than at Cambalu, because the Court i not so numerous there. Ʋndkan, wh had a mind to win the affection of  considerable Prince, to obtain of him
by sweetness and civility, what he pretended to impose upon others by force, neglected nothing that might oblige the young Zingis. He gave way to pleasures that touched his Inclina∣tion, and observing that Timur still preserv'd his coldness, he entreated him to constrain himself, altho' he had a repugnance thereto, being inspir'd by a politick Mother, that was in hopes to obtain from Undkan one of the most considerable Crowns in Asia for this Son, he did as the King would have him. As for my Master, he gave himself up entirely to love: The more he saw Taxila, the more influence she had upon him. His Heart filled with an ar∣dent passion, began to feel disorders, which till then had been unknown to him, and fearing worse to come, he was unquiet and amorous together. 'Tis true, he was the Son of a Prince that was uncapable of making him a∣ny refusal: But Taxila owed her life to a Man that destin'd her for Timur, and altho' this Rivals Dominions were
much inferior to that of the Mongul yet he was a King, and the Son o Zamar, who had Ʋndkan at her di¦posal. At length we quitted Cingui to re¦turn to Cambalu; 'twas then our di¦vertisements suffered an Alteration and instead of Walks, there was a application to Sports and publick en¦tertainments. Taxila had many La¦dies of Quality near her person: Bu a few days before our arrival at Cin¦gui, she was presented with a young Stranger admirably Fair, perfectly Beautiful, whom the Princess soon dis¦tinguished from all the rest, by a Friendship full of esteem and confi∣dence. The Men that made the mos advantageous appearance at the Cour of Ʋndkan were Timur, Almundzar, an Omir Prince of Brema, who had been brought young to Cambalu; the King of Tartary having rendred himself Ma∣ster of the Dominions of his Father, who had lost his life in their defence. There were also Bazian, Mirante, Oz∣run, Ziphane, and many others of a
remarkable Character. My Master as presently acquainted with the reat Merit of Almundzar, and con∣racted a strict friendship with the rince of Brema. During some Months that slipt a∣way, those amongst the Tartars that ny Master conversed with, were ac∣uainted with his worth, and had the ighest esteem for his Person. As for im, his principal aim was to please Taxila, who observed his eager cares, ltho' she was besieged by Timur. He njoyed priviledges, which the Credit f his Mother afforded him, and often imes put the patience of the Princess o the utmost proofs. Imagining imself secure of a happiness he de∣erved not; he spoke before her with n insupportable boldness, and Taxila omparing the submissive proceedings of the Prince of the Monguls to the a∣acious advances of the Son of Zamar; he found their actions as different as their Persons. Zingis had too much respect not to impose upon himself a perfect discretion: For all he was a
Prince, and in a condition to pretend to all things, he did not precipitate a De∣claration of his Love, that might in∣cense Taxila, but would wait till his Services should prepare her to a favour∣able Audience. At length the heart of the Princess was inclined to Zingis, and her aversion for Timur had en∣creased considerably since the arrival of my Master. Upon a day which Timur regarded as his own, because 'twas the Birth∣day of Taxila, he prepared divertise∣ments for all the Court, and amongst other things, some extraordinary Sports upon the Polisangi. A thousand Gold∣en Barks covered the River. Every one had the liberty to choose his Co∣lours; there was nothing to be seen but Cyphers, and Devices in Stream∣ers: The Cordage was made of Gold and Silk; the Oars covered with Glit∣tering Pictures, and those little Boats filled by a magnificent Court, form∣ed the most agreeable sight in the World. The Princess would most gladly
have dispensed Timur from his gal∣antry; but the fear of incensing the King, obliged her to the acceptance of it; it was even necessary for her to appear at this Feast with all the Gaie∣ty and exactness of an accomplished Art. Timur in all his Equipage shew∣ed a magnificence that went to profu∣sion, and my Master with less affecta∣tion had much greater advantages. Zamar did not disdain this pastime, altho' she had contemned many others, and Ʋndkan to oblige his Queen, gave them the honour of his presence. The amorous Zingis was a little touched to see the name of his Rival mixed e∣very where with that of Taxila, and to think that so much Beauty and Vertue were destined for a Man, in whom there was observed nothing that might render him worthy of them; and these considerations cost him some profound sighs, which the Princess heard sometimes. In a word, my Lord, this day which Timur designed to solemnize after an extraordinary manner, was remarked
by an observable Adventure, which had like to have proved very fatal. Whilst they were taken up with the diversions prepared upon the River; Whilst a charming Consort filled the Air; the Bark which carried the Prin∣cess where she was with Axione alone, (that unknown Lady that was become so dear to her) because those little Boats could not conveniently contain more than four persons, with those that conducted them, by an unexpect∣ed misfortune, turn'd upside down, thrust by some other Boats, and ex∣posed Taxila and Axione to so great a danger, that all the World esteemed it irrecoverable. Doleful Cries suc∣ceeded the sound of Instruments. Ti∣ur, the Cowardly Timur, did nothing but encourage his Attendants to seek Taxila in the Waves; but the cou∣ragious Zingis excited by other Senti∣ments, hurl'd himself into the River, and dexterously cutting the Course of the Water, he receiv'd the Princess in his Arms at the very moment she came up, and as she went to fall again,
perhaps forever to the bottom of the River. His action was so sudden that no one else could prevent him. The Prince of Brema, who was with him, rendered the same Service to Axione, and equally happy in this occasion, they felt the satsfaction of preserving from death the two most amiable per∣sons in the World. The danger was great, since the Men that fell in the Water with Taxila, perished through the little care that was taken to relieve them, their negligence deserving in some measure this unhappy Fate. This Accident disturbed the whole Festival. Ʋndkan being alarmed, made to the Shore; the Princess and Axione were conveyed thither almost senseless, and Timur incapable of Shame, had the, confidence to approach her. Zamar, who had observed with Envy the acti∣on of my Master, and who began to apprehend the secret Interest of his heart, appeared in a confusion for her Son, and gently murmured against his timerousness. The Princess opened her Eyes, and
regain'd her knowledge. When she was laid upon the Bed, she enquired after Axione, of whom they had taken the same care, and then fixed her self to that repose which was convenient for her. The Night past away sweetly, and finding her self perfectly recover∣ed in the Morning, she asked her Maids to which of the Tartars she was indebted for her Life. Altho' she had no good Opinion of Timur, yet she was afraid lest she had received so important a service from him, but being informed that it was Zingis, who had prevented the whole World with a precipitation full of zeal, she had a secret satisfaction, and gave thanks to Heaven for it. They did not cease to tell her, that the King of Tenduc did not so much as think to ex∣pose himself for her, with which she was pleased, as being disengaged from any acknowledgment to him. As soon as it was day, Axione presented her self to the Princess, who most tender∣ly embraced her. Ʋndcan had testifyed to my Master, how sensible he was of
what he had undertaken for Taxila. Zamar also who was perfectly ac∣quainted with the Art of concealing her Sentiments, return'd him some thanks, and Timur acknowledged som∣thing in spite of his Confusion, but he was little observant, whether they were affected at it or no. Taxila arose, and being unwilling to wait for the particular importuni∣ties of Timur, she went out of her A∣partment, just as the Queen was com∣ing to make her a Visit, and meeting in a common Gallery, Madam said Zamar to the Princess, I praise Hea∣ven for the care it has taken of your Life, and I assure you, that at the moment I saw it expos'd, I could most willingly have endangered mine for your safety. 'You would have done much more, Madam, replyed Taxila, smiling modestly, than many Men could do, and you see that in the very bosom of the King my Father's Dominions, there was but two Prin∣ces and those strangers too, generou enough to contemn the Danger. Bu
Madam, added she, with a profound re∣verence, full of Grace and Majesty, your Life more valuable than mine, interess too many Illustrious Persons to expose it to the least danger, and I am as much obliged to your good Intentions, as if they had produced other effects. Zamar plainly saw by this discourse the acknowledgment of Taxila for Zingis, and her disdain for Timur: but not designing to enlarge upon this mat∣ter, she prayed the Princess to return to her Apartment; when the King passed by, accompanied by Timur, O∣mir, My Master, Almundzar and ma∣ny others. Taxila blushed extreamly, her Charming Eyes which languished again, made an obliging Declaration to Zingis, that she was sensible of what he had done for her; and Timur had the mortification to observe, that she did not so much as turn them towards him. My Child, said Ʋndkan to her, you have made me pass a Night full of disorder and trouble, which the good condition I behold you in, most
agreeably disperses. In the mean time methinks you ought to be less desirous of quitting your Apartment. My Lord, returned the Princess, a little exercise can be no prejudice to me, since I do not find my self in the least indisposed. The King made an obliging Complement to the beautiful Axione, which she accepted with much respect, and all this glorious com∣pany passed to the Apartment of Za∣mar, because dinner time approached. My Master, who saw well that the Princess was so beset by Timur, that she could not oblige any more compa∣ny, retired; and in effect, after the repast the King of Tenduc coming to her without any interruption, had the liberty to say what he pleased. He look'd along while upon the Princess with a confused Behaviour, and then casting down his Eyes: The same day that Heaven presented you to the World, as the most valuable gift it could make, had like to have proved the utmost of your Life, Madam, said he, and I tremble to think of the danger that
threatned it. Every one has not suppose it so considerable as you, my Lord, replyes Taxila, disdainfully; and the Prince of the Monguls, and Brema, have de∣monstrated that they despised it, in expo∣sing themselves thereto. 'Tis true, Madam, replyed Timur, red with anger and shame, that they shewed something of courage, but then they possessed their rea∣son entire, and mine was disturbed by the most dreadful of all Ideas: And this di∣sturbance, my Lord, return'd Taxila with a malitious Smile, would have suf∣fer'd me to have been lost, if so be there had not been found persons of a more easy temper, and less interessed for my life. I see, pursued Timur, that you seek to ex∣tol a Service great in effect, but which a thousand others could have performed. All the World would have performed it, but the K. of Tenduc, interrupted Taxila. But, my Lord, don't be disturbed, if I have some acknowledgment of this service, which deserves a great deal; since I give you my promise to keep an account of your Trou∣bles, and also of the fearfulness they have produced in you.
Timur would have answered to these words, and perhaps without respect; ut a crowd of People, who came to ee the Princess, prevented him, and he departed full of confusion. Taxila, ob∣serving the fine Weather, descended to the Gardens of the Palace, and walk'd there for some time: Those that at∣tended her, having remarked that she had a desire to be a little private, kept at a distance. She seated her self at the end of a Terrass, that looks upon the Polisangi, & observing the place where she had lik'd to have perished: Axione, said she to that charming Lady, as we have been since informed, don't you trem∣ble at the prospect of this River, as cou∣ragious as you are? My Princess, answer∣ed Axione, I protest to you, that I am not moved at it, but for you, and as far as my Reason would permit me, altho' I look'd for a certain Death, the thoughts of yours made me suffer what's most afflicting. You are too kind a Friend, my Dear Axione, added Taxila, pressing her hand, and I cannot sufficiently requite this tender and generous motion of forgetting your self for
me. I am very sensible, replyed Axione, smiling, that you are one of the most pow∣erful Supports of my Life; and that per∣son, added she, with moist Eyes, who ought at present to have a greater right to it than any other. You make my own very dear to me, replyed the Princess: but Axione, I know not whether I ought to re∣joyce in seeing it prolong'd. Ah, Madam, cry'd Axione, why should not you be satis∣fy'd with a Happiness that's valuable to all reasonable persons? Alas! answer'd Taxila, this happiness that must be sacrificed to Timur, promises nothing agreeable to me. What a person a∣mongst all Men in the World, the King my Father chooses for me? Should I be the Victim of that pow∣er, which his weakness has submit∣ted to Zamar? besides the small In∣clination I have naturally for Timur, he doth nothing as he ought to do, to gain my Affections; he supposes that I am his due, and you see after what manner he behaved himself in our last adventure. More amorous of his own Life, than of the Unfor∣tunate
Taxila, he abandoned her to the unhappy Fate that threatned her, and lest the care of her Fate to the generosity of others? How should he pretend hereafter to a Princess, whose preservation he has so weakly neglected? Oh Heaven! O just Heaven, pursued she very sadly, I that have so much horrour for Cowardise, will you suffer me to be thrown away upon the most Cowardly person living?  As the Princess xpressed her self in this manner, my Ma∣ter who had learnt that she was in the Gar∣den, appeared with the Prince of Brema. Taxila who knew him rose up to go before hem. Zingis offered her his hand, after he had saluted her. Omir rendred the same Office to Axione, and they continued their walk. Well, Madam, said my Master to the Princess, how are you disposed after your cruel Accident? And you my Lrd, replyed she with a Charming sweetnes, you who had so generous a part therein, and so much  my advantage, how do you find your self? If I had been asslted with an inconveniency, answer∣ed Zingis, the satisfaction of being serviceable to a great Princess, for whose safety the whole World ought to have been concerned, would have entirely dispersed it. Our Bodies are made for greater Fatigues; you endured much, and 'tis with Reason that I am disturbed for it. I assure you, my Lord, replyed Taxila, that
I have no remainder of this Adventure, but the remembrance of the sensible Obligation I am under to you. Ah, my Lord, added she, with an Emotion that marked her acknow∣ledgment, What can I do to acquit my self! 'Tis too much, that you remember it, Madam, persued the Prince of the Monguls, and this price is sufficiently great to retalliate the most considerable Services. I don't know who can be more deserving of it, return'd Taxila, — Madam, interrupted my Master with a sigh, altho according to all appearances, I have only laboured for the Service of Timur, yet I did not cease to regard yester day, as the happiest of my Life. The Princess cast down her Eyes, to hide some Tears, which she could not retain at these words, and which notwith∣standing appeared to Zingis. He was con∣cerned that he had touched that place, and continuing thus, I beg your pardon, Madam, if I have named the King of Tenduck; it is perhaps  want of respect. No, interrup∣ted Taxila as her turn, but 'tis reviving an afflicting Idea, which I often endeavour to remove; you know the Intentions of the King my Father in relation to Timur: But my Lord, mine are unknown to you, and you are ignorant without doubt, that I cannot think of submitting my self to the Son of Zamar with∣out a mortal grief. I am not enough determined to disobey Undkan; and be the effect what it
will, if he Commands it, its necessary that I acrifice my self, judge, my Lord, having a atural Antipathy, or rather an invincible atred for Timur, what a state I am in, every ime I think on the designs of my Father, nd the Influence of the Queen. This free∣om of the Princess charmed my Master, nd gave him more assurance. I confess persu∣ed he, that there is nothing in Timur, that is worthy of you, nor even in persons much more compleat. Ah! Madam, what Man a∣mongst all those whom nature and Fortune have most distinguished by their Favours, might law∣fully aspire to the precious advantage of not dis∣pleasing you, and the glory of being possessed of you one day? My Lord, answered Taxila, I can discern Merit whre it is, and not in∣fer a blameable conceit from that which I have not; several in the World might be in a state to pretend to the Allyance of the King of Tar∣tary, and Timur himself would not be unwor∣thy by his Rank, if his evil Inclinations were not absolutely inconsistent with mine. When Fortune should authorise some Prince to lay his Possessions at your feet, added my Master, if so be his Person could not affect your heart, the other advantages would be of no service, and there are Princes of a sufficient Power that would sigh before your Eyes, without daring to let you know, that they adore you. We must be exceeding Cruel, continued the Prin∣cess
of Tartary, to arm our selves with an unjust Anger against those who should have some affection for us, and disengaged from all sorts of Passions, to dare to boast of being al∣ways insensible: But, my Lord, with a freer behaviour, this matter would lead us too far, and I had rather speak of the obligation I am under to you. If that inspires you with some goodness for me, replyed my Master, it will be of considerable use to me in the state I am in, since loving you with a most ardent Passion, whose beginnings I have sedulously concealed, I am forced to let slip the declaration of this Mystery in my own defence. My Lord, reply∣ed Taxila, with some disorder, that presa∣ged nothing of prejudice to my Master, I see the King, which as all I can say to you. In effect Ʋndkan appeared, and Zingis could proceed no further. He perceived by the looks of the Princess, that she had a confu∣sion without anger, and in some days that followed, if he observed any disturbance in her Eyes, there was no resentment there. Taxila was beloved among all the Tar∣tars, and the important service which my Master had rendered to her, made a deep impression upon the grateful Souls. This Nation look'd upon Timur with disdain, af∣ter the unworthiness he had shewn: Ʋndkan himself, was concerned to see that he made himself so little deserving of all the advan∣tages
he destined for him; and could not hinder himself, as we were informed by Almundzar, from expressing his sense there∣of to the Queen: But she had so much in∣fluence upon him, that he dispensed with the timorousness of the King of Tenduck, and was ne're the less Religious observer of his Promise. At this time Zamar, who was ambitious of extending the limits of Tartary, in hopes of seeing her Son upon the Throne, made Ʋndkan compreherd that it was disgraceful for him with so much power, not to exact from his Neighbours those Tributes which it was easie for him to impose upn them. Most of thse Kings have preserved some∣thing of the fierceness of the Antient Scy∣thians; but their valour is wanting to them, and you see Instances thereof in this Court, in the Kings of Tanguth, Cerguth, Ergimul, and Ʋng. Ʋndkan made known to their Ministers, that they owed something more than an Embassy to his Grandeur, and that they must with hommages pay him an An∣nual Tribute. These strangers demanded time to Communicate this affair to their Princes, and having at length returned for answer, that their design was not to condes∣cend to that degree; they retired into the Dominions of their Masters, and all things were prepared for War.
The Kings of Tanguth, Cerguth and Erg¦mul could easily joyn their Forces, becau their Provinces are bordering; but that  Ʋng being further distant, and of a side quit opposite to the rest, made a diversion. A¦tho' Zingis had reason to believe, that the would attack the Monguls in their turn, y loving Taxila as he did, he would by n means remain idle in the Court of her Fa¦ther, and if so be he found injustice in th enterprise of Ʋndkan, Love would not le him examin this proceeding with rigour▪ He did not long consider, whether he should offer his Arm to the King of Tartary▪ whatsoever the absence of Taxila might cos his heart, he resolved to go to become more worthy of her. The Kings of Tanguth, and Cerguth advanced upon the Territories o that of Ergimul, who was likely to be first assaulted, as being the nearest neighbour o Ʋndkan. There was a necessity for two Ar∣mies, since the King of Ʋng was by himself, and Timur's Dominions not far distant from his, Ʋndkan left a part of his forces to his Conduct, to perform this Conquest: but ex∣perience declared that they were very ill dis∣posed of. The King of Tenduck would most willingly have remained at Cambalu, if his Mother more couragious than he, had not encouraged him to his Duty. So with good Lieutenants, and experienced Troops, he
marched towards the Enemy he had to Conquer. Zingis had no Army to Command as Ti∣mur had, altho' he was better capacitated. Ʋndkan went in Person, and my Master took no Employment that he might be at liberty to fight near him. The Princesses saw these preparations of War, with motions extreamly different. Za∣mar, who could engage that her Husband and her Son were not of a humour to ex∣pose themselves, easily submitted to their departure; but Taxila, who was already perfectly acquainted with the Love and cou∣rage of my Master, did not enjoy the same Tranquility. All things being ready, Zingis went to take his leave of her, and the Employments of Timur delivering her for some time from his Importunities, he found her accompanied with no one but Axione. As she was not at all suspected to them, the Prince did not constrain his Love, and the Princess let her sadness be discerned. You are going then, my Lord, said she to him, to look after Victories, which we could easily dispense you from. Oh how greedy is the Ambition of Zamar, and how dexterous is she in spil∣ling of Blood! Since the glory of the King your Father is concerned therein, Madam, answered Zingis, those that lose
their blood in this occasion ought not  be disturbed at it. 'Whatsoever may  the Motives of the War, replyed Taxil it always puts me into a trembling; b my Lord, that which you go to be co¦cerned in, appears to me so much the mo Cruel, in as much as the Spoils thereof a to belong to Timur, and will transp his vanity to the most Insolent ptich. S long as the King's alive, continued my M¦ster, he will never enjoy those advantage and if the Fates should determinate h Life, I see but a few Tartars that are di¦posed to submit themselves to the Law of Timur. I am in earnest, my Lord, a¦swered Taxila, more moved than before, h will regn, the fatal influence that rules me has so ordained; grant Oh Heaven, tha my death may prevent his fortune! A Madam, interrupted my Master, in a pas¦sionate mnner, is it thus, you would com¦fort an unfortunate, whose Duty calls him near Ʋndkan, and who separates himsel from you, with a mortal affliction. Wha shll I do in this extremity? Shall I stay behind as a Cowardly an useless Spec¦tator, of a War that may expose Tartar to some disorder, because the proud Ti∣mur hath pretentions to it, and shall I ob∣serve the Father of Taxila, a Princess whom I adore, and for whom I would
expose a thousand lives, were they in my power; go in Person to the Battel, with∣out making a fence of my Body and Arms for him, because he is favourable to my Rival. In a word, Madam, shall I remain t Cambalu, or retire amongst the Monguls, o avoid uncertain inconveniencies, and to me∣it the having my name oblitterated from a∣mongst Men? Ah! my Princess, how little wor∣hy should I be to sigh for you, and to wear hose glorious Chains which I have received with so much pleasure; let the future prove as it will, the present time requires me to serve the King of Tartary; my fidelity and zeal perhaps will make some Impression upon his Soul. But Madam, you are dumb, and I see nothing but a trouble in your Eyes, which concerns me. What misfortune can it presage to us, my Lord? pursued Taxila, you see that 'tis the effect of my weakness; your Rea∣sons have conquered mine; but they cannot as∣sure my heart. Alas! Zingis, was not I un∣fortunate enough, in hating Timur, if the Fates have destin'd me for him without lov∣ing?  Taxila blusht, and could not proceed, but her Eyes were the Interpreters of her Heart, and those of the amorous Zingis, read therein the happiness he had so much longd after. Never was there a more tender separation on his side, and more obliging on that of the Pr ncess, than that of these two
Illustrious Persons: Timur did not insist up so much respect and delicacy; he did nothi but repeat without agreeableness, what  had said so often, and departed as fierce  if he had been assured of the Conquest  the World. We found the three Kings united, a in a disposition to fight us. Their Troo were lusty, and in order, but those  Ʋndkan much fatigued by traversing t Mountains and Forests. The Enemies po¦sessed advantagious Posts, and seemed  be determined. Notwithstanding a Batt was fixed upon. All that has been said Fabulous Heroes, did not come up to t performances of Zingis. Ʋndkan look'd u¦on him as a Prodigy; it was his valour ¦lone that made Victory to be always decl¦red in our Favour; he preserved the li of Ʋndkan, who was insensibly engaged ¦mongst the Enemies, and after several ba¦tels he made the three Kings Prisoners  different occasions, which put an end  the War on this side. The King of Ta¦tary left my Prince Master of the Destin of his Captives. He not only spared the lives, but restored their Liberties, and w contented to engage them to that Homag and Tribute which Undkan had required  them. The generosity of such a Conquer was of no other Service, than to excite the
against him by a particular and secret Enmi∣y. But Undkan after he had highly pro∣laimed, that to him alone was owing the lory of this Expedition, seeing his Foes ubdued, disbanded his Troops, and re∣urned to Cambalu. Fortune had not been so friendly to Ti∣ur, and the King of Ung with Forces in∣erior to his drove him from his Territories, nd prepared to march towards those that ompose the Kingdom of Tenduck. This News fflicted Undkan; and my Master to compleat what he had begun, directed his course to Timur without delay, brought him back to he Battel, and returned to Cambalu after e had triumphed over the King of Ung, s he had done over all the rest. Undkan received him with signal expres∣ions of Joy, and Zamar, altho' envious of his Glory, was obliged to shew some ac∣knowledgment: But it was not their ap∣plauses that affected him, and those of Tax∣la were of a much different esteem to his Heart. A year of absence had yet encreas∣ed her Beauty, and my Master found in her. Person, what was agreeable to his most ardent wishes. I know not whether my Pray∣ers have been any ways assisting to your Vic∣tories, My Lord, said she to him, when he was to visit her, but it is certain that mine were very zealous and sincere. I question not
my obligations to your goodness, Madam, answe¦ed Zingis, and certainly the hopes of not gai¦ing your displeasure, has rendred me more r¦solute and performing, than those of obtainin the Universe. But Madam, what will becom of all the Love that your Beautiful Charm have inspired me with, if Undkan is favour¦able to none but the Son of Zamar? Alas, o what use will my Respects and Acknowledg¦ments be to you, interrupted Taxila, if I a to be disposed of against my Will, to the Per¦son I abhor? He is Insensible of his shame and pretends to partake of your Reputation  and what's worse, my Father notwithstandin all you have done for him, is capable of re¦quiting you with Ingratitude. 'Tis this know¦ledge that I have of his Injustice, which af∣flicts me. Pity me, my Lrd in so dismal  condition; deplore my hard Fate; and whatsoe∣ver happens, assure your self that I shall al∣ways be much more unfortunate than you. After she had said this, Timur makes his entrance; he had not seen the Princess before but at his Mothers Apartments; his behaviour, was full of boldness, and he came to re∣ceive as a reward of his Cowardize new assurances of his good fortune; or rather Zamar, who had a mind to comfort him after his unlucky chance in War, and shake off the Melancholly that disturbed him, came to obtain of Undkan stronger promises of
Taxila for her Son, than she had yet de∣anded. He saw Zingis with impatience in place, where he was resolved henceforth  reign alone; and if he durst have fol∣wed his own Motions, he had explained mself at that very moment: But the re∣embrance of the late event in War restrain∣ him, and contenting himself with no ark of Civility to him. We come to enrich e Crown of Tartary with many important ributes, Madam, said he to her, and she  at present the only one of Asia, that is ca∣ble of numbring considerable Kings amongst r Subjects. You might speak less generally, mur, answered the Princess, with a des∣sing coldness, worthy of the Insolence of e King of Tenduck, and if so be Fame s done you justice, the King of Ung should ve obtained of you what the Prince of the onguls has forced from him and all the rest. These words nettled Timur so smartly at his transport stopt his mouth for some nsiderable time; but at length returning  himself, If you were more equitable and less ejudiced, continued he, you would ot take om the King your Father that glory which is ing to him, to bestow it upon others, and I as not so much lost when they came into the rovinces of Ung, but that I should have sub∣ued them in a little time. If I might have en consulted, replyed the Charming
Princess with the same indifference, you should have been allowed all the time you re∣quired; and indeed my Lord, you ought to have taken it your self. I know not, said my Master, whether I have a share in the ob∣liging words of the Princess, and the contempt of Timur? But I am satisfyed that I should esteem my self much more glorious by the one than dishonoured by the other. My Lord, ad∣ded Taxila, I should be destitute of Reason, If I remained the single Person of Tartary, that doth not give justice to those Services she hath received from you, and the Conquest of four Kings, hath spoke loud enough to be known by all the World. There are Kings, replyed the inconsiderate Timur, that are not so easily to be subdued, and if we were engaged Man to Man, it might perhaps be found uneasie to perform what you pretend has already been. Your fierceness replyed Zingis with a disdain∣ful smile, could not prove my rudest Adversary, and I should not take great precautions to exe∣cute against certain persons, things which their weakness would render always easie; But my Lord, would you rekindle a War in Tartary after an establishment of Peace? No, pursued Timur, with sparkling Eyes, because he well knew that so near the Princess the respect of my Master was an obstakle to his Valour; but I'll carry it amongst the Monguls, at the head of a hundred thousand Men, when by the
Commands of Undkan, I shall have an abso∣ute power over this unjust Princess. Much fewer than a hundred thousand Men shall oppose your irruptions, replyed Zingis; but you will be ne're the more formidable, and he that has pos'd Tributes on your Neighbouring Kings, is still in a capacity to put a heavier yoke up∣on that of Tenduc. This smart Conversation had passed fur∣ther, if the circumspection of Zingis had not obliged him to depart in saluting the Prin∣cess with all imaginable respect, who be∣held Timur with more contempt than before. In short, Madam, replyed the Son of Zamar, to her, your discretion is at an end; your aversion appears for me in all its extent; but the King your Father, who has just given me a fresh assurance, that you are uncontroulably mine, shall take an occasion to enquire after the Cause. Timur an∣swered Taxila in a resolute Tone, when the promise of my Father shall encourage you to force my Inclinations, you can't expect to be e're the more happy, you have not so much as sought to deserve them, and 'tis nt a fierceness of that Nature which raigns in your heart, that can make an impression upon that of Taxila: It were submis∣sive proceedings with a generous and dis∣inteessed Conduct, and not the Credit of the Queen which ought to have been put
in use; but 'tis for your Fortune that you labour; and since the Crown of Tartary hath more powerful Charms than mine en∣joy them if you can, I shall not be jealous, provided you leave me at ease; it's evident enough that my Person is not esteemed by you; the Adventure of the Polisangi, is a de∣monstration of it, and you come now to quarrel with a Prince before my Eyes, that exposed himself couragiously to preserve my Life. These last Words excited a cruel Jealousy in the Soul of Timur. He was already persuaded, that my Master loved the Princess, and was then but too sensible, that he was beloved by her. You pay very dear obligations, which you speak of, replyed he, since that happy stranger, who is a little favoured by Fortune, is become Master of your heart: But if War and Love protect him at the same time, I hope the King will put a difference between us, that shall be of no advantage to him. Upon which, Timur retired, and left the Princess at li∣berty to reflect upon all she had to fear from a person without Honour and Geneosity. Whilst she considered her misfortune, and that Zingis was in the same Employment, Timur went to find the Queen, and said to her all that might excite her against the Princess and my Master. She favourably heard his Complaints, and promised to calm
all his Disquiets with all possible diligence. To that end, she made use of to her Spouse those affected Charms, which had so often surprized his Weakness; she told him that Zingis was beloved of Taxila, and that a∣gainst his Word, which she ought to re∣spect; this disobedient Princess aimed at nothing but to render the Prince of the Monguls happy, and easily provoking the Father against the Daughter; he again made a protestation to her with Oaths, that the Rebellious Taxila should be enjoyed by none but Timur. Zamar pleased with this first advantage, had a mind to obtain a second, and solicited Undkan, to humble Zingis, that he might be made a Tributary to the Tarta∣rian Crown amongst the other Princess. As this was no easy Undertaking, Undkan rejected the Proposition, and by what he had seen the Prince of the Monguls perform, he thought there was no Power sufficient to controul him. As soon as the subtle Queen had left him, he sent for the Princess. Taxila, said he to her, looking stedfastly upon her, I am un∣willing to believe what has been reported to me. I am informed, that your heart is engaged in spite of the choice I have made for you, and that you prefer the Prince of the Monguls before Timur. Methinks you might have known my Sentiments long be∣fore in relation to your Establishment, and
you have had leisure to prepare your Incli∣nations, if they were not disposed to it. I have destined you for Timur from your most tender Infancy. He is a King, he is the Son of my Spouse, and if you entertain any foolish Idea's engage with them, or rather force them to oblige me; since no Law ought to be more powerful with you, than that which requires you to obey me. I esteem zingis as a young Heroe, that may aspire to great things; but I can do nothing for him in your respect; and I had promised you, before I had known that Prince. The Princess hearkened to this Discourse, which touched her Repose through the most sensible places with abundance of emo∣tion. She distinguished every word, and arming her self with a Resolution worthy of her Vertue. Allowing I had a particular esteem for Zingis, my Lord, answered she, the most severe Judges could not interpret it as a Crime; and what he did for me, whilst Timur abandoned me to a fatal Ad∣venture, well deserves my acknowledge∣ment: I will not alledge to you here the important Services he has done you, and I will only tell you, my Lord, that when my Heart shall enjoy it's full extent of Liber∣ty, it will never so much incline to Timur's side. You may sacrifice me to his Am∣bition: My respect owes all things to you;
at the same time, this Duty cannot over∣come my Aversion for the King of Tenduc. Alas, my Lord, there are so many Princes∣ses in Asia, or in some other part of the World, that might render his condition much more happy. You are wise, inter∣rupted Ʋndkan, with a moderation that much degenerated in the consequence, and I am per∣suaded, that you will love Timur, when he is your Husband. So Taxila; No reply, I have promised him, I will and must perform. It was thus the K. of Tartary sent back the Princess his Daughter: She complains, she bewails her Misfortune; but all joyned against my Master, who had none for him, but the Princess and Almundzar; the Prince of Brema being retired from Cambalu at his return from the War, where he had gloriously signalized himself, without any ones know∣ing the reason, that obliged him to it. Axione, a zealous Friend of my Masters, informed him of all that had passed, and the affliction the Princess was in, He was but the more disturbed, his Love reproach∣ing him with all the Disquiets of Taxila. Zamar, and her proud Son, assured of the Passion of Zingis for the Princess, thought of nothing but the conclusion of her Marriage with Timur: To defer it, was to permit the growth of those Fires, that were but too violent already; so that it was their single
Aim to get it perform'd with all Expedition. The Queen stisfy'd with the positive assurance, that Ʋndkan had given her, was to visit the Princess, to torment her with this News: Madam, said she to her, after the Favour the King has according to my Son, I cannot too much declare his Goodness, nor do enough to testify to you my satsfaction. I know that you and we have not equally desired the double Alliance, with which he honours us: But we will do so many things to convert your Heart, that it may at length perhaps become favourable to us. I see a disturbance in your Eyes, that pro∣mises to us the Consequence of your Dis∣dain, we perceive it with Affliction: But Madam, you disperse it upon constant er∣sons, that will never be weary o Suffering. How much Resolution the Princess had need of to retain her self! I am persuaded, Madam, answered she, with her usual mo∣deration, That wht you call a happiness for Timur, is owing to none but your self, and which according to the Inclinations Heaven has bestowed upon me, can't post¦sibly be one for me. Your perpetual Sol∣licitations force the King my Father to a compulsion; in the men ime, Madam, my Respect for him exemps you from that disdain which you speak of, and of which I am little capable: You know, Madam,
that his Alliance exalts you above all the Princesses of Asia, and before that you could hold a Rank but amongst the most in∣feriour. Ought then this Advantage of yours serve to my Destruction? Is it possi∣ble for me to love your Son against my Nature; and if I love him not, will you render us both unhappy? I have told him, and I repeat it once more, that I am willing to make a Resignation of my Title to the Crown of Tatary, provided he demands not a Heart which I can never give him. This smart Answer, which escaped thro' the great Courage of the Princess, gave no disturbance to Zamar, who had leisure to prepare her self for all things. It would be too much, pursued she, to abandon your just pretensions to Timur; he entertains more reasonable ones: But as he is not without ambition, and that the indifferent Rank we have held in the World, is not sufficient to content him, since the King or∣dains it, he shall partake of them with you, and shall expect from his perseverance, and your Justice, this heart, that you are not yet disposed to give him. As for me, Madam, added she in saluting her, I shall always re∣gard you as an indulgent, and affectionate Mother; and it is not to esteem you a little, to offer you what is of most value to me in the World. Whereupon she retired, and left the
Princess in a confusion, which all the comfort∣able methods of Axione, could not easily qualify. The next Morning Ʋndkan declared to his most considerable Subjects, his Design of making Timur his Successor, by matching him with the Princess his Daughter. The most sincere, who esteemed nothing in Timur, be∣cause in truth, he had nothing to be esteemed, disapproved of this Choice: But some un∣worthy Flatteries, whose Suffrages Zamar had purchased, applauded the motion, and the greatest number was of that side: The next day the Marriage was proclaimed, and all things began to be prepared, to adorn the Festival, Almundzar was one of those who declared not for Timur, and Zamar, who loved not the Favourite of Ʋndkan, placed this Subject of Animosity amongst several others. I can't express to you, my Lord, the con∣fusion of my Master, when he was informed of this sudden Resolution. He found him∣self so much the more uhappy, in that he could alledge nothing to the King of Tarta∣ry, but a Love that was born after that of Ti∣mur. He knew that he was beloved, and tast∣ed the sweetness of this precious advantage: But he saw the lovely Taxila subjected to an absolute Power, and upon the point of being Sacrificed to what she abhorred. All his thoughts were violent; altho' he shouldd arm all Tartary against him, in assaulting the life
of Timur, yet he concluded that he had bet∣ter die, than leave him the quiet Enjoy∣ment of Taxila. Things were so far ad∣vanced, that the Princess was forbid the sight of him, and this prohibition enraging him to the highest degree; he went out of the Palace, resolved to abandon himself to his Passion. In crossing the great Square, he saw Timur but slenderly attended, and forgetting that he was not only at Cambalu but under the very Eyes of Ʋndkan and Zamar, beholding in Timur the Persecutor of Taxila, he advanced with an angry Behar¦viour. King of Tenduc, said he to him, you that will carry a War to the Monguls, think of doing it at Cambalu to a Man, without whose assistance you would not be in a state of disposing your self to an un∣just Violence against the Princess of Tar∣tary. 'Tis by your Orders that her sight is forbidden me, and I will lose my life, or you shall give me satisfaction for this Of∣fence. Timur was not prepared for so im∣portunate an Encounter, and had no inclina∣tion to fight. He would have passed on by answering with disdain; but zingis, who had drawn his Sword, obliged him to defend himself. Timur's Attendants placed them∣selves before him: The Valour of my Ma∣ster soon dispersed them; and seeing his un∣worthy Rival without other defence than
than his Arms: Defend thy self, Coward, said he to him, and deserve Taxila to day, by shewing some marks of Courage. The Son of Zamar heard these words; but he was ne're the less weak and fearful; so my Master made him fall, pierced with several Wounds, with out having received a single Hurt from his Arms. Zingis would not retire after this Ac∣tion; but Almundzar, whom the Noise of the Fright rought to this place, obliged him in the Name of the Princess to be careful of him∣self; and the Night happily approaching, he conducted him to a secure Retreat, that was known of no one, but my self. Timur was carried to the Palace, without any appearance of Life. Zamar set up dread∣ful Cries, and made horrible Imprecations against Taxila, and my Master; Ʋndkan dispersed his Orders to search for him in eve∣ry corner: But Almundzar had too well provided for his Safety. He came to see him the same Night, and told him all that was prepared against him, shewing the indispensable necessity he was un∣der of leaving Tartary. My Master op∣posed it along time; but Almundzar made him comprehend, that if he should remain at amba he could not possibly see the Princess; that she would be in continual frights, and that he ought for her repose to go and attend some where the abatement of Storm. Zingis did not consent, but up∣on
condition he might have a sight of Taxila before his departure: And the night follow∣ing the faithful Almundzar introduced him to her by some private ways, that he was ac∣quainted with. Axione alone was privy to the Secret. Almundzar retired to observe, least any one should surprize them; and Zingis falling at the feet of the Princess, was ixed there for some time without be∣ing able to express himself: What have you done, my Lord, said she to him, raising him up, and what will be the consequence of this last effect of your Valour? What should I not do to preserve you from Timur Ma∣dam, replied my Master, or at least to defer his good Fortune? I know not, pursued Taxi∣la, whether Heaven sometimes pardons violent Actions; but it is certain, that I cannot be much afflicted for the State of Timur. In the mean time, my Lord, 'tis necessary for you to retire, and to dispose your self to it; for I can't know of your being here without con∣tinual Fears. Madam, answered my Ma∣ster, if I had nothing but my Life to consi∣der, I protest to you, I would not stir from Cambalu: but if your Repose is concerned in it, I am ready to submit to all things. In the mean time, my Princess, do but reflect on the punishment he that loves you with so much fer∣vency, goes to be exposed, is in the uncer∣tainty of a tedious absence. The proud Ti∣mur
will recover; my Arms have not been fortunate enough to put an end to his Life: Ah! who shall defend you against this Adver∣sary, when Zingis is away? Let me but stay till one may depend upon his condition, to the end of preserving you from being unhappy. No, my Lord, replyed the Charming Princess, I shall not entertain so cruel a complaisance: O Heavens! I tremble, in speaking to you, when I consider that the revengeful Zamar is so near us. Suffer me, to make those Pray∣ers for you which are not disturbed by fear. It may be, Heaven may hearken to them. Be it as it will, believe that I love you. I don't offend Vertue, in giving you an assu∣rance of an innocent Affection; and if that can satisfy you, taste the pleasure thereof en∣tire. In leaving us, be assured, for your com∣fort, that if you absent your self from the eyes of Taxila, you shall be ne're the less fixed in her heart: and that not only her Repose de∣mands this constraint, but also her Reputa∣tion. Yes, Madam, replyed the amorous Zingis, I will go, since 'tis your pleasure, and will content my self with the pretious Assurance which I have obtained from your Goodness: But how shall I behave my self in relation to the King your Father? Shall I defend my Life against him, if he comes to assault it; and will the respect I owe to you, permit me to arm our People against
the Tartars. Yes, my Lord, replyed the enerous Taxila, and if my Father becomes our declared Enemy, after the obligations e is under to you, make the best use of your orces, and your Valour; and consider no∣hing but his Life. 'Tis his Person alone hat I recommend to you. Go, my dear Zin∣gis, remain no longer in a place so full of Danger. At these words, she gave him her hand, which the Prince respectfully kissed, and not concealing her Tears from him, she received his Farewel, and finally obliged him to retire. He took his leave of Axi∣one, who was no less afflicted than the Princess, and after having imbraced Al∣mundzar a thousand times, who had pre∣pared all things for our departure, we left Cambalu, and took the direct way to Molg. Our Journy was but melancholly; and find∣ing the King dead at our Arrival, my Ma∣ster, who had most tenderly loved him, re∣ceived a terrible addition of Grief by this loss, and demonstrated the goodness of his Nature in the profound Mourning he was in for a long time. His Subjects ravished at his sight, swore to him an inviolable Fi∣delity: And some Months after his Arri∣val, not doubting but that he should be assaulted; and Taxila having given him leave to defend himself, he visited all his Provinces, advanced as far as the Desarts
of Bargue, and in short time disciplined a People, that were wholly ignorant before, teaching them the Art of War, with which he had as perfect an Acquaintance as any Prince in the World. His Neighbours, be∣ing jealous of his Gloy, had a mind to give him some disturbance: but in a few Months he added several Provinces to his Dominions, amongst which are those of Jek, Motrik, and Melair. In this Tri∣umphant Condition, more sensible of his Love, than of so much Glory, seeing that Tartary made no advances against him, and supposing that things might have suffered an alteration there, he dispatched a splendid Embassy to Vndkan, to demand the Princess: But he was refused, and treated as a rash per∣son. Timur, as he had foreseen, being cur∣ed of his Wounds, he carried his despair a∣mongst new Enemies, and always victorious, being unable to live without the sight of Taxila, knowing that she was still free by a secret Correspondence, which he enter∣tained with Almundzar, he return'd to Cambalu, with a design to make the Prin∣cess consent to a private Departure with him, or to die before her Eyes, if she was contrary to it. Coming to the Gate of the Palace, which was to have been opened to us, the impatience of Zingis betrayed him; he spoke, Zamar heard him, and
you know, my Lord, what she has ordained against my Master. Zerbin ceased to speak, and the King of Thibet, after having admired a Life so illustri∣ous, assured the Mongul, That he bore no less affection to his Master, than those who were his particular Friends; and then went to rejoyn Almundzar, whom he prai∣sed for his faithful Attendance upon Zin∣gis. My Dear Almundzar, said he to him, by what means shall we look after the Secu∣rity of Zingis; what methods shall we make use of against the cruel Zamar? As her hatred is inflexible, answered Almundzar, and her Power absolute upon Undkan, I see nothing but force that can counterpoise it, and I know not where to find that which is fuffici∣ent for an undertaking of this importancc, Whatsoever happens, pursued Philing, I will die before I'll suffer the King of the Monguls to be destroyed. I'll go first to Vndkan, and still pursue the Paths of sweetness. But if he perseveres in his Cruelty, I'm resolved to declare my self his open Enemy. Almundzar approved the generous Resolution of Phi∣ling, and assured him, That whatsoever he attempted for the Service of Zingis, he would always be of his Party. This day passed afflictingly: The following one the King of Thibet returned to Vndkan, whom he found still besieged by Zamar, and was the more
expeditious, in as much as he feared son private Cruelty; for they talk at Cambalu  the Death of Zingis, as a thing without disput Zamar and Vndkan feared the presence  this Prince, who was neither their Subjec nor their Tributary, and whom they sa highly declared for Vertue. His Arriva put them into a sort of confusion, and Zama was extreamly disturbed at it. My Lord said he to the King of Tartary, I kno not whether the design, which brings me t you this Morning, will have a favourabl Success: But I protest to you, that I neve had so urgent an interest, as that of the lif of the King of the Monguls. It will b always reputable and glorious to you, my Lord, to treat a Prince with generosity, from whom you fancy to have receiv'd some Pre∣judice: But it will be to your eternal Disgrace, to exercise an unjust Cruelty upon him having s many reasons to esteem him, and to look upon him as the greatest of Men. No body is ignorant of the Services he has rendred to you, and his Love for the Princess is all that makes him Crim∣minal before you. But, my Lord, in the Dig∣nities Heaven has raised you to, consider what is owing to that of other Kings. Must you be powerful only to appear unjust, and will you exercise this Power upon an Enemy that has submitted to you, only because he would; but an Enemy, whose Actions have been always
glorious, and who keeps the Eyes of a great many Nations fixed upon him: This would be to confirm the Ideas that other People en∣tertain of us. We are taken for Scythians still, my Lord, that is to say, a People without Humanity, without Laws, without Gods, and Religion. Will you pursue those barbarous Ex∣amples of Antiquity, which are lookt upon as hideous Prodigies? and will you sacrifice a considerable King, for such slender Reasons? Those slender Reasons, interrupted Zamar, transported with anger, will not pass for such, wthi Mothers as indulgent as I, and he that would have killed my Son before my Eyes, and almost in my Arms, cannot be too severely punished for a violence which has cost him so much Blood, and me so many Tears. I have been informed, replyed the King of Thibet, That Timur was well attended, when zingis assaulted him, and that Gene∣rosity had not so much as a share in this occasion, since many Swords at the same time were directed against a single Man; and I think I have been told, that the King of the Monguls had saved the K. of Tenduc's Life more than once, when he made War in the Kingdom of Ʋng. My Lord, an∣swered Zamar, you are so well acquainted with what relates to zingis, that in all ap∣pearance you have some particular cor∣respondence with him; it is undoubtedly
in our Dominions, and upon these Con¦jectures it might be lawful for us. What Madam, interrupted Philing coldly, to load me with Irons too, and to heap Injustic upon Injustice? It matters not from whose mouth I have learnt the Wonders of hi Life; but it suffices that I am a zealous and sincere admirer of it. My Lord, said Ʋndkan, The Queen talks like an Offended Mother, and you ought not to condemn her Resentment, I have considered al your Reasons, but they have not convin∣ced me, and it were to make Vertue suffer, to let those Men live, that disturb Empires and unreasonably stain the Palaces of King with Blood. I have receiv'd some Services from zingis, and I have honoured him as a Stranger, that I thought worthy of my esteem; but abusing my easiness, he comes to my Court with a design to seduce a Young Princess, and to withdraw her from the Obedience she owes me; and pushing his Rashness still further, he at∣tacks the Life of a Prince, who is my Son, because he is that of my Wife, and to whom I have destined my Daughter; and then returns unknown to Cambalu, to in∣troduce himself into my Palace, and make secret Combinations with the feeble Taxila How do I know, but that he had an inten∣tion upon my Life; and who shall assure me
of the innocency of his Designs? In short, I owe my self this Victim, and to solicite for his Liberty, is to lose time without ef∣fect. I see well, my Lord, answered Phi∣ling, incensed with the barbarous resolution of Undkan, that the loss of the King of the Monguls is sworn, and that there's no resist∣ing it in places, where all submits to your Commands. But a Person of my nature will never observe this Cruelty without resent∣ment. In all appearance, you fear neither the anger of the Gods, nor the contempt of Men: But do you think that the juster sort of Men in this part of the World, which we inhabit, will permit you to Sa∣crifice this Illustrious Zingis without any attempt to revenge his loss? The Indies, Persia and China, will easily be moved, and there wants nothing, added he, inspi∣red by his generosity, but such a Prince as I to encourage them to it, and to bring into your Territories a storm, which would soon overwhelm you. And so departed, but all his threatnings were so remote, Und∣kan and Zamar were less terrified, than in∣censed. Their first motion was to appre∣hend Philing: but Almundzar and some other Tartars, in whom Ʋndkan had some confidence, hindred him from coming to that extremity, by representing to him that it were to arm against him all the
Powers of the Universe: Zamar was no of this opinion, but she was obliged to yield The King of Thibet would again attempt to see the Princess, but the entrance of he Apartments was refused him, as it had been before; and whilst, being provoked with this denyal, he was considering of me∣thods to pull down an unjust Authority the Afflicted Taxila, and the lovely Axion were in a melancholy Solitude, where they entertained none but dismal thoughts. Bu what must those of Zingis be, that was so near Taxila, and so uncapable of conver∣sing with her? By the knowledge which he had of his Enemies, he did not question his unhappiness; and the Idea of that Death which he had so often braved, was less a¦flicting to him, than the absence of th Princess Almundzar interessed himself as a gene¦rous Friend, in the misfortune of Zingis but notwithstanding all his Credit with Und¦kan, that of Zamar was always preferred He spoke loud enough to be commande silent, and he had not so much as the com¦fort to be able to qualify the inconvenien¦cies which the King of the Monguls recei¦ved in his Prison. Zerbin who was still con¦cealed with this generous Friend of Zingi informed him that his Master had six hund¦red of the most resolute and couragious Me
in the World, lying hid in several Corners about Cambalu, that would most heartily expose themselves for their Prince. Al∣mundzar immediately made the King of Thibet a partaker of this News, in order to engross a Party, of which this Prince might have the Conduct. There were some Tartars too, bold e∣nough to declare themselves in favour of Zingis against Timur, whom they mortally abhorred, and whose Government they just∣ly feared. Almundzar hid his zeal, to be more useful to the Princess, and the King of the Monguls; and with this Policy he had liberty to win a great number of conside∣rable Tartars, who respected the Vertue of Zingis, and despised the baseness of Timur, which had appeared to them in so many occasions. The King of Thibet vexed at the second refusal he had received, carried his concern to Almundzar, to whom he made his complaints You plainly see, my Lord, replyed the Tartar, that all is here managed against Honour and Justice, and I don't believe that any other place in the World would have been so much wanting in the respect which is owing to such a King as you. My dear Almundzar, answer∣ed Philing, I should be but little sensible of such formalities, if I had nothing but the Interests of Glory to observe here, but I
have those of a Lover to satisfie; and you discern in me the most amorous of all Men Ha! of whom, my Lord? replyed Almund¦zar, being surprised; of Axione, pursue Philing; of that Charming Damsel so dea to the Princess, whom I have loved these mny years, and shall do to Eternity. I don't know, Amundzar, whether you have experenced her enough to be acquainted with all her Vertue, that stands in com¦petition with her Beauty; and the obscu∣rity of her Birth is effaced by the gran¦deur of her Sentiments. This effect of the merit of Axione doth not surprize me added Almundzar, but tht which is ama∣zing to me, is the manner of her arriving at Cmbalu, and the residence she has made here without you. Notwithstanding 'tis she alone that has brought me hither, an∣swered Philing, and for whom I have re∣mained here so long. But Almundzar, it's necessary that you know perfectly so ex∣traordinary a person, and the Passion I entertain for her, in opening my heart to you sincerely. Almundzar who was very ambitious of knowing the Adventures of Philing, besought him not to retard this satisfaction; and the King of Thibet, who could not be more agreeably employed, than by speaking of Axione, thus expres∣sed himself.
The History of Philing and Axione. THE Kingdom of Thibet is not one of the least considerable of Asia, nei∣her as to its extent nor Traffick. Altho' 'tis ncompassed with Mountains, and Desarts, et the Inhabitants of the Indies and those f China come frequently to correspond ith us. Our Cites are Populous, our Coun∣y Fertile, and magnificence is not unu∣ual with us. I was but six years old when  lost my Father, and nine when we re∣ained (the Princess Thamirize and I) ithout a Mother. These first misfortunes ere great, but our Age diminished the oubles and made us soon forgetful of them.  would be even difficult enough to express hat we thought, and I acknowledge that have but a bare remembrance of persons, hat ought to have been so much alued. My Father had been extreamly loved by is Subjects, and his memory was always ad in veneration by them. Perhaps there ever was observed a People more affectio∣te and faithful to a young Successor, who new neither his Fortune nor what might v-whelm it. Amongst all those, My Fa∣her had distinguished in his Dominions,
Hildezar was the most considerable. There was some Relation between the Royal Fa∣mily and his, and 'twas to him the Regence was committed, during my years of Mino∣rity. He made a worthy acquittance of this Employment. His knowledge was eminent, and his courage great. He was vigilant, and zealous, and Affairs underwent no alteration by his management. As for me, I was af∣forded Governours of sufficient merit, and Thamirize had select Ladies to wait upon her. Our usual residence was at Kachen. Hil∣dezar lodged in the Palace. He had lost his Wife, of whom he enjoyed but one Daugh∣ter, who had the same Education with my Sister; and I was attended with several young Gentlemen of Noble Families, to ren∣der the Employments of my Infancy the more agreeable. Hildezar at that time was about five and thirty. He did not want Ambition, and ceased not to feed himself with hopes, con∣sidering his all-sufficient power in Thibet, to oblige me one day to espouse his Daughter. The pleasure of Hunting was that he prac∣tised most of any. His Family was more nu∣merous than mine, his Expences much great∣er, and his Equipage equally splendid. It i true, that at ten years old so much magnifi∣cence is not absolutely necessary; and it is also certain that my Interests were not neg∣lected
by the Regent. It was a year per∣aps, since he exercised the whole Autho∣ity of Thibet under my Name, by the death of the Queen my Mother, and the Mourning being over, divertisements took up our time with those useful Employments that might compleat the Body and the Mind. All our Mountains are of a difficult access. Notwithstanding the Chase is agreeable there, and Hildezar, who often took this delight, suffered me to partake of it sometimes, with∣out letting me be exposed to the violence of this exercise. One day chosen amongst the pleasantest of the Spring, we were at a place near Kachen to pursue our usual Game, and we rid long enough with more vigour, than Children ordinarily enjoy. In passing under some scattered Trees, whose Trunks were washed with a little Rivolet, we saw a spec∣tacle that surprised my youthful Heart, and made a lively impression upon it. The Blood of several dead or dying Men, filled up this River, and some distance fom these Bo∣dies, we saw a little Damsel of six or seaven years old, cloathed richly enough, and of a Beauty so extraordinary, that our whole Company was astonished at it. She cryed and lift up her Eyes and Hands on high, being ignorant of whom to ask assistance. In this dismal state her very Garments were all stained with Blood, and never could an
Object more Charming, and worthy of com∣passion appear before us. Hildezar stopt; and our arrival made the innocent unknown redouble her Cries, who thrust her self a∣mongst our Horses feet, amazed at her mis∣fortune. I profes to you, Almundzar, that I was sensible of Love from that very moment; but I was ignorant thereof at first, and my innocence made me take it for a simple com∣passion. Hildezar alighted from his Horse, and went forthwith to approach the lovely stranger. He is dead, said she, with an inno∣cence Divine, in the Tartarian Language, but somewhat different from ours, my Fa∣ther's dead. These cruel Men have killed him, but he has dispatched them too. Ah! my Fa∣ther, added she, turning her Head most pit∣tifully to the place where the Bodies lay, Ah! my Father, I shall never see you more, and now will dye with you. Hildezar being soft∣ned, took her in his Arms, and made her shew him the Person she called Father, but neither he nor any of the rest gave any signs of Life. After that Hildezar himself con∣ducted the little Axione, for so she was cal∣led, to Kachen, asking her some questions by the way, and learning of her that Marzil∣le her Fathe had been assaulted by thse wick∣ed Men, with others that attended him; but she could inform him n ither of her Countrey, nor her condition, which by all appearances
was not indifferent. The sight of my Sister, and Alzina the daughter of Hildezar, both much of the same Age with her, a little mo∣derated her grief, and some few days after she appeared so beautiful, that the whole Court was charmed thereat. I never saw so much grace, such sweetness, and such mo∣desty as appeare in her meanest actions, and altho' she had spent her first years in a wan∣dring life, she had an admirable nature; which was not corrupted by the Want of Education. Her reason, which outstript her years, soon exelled that of persons much more aged: She was complaisant without debasing her self; and would have a defe∣rence in certain things to the Quality of King, which my Tenderness could not dis∣pense with. My Sister loved her entirely. Alzina lived Familiarly with her, and we passed five or six years in the sweetest con∣dition of the World. In the mean time, Axione became so handsom, and I so amo∣rous, that I aimed at nothing but her sight, and how to please her. I rendered her small Services which touched her Gratitude: but always humble, and always modest she re∣ceived them with respects, of which my Passion could not bear the observing. Axione said I to her one day, when I had made her a Present of some Flowers, for which she gave me, thanks, as for a thing of much
more value, you esteem at a high rate, gifts of little importance, and amongst those that I could make, that are some more worthy of observation. All those that proceed from your hand, my Lord, replyed she, ought to be very considerable to me, and such a King as you knows not how to be∣stow small ones. Ah! lovely Axione, said I, if flow∣ers attract so obliging an answer, what ought not I to hope from a Heart less unworthy of you, which I have long since disposed of to you? Hithrto my Eyes alone hve told you so, but now 'tis necessary to speak after another manner. Yes, Axione, I have given you this tender heart, which shall be faithful to you; and if you are capable of acknowledgement, methinks it should prove in my favour. The Modest Axione blusht, sighed, and beholding me with an affecting Air, but full of grandeur and Majesty. The Hearts of Soveraigns are not so easily to be disposed of, my Lord, answered she, nor to be accepted with so little pre∣caution. Consider what you are born to, and the con∣dition you have found me in. Make reflection upon a goodness which might pass for weakness, and which I'll not abuse. Believe that I will always respect in you the Royal Dignity, and a desert of which I am but too sensible. But, my Lord, believe also that the ob∣scurity of my Life doth not concern me enough to es∣cape by an artificial way. You have too much Wit, replyed I, and would to Heaven you had as much tenderness! what can the obscurity of your Birth pre∣vail against such Beauty, and such noble Vertue? Do you believe that I am one of those that Sacrifice to Fortune, and not Merit? Content with what I possess, I should esteem my self more happy to please you, than to oblige the gretst Queen upon Earth. Don't give me instructions then which I should look upon as Cru∣elties; suffr me to love you, and suffer it with satis∣faction. I might press on, 'tis true, but still she answered me as she had done before: The on∣ly advantage which I had, was to speak, and be
understood, and when I protested to Axione, that it was not the quality of King which made me take that liberty, she seemed to be more satis∣fyed: But, Almundzar, when her stature was quite formed, and her Beauty perfect, I also felt my Passion to encrease, and found my self full ca∣pable of giving up all things for her. I was not the only one that loved her in this manner, and you shall find I had a formidable Ri∣val. Hildezar, Regent of Thibet, in an advanced Age, Father of Alzina and who had acquired much esteem in our Countrey, and amongst our Neighbours, by his good management of things, seeing the lovely Axione grown up, felt kindling in his heart for her, Fires of an extream vio∣lence. He took in vain some care to stifle them, and what he had done for Axione flattering his hope, he let an Evil encrease, which it was not in his power to defend himself against. He had observed through all my actions the love I had for Axione; but he did not think it could be pure, and imagining that a young King must entertain Ambition, he hoped that time would carry my inclinacious further than to the Fortune of a Stranger; and so let his own act freely. One day, when I was not at the Pallace, Hil∣dezar found Axione alone upon a Terras walking, and taking the advantage of the time, when no one could observe him: Stay Axione, said he to her, I have something of importance to discover to you▪ Axione, who foresaw nothing, smiled at these words, Of what, my Lord? replyed she, is it in reference to the Obligations I am under to you, and is i to reproach me for having been wanting in m respects to you? If you had an obligation to me replyed Hildezar, it would be easie for you t acquit your self of it, and 'tis of this powe which is unknown to you, that I would infor
you. As long as you remain a Child, not feeling what I do with the same violence, I have forbore expressing to you what was beyond your reason; and since I have been retained by a fear, which a more absolute Authority at present quite ef∣faces. One cannot always be discreet and cir∣cumspect when one's despertely in Love: This Declaration will surprize you, Axione, the know∣ledge you have of your own charms, should have prepred you for it. You need not fear my Intentions, they are full of respect, and I don't offer to you my heart with an absolute Empire over my affections, but to offer you at the same time my hand, and all that Fortune has en∣riched me with. The Discourse of Hildezar made Axione loose her speech. He besought her a long time to an∣swer him, before she could, at length returning a little from the confusion: Is it possible, my Lord, answered she, that what you say is not de∣signed to make a Tryal of me, and that there should be any truth in a discourse of this nature? Can you doubt of it, repyed Hildezar, and are these sort of delusions becoming a person of my Age? You must needs think I love you very ardently, since no consideration hinders me from declaring it? Ah! my Lord, cryed Axione, what have I done against Heaven, to be expo∣sed to such a misfotune? Alas! is this mis∣fortune so great, replyed Hildezar, that you are so much disturbed at it? Yes, my Lord, pursued she, 'tis one of the most cruel ones to me; and after the obligations I am under to you, 'tis an eternal unhappiness for me to contribute to the pollution of your glory. What will be said, if you let your self go to such evil Conduct, and suffer your self to be guilty of Errors, which the tendrest youth cannot render excusable? What commendation can my alliance procure
you? unknown to my self and the whole World, perhaps too of an inferior blood, unworthy of your Cares. Axione, intrrupted Hildezar, this modesty raises your Vertue to so high a pitch, that my Love would encrease, if it were not already at the utmost poit. I see in you all that can satisfy my Ambition and my Love. but Speak possitively then▪ Ha! well Hildezar, per∣sued she, I will be sincere, sice you would have me, and I declare to you, that this unknown Blod, from whence I proceed, inspires me with thoughts so noble, that I will never do any thing without being inform∣ed of my Extraction. I feel it much better than per∣haps I shall ever know it — 'Tis not that which stops you interrupted Hildezar again, and this re∣sistance which puts me into dispair, is owing to ano∣ther cause; I am neither young, nor yet a King: but Axione I love you, and I can make you very happy. I have Athority, do not force me to make use of it. Philing 'tis true, is Soeraign, but he must have a great Alliance suitable to his Dignity, and he offers nothing but a volatile Love, much sooner extinct with Kings than other Persos. I eave you, and expect all things from you, proposing nothing but what is rea∣sonable. Thus he departed, and Axione remained alone at liberty, to reflect upon what she had heard. This entertainment made such an impres∣sion upon her Face, that it was easie to disco∣ver it, in spight of all the care she took to hide it. I found her much disquieted, full of distrac∣tion, and in a state I never found her in before, What have you done this Morning, Axione, said I to her, you are no more your self, and I cannot sup∣pose the caue of this alteration? My words reco∣vered her a little; she told me there was nothing very extraordiary; but I discerned too clearly in her Eyes, what love had long snce made me study for, to be contented with this Answer. You are not sincere, persued I, but if you coceal any thing
from the tender Interest I repoe in you, you'l be the crueliest perso in the World. My Lord, replyed Axione, that which you desire to know, ought to be concealed from you; yet I find my self not to be in a capacity of hiding the secret from you, but it must be upon condition that your goodness leaves no room for Resentment. Know then, my Lord, that this Hildezar whom Heaven has made use of to sweeten the first Misfortune of my Life, is now become the most sen∣sible of my Torments. There was no need of any more to make me comprehend, the Designs of Hildezar, and had it not been for the Condition which Axione had placed in her confidence, I had instantly gone to have searcht him in order to his chastisement. Hildezar, is amorous of you, replyed I, what then can I popose to my self if you are favourable to hm? My Heart added this charming Damsel, is of no great value, but my Inclinations are not destined for Hildezar. I am ex∣posed to his discourses, and perhaps to his Capricio's. Ha! do you make no account of my Authority, inter∣rupted I, do you imagin that my love will let his'n act undisturbd? O my dear Axione! I have much more interest therein than you, and you have too much charmed me to let a Rival importune you with a love, which no one shall pretend to whilst I am King, and enjoy the Possession of all, but Axione. You may ex∣tend your Title even as far as my Will, my Lord, re∣plyed she, since your generosity will never impose on it whats displeasing; and which is more, you are all-powefl here No Axione, added I, I shall never act any thing where you are, but what's agreeable to your wishes, since you are to reign here with a Sove∣raign Power. Oh Heaven! pursued this lovely Creatur, is it possible that I should prove un∣grateful to so much goodness, and will you not put me in a condition one day of returning an acknowledgment? I ope, my Lord, continued she, that my indifference, or rather my concern, leav∣ing
Hildezar in dispair, he'll change his Conduct; but if that happens not, I must change my self. Yes Axione, answered I, and what's more, it's necessary that you change your Condition. Don't believe that I consider, whether I shall make you Queen of Thibet, 'tis a determined thought. The Throne which I enjoy, can't please without you, and if our Laws would suffer such things, I'd of∣fer it entire to your disposal. My Lord, reply∣ed Axione, with regards full of Acknowledgment, you honour too much an unhappy Stranger, whom Fortune hath hitherto sound unworthy of the least of her Favours. It ould be too great a one to enjoy the affections of a noble Prince, and to partake his Crown: But my Lord, I shall not vilify so generous a goodness: Your Glory shan't be stained by an alliance such as mine; and to prevent this Misfortune, I would abandon my self to the most crul nes, so far as to bestow my self on Hildezar: What should Axione be Queen of Thibet, one who brings for her whole Advantage, nothing more than an O∣riginal unknown to all the World? I owe my self and you a perfect Information of my Person; and if there's found, said she with an extraordina∣ry Majesty, something in my Life that's worthy of you, believe, my Lord, that no one can dis∣pute it with you, and that I shall esteem my self but too happy. Oh Heaven! cryed I, charmed with the vertue of Axione, could you have placed so much gran∣deur in a common person? An. Madam, seek for no other Proofs of what you are, than in the Beauty of your Sentiments. They make you worthy of all the Thrones in the World. Ac∣cept of mine, and do not be cruel to me, by too modest and too obstinate a Refusal. My Lord, replyed she, 'tis a fixed Resolution. I know not whether I shall offend decency, in professing
to you that you have touched my Heart, and that of all which can be presented to my Eyes, nothing is more agreable to them than you; But I commit this fault to assure you, that the more dear and etimable you are to me, the more I ought to be careful of your glory. She blush∣ed in concluing these words, and would absolute∣ly change her iscourse. To satisfy her, it was necessary to put up the Offence she had received from Hildezar, and to give him no suspicion that I was informed there∣of. Having then my Eyes open, I saw but too clearly, what was agitating in the Heart of this inconsiderate Rival: But I was not so apprehen∣sive of the Intriues he caused in Thibet, by the Authority which he had gained during my Mi∣nority. As soon as he had declared his Senti∣ments to Arione, he took secret Measures to ob∣lige me o espouse his Daughter, to whom I had not so much as inclined a thought, nor had he spoke to me concerning it. He put the whole State in motion, and as hitherto my Education and my Love had more employed me, than the grand Affairs, it was easie for him to insinuate to those who had a Partnership in his Cares and business, all that he had a mind they should do. He declared then to every Man, that was distinguished amonst them, and who obtained some credit, that I, possessed with a blind Infatuation, abandoned my self to the love of the unknown Axione, and that I destined no other Princess to my Subjects. Each was for charging him to tax me with it, condemning this Engagement; but he refused to do it, and others were obliged to take the Commission thereof. I was not careul to imagin what they were then concerned about, and I was much surpri∣sed one day, that for an Affair of great im∣portance, I was obliged to be at Council, where I
but seldom went, supposing that my presence as not always necessary, when the most vene∣able of those that made up the ssembly, made is Addresses to me in these words. I speak to you in the Name of all your Subjects, my Lord, who by my Mouth, implore your goodness to give them a Queen. Your Age is not advanced, but your Reason is much; and that will inform you, that nothing is more agreeable to People, than to see their Soveraigns in a state of leaving them a glorious Po∣sterity. Kings become more vigilant thereby, and Nations better disciplined: Princes without engage∣ment are almost always without Interest, and that of a Family makes them search after renown, and the en∣largement of their Dominions. Think then, my Lord, of satisfying us, and persue the Steps of most of your Pre∣decessors. Don't go to take in Foreign Climates, a Princess that may undeserve our Love. There are in Thibet Families Illustrious enough to Merit the Al∣liance of their King. This favour ought even to regard the zeal and fidelity of Hildezar. Alzina can reckon Princes amongst her Ancestors, and she is not the first of her Blood, that has en∣tred into the Royal Family of Thibet. This dis∣course astonished me to such a degree, that I could not immediately return an answer. Anger had seized upon my Soul, I look'd upon these Men as so many Adversaries, that had designs to trouble my repose, and particularly Hildezar, not doubting but that he was the single occasion of all that passed. At length composing my looks, which the subtil Hildezar examined, I spoke, be∣cause 'twas necessary I should. Botzar, said I to him that had explained himself, I know not from whom you hold the Commission of which you have just acquitted your self, but I'll tell you, that it is not agreeable to me. Who ought to be more concerned than my heart, in the choice which is so much desired, or more careful of my Fortune than my self? You must certain∣ly
suppose me very weak, when you take the liberty of recommending Objects, and giving me Instructions. I am not so far Ignorant of the Laws of Thibet, and those of other Kingdoms of the World, but that I can square my Conduct with some glory, and make choice of a suitable Spouse when it shall be judged convenient. My Lord, said Hildezar, seeing that I had left speaking, you must not take amiss, that so many persons who regard you as their only good, aspire to see you fixed to them by that Interest they intimated to you. I could have given my Vote, but 'twas not I that did propose Alzina, who notwithstanding, Sir, excells a Stranger, and would agree much better with your Subjects. Hildezar, interrupted I, with looks full of displeasur, you abuse the consideration. I have had for you. I am apprehensive enough, to know that you do not so much conemn the unknown Ladies, and you might have so far disovered my Inclinations, to have been more retentie, and less confident. As for the rest, I am King, and pretend to be the Ma∣ster. When the People of Thibet are oppressed by my injustice, then they may complain of me: When I a∣bandon them to the fury of their Foes, thy'll have just reason to reproach my Cowardice; but hitherto they cannot condemn my Actions, and I can upbraid you, for all your Power, as one that's wanting in those respects, which I shall take care to make you ob∣serve for the Future. And so withdrew full of an∣ger, and had appeared such as I was, when shew∣ing my Resentment to those rah Men; had I not feared to have committed Axione to somewhat that would have disturbed her: she read my emo∣tion in my Eyes but I concealed the cause, and gave another pretence to it. Hildezar incensed against me for the Interest of his Daughter, but much more for that of his Love, made a angerous malice succeed to the affection he had professed for me. My ruine appeared to him necessary to assure his repose,
and Fortune, and as the peace which reigned a∣mongst us had left no Clouds at all, he raised a War by pernicious Intrigues, not doubting but I would run with a precipitant haste, to places where Glory was to be obtained. He expected by my Death, a Throne which had no other Heirs, and altho' Benzid and Othris, two considerable Princes in Thibet, had some pretensions to it, the suffrages, of which he was assured, made him regard them as no great Obstacles. 'Twas he then that seduced the People subjected to my Obedience, that Inhabit our Frontiers towards India. upon the first noise of this Rebellion, I would by all means act as General, and King. Hildezar cold and tardy, seemed little inclined for the War. His Creatures followed his Ex∣ample. But in spight of him, I found my self in some small time at the Head of a consider∣able Army. As soon as he discerned me ready to depart, he feigned an Indisposition to remain at Kachen. It was a cruel necessity for me to leave Axione, exposed to his importunities. No, said I to her, when I must depart, I'll never a∣bandon you to the indiscretion of Hildezar. He is all powerful here, Axione, and my misfortune has let his Authority encrease. My Lord, replyed she, being so near the Princess, I ought to be afraid of nothing in reference to him, and 'tis not his importunities, that disturb me; 'tis your Life, my Lord, which will be exposed to Rebellious Arms, 'ti your self, 'tis that great Heart, that burns to sygnalize it self. Alas! my Lord, to sympathize with our Weakness, have less Passion or a Glory that will always attend you close enough, and remember in the fight, what cares are owing to your own security. This Testimony of the Love of Axione, whose Charming Eyes be∣gan to appear moist, most sensibly affected me This Life that I have Consecrated to you, fai Axione, said I, won't run so many hazards, which
your goodness doth perswade you. But since you particularly ordain it, I will be careful of it, as of a thing which appertains to you, and which you are unwilling to be deprived of. For you, Axione, I trust you to your self. Fight with the rashness of Hildezar; and think at my return to put an eternal Obstacle between his bold preten∣sions, in giving your self to a Prince, that only lives for you Go, my Lord, continued this char∣ming Damsel, where the rigour of Fortune de∣mands your Courage, and if I am Mistress of a∣ny of your Interests, believe they cannot be placed in more secure hands. 'Twas thus I parted from Axione, and after having tenderly commended her to my Sister. I left the Pal∣lace attended by Benzid, Othriz, and several other considerable Persons in Thibet. Hildezar, said I to that perfidious man, you are inclined to remain at Ka∣chen, but remember always, that I reign there, and that I reign justly, don't abse the Power I have given you. render to my Sister what's owing to her Dignity, and a∣bove all, respect Axione for whom I Intress my self. Don't excite Troubles, which I go to calm: my return will be expeditious; I dare assre you, farewell. His answer was a Salutation, and I departed, but not without distur∣bance. I could tell you. Almundzar, that I passed like a Tor∣rent amongst the Rebels, they had no couragious Leader to excite them, and their Revolt was the workmanship of the perfidiousness of Hildezar. I had but little pains to subdue men con∣quered at the single prospect of our Standards; my vexation suffered me to punish some for ex∣mples, and as much disposed as I was to Clemen∣y, I could not think without Resentment, that hey occasioned my absence from Axione. In a ord, without much loss sustained, or the recep∣on of a single woud, altho' I did not spare y self; In less than three Months, all things
were composed. The conquered disposed them∣selves to all I ordained; and I retook the Road of Kachen, from whence I had often heard with∣out the least intimation of any thing that might make me suspect the misfortune that attended me. But at my Arival there I found neither Hilde∣zar, nor Axione. The Traytor had forced her away; and as exact as Thamirize had been to observe him, she apprehended nothing of it, and appear∣ed to me astonished at the Accident. Alzina her self, the innocent Daughter of so Criminal a Father, Protested to me, that she had no share in the action of Hildezar, and offered me coura∣giously her blood for the reparation of the of∣fence I had received. I assured her, as afflicted as I was, that not confounding her with the Infidel that gave her life, I eemed her innocent of all. In a word, Almundzar, without any stay at Kachen, I run through Thibet, and even exposed my self in the hideous Desarts of Xamo to frightful advetures; and after so much useless Enquiry which consumed much time, I returned to Kachen, to dispose my self to a longer Journey, leaving the Government to the Princess my Sister, and Ben∣zid and Othriz to asist her in her important Em∣ployment▪ after which I went out of Thibet, being unable to live without Axione. I saw the grearest part of Asia. I had adventures, which I don't acquaint you with, becuse they have no refer∣ence to my Love; and after to years of vain enquiry, being in Tartary, and passing through a-Forest that belongs▪ to the King of Ergimul, I found Hildezar at the foot of a Tree, pierced with many mortal Wounds, and in a condition worthy of his Treacheries. He breathed as yet, and knew me without much difficulty. His misfortune made ny anger vanish, and perswaded me to succour im; no, my Lord, said he to me, you ought not to row away your goodness upon a Man, that is so
little deserving of it. I am culpable, it is not Death that forces me to acknowledge it. and 'tis long since that a just remorse has revenged you of my infidelities. I dye too quietly for a man, that has deserved th utmost Punishment, since I can ask pardon of my Master▪ At these words he made an attempt to kneel, but I excused him from it, and askt him Nes of Axione. He fadly sighed, and told me that he had lost her near two years since; that ha∣ving mae her travel a long time, they had been assaulted in Tartary, and she tken from him. Since which, he had searched her strictly, but in vain, and that the same Rvishers had newly pu him in the state I found him, because he knew them and demanded news of Aione; after which he expired, and having ordered my Attendants to coer his Body with a little Earth; I came hi∣ther where I have at length found Axioe, beyond my expectation. I made my self known to Ʋnd∣kan. I ave often seen Axione, and then she loves me; I am assured of it, but her Severe vertue wil not permit her to consent to make me happy, till she has a perfect knowledge of her Self. she told me, that Hildezar had taken her away with a most secret Art, and great dexterity; that he did not shew himself to her till a long time after his departure from Kachen; that he had conjured her to pardon his Love, which made him Sacrifice his All for her; that she had ex∣claimed against his Perfidiousness: But that no∣thing had convinced him, and at length in Tar∣tary, she had been taken from him and sold to some Tartarians, who gave her to the Princess Taxila▪ Philing ceased, and Almundzar admired his ge¦nerosity, and the Vertue of Axione. At length re∣turning to the Intrests of Zingis, they talkt o the Troops he had about Cambalu and those Measures, which they ought to take to preven
the misfortune, which threatned the Life of that Illustrious Prince. In the mean time, Timur the Author of those Evils, which so many considerable persons Suf∣fered, was not without disquiet, and for all the Man of the World he haed most, was upon the point of being sacrificed to him; yet loving Taxila as he did, he could not live without her sight, and he was too sensible that he could not present himself before her, without hearing things that would be disagreable to him. Zamar, who loved him even to Idolatry, saw his Melancholly with trouble. Why do you languish, Timur, said she to him, all things conspire to your Felicity, and there is no Crown in Asia, that equals what you will possess? What can you want more to satisfy you? After so much care that I have taken, will you always appear before me with a disturbed Aspect? Madam, replyed Timu, these moti∣ons are not voluntary, and 'tis against my will, you discern them. You have done but too much for me. My acknowledgment can go no farther; but if my Am∣bition is contented, I feel my Love alarmed. Being too constant a lover of Taxila, I must either deprive my self of her sight, or else expose my self to her reproaches Ah! Madam, how I deserve compassion, and how discomposed I am in the midst of my prosperity! Say rather that you are weak, interrupted the Queen of Tartary, and that you merit real misfortunes, since you make to your self imaginary ones. First see our Enemy destroyed, and then render your self Master of Taxila. Her consent is of no importance. The Authority of Ʋndkan shall raise these difficulties. In short, my Son, I would have you reign over the Tartars, and there is nothing but I would accomplish for that end. Go see this ungrateful Taxila, whose fierceness I should not spare but for your single consideration, whilst I dispose the King to the Execution of Zingis.
The Son of Zamar, inspired by such a Mother left her, to go visit the Princess, where he alon had the priviledge to enter. Taxila, who had no seen him since her disgrace, was so confused at hi arrival, that she had almost lost ll knowledge. T pursue the Counsel of his Mother, he had disperse his sadness, and appeared most confident and bold Madam, said he, it should be hardly credible tha such a person as you should be capable of attract¦ing banished Enemies to Tartary, and even to th Palace of the King your Father, and withou valuing my Interest, that you could have those o a sufficient Power to obstruct my correspondenc with you. As moderate as the Princess was, she lost al patience at these words. When I shall have don things that deserve some reparation, replied she, i should not be to the King of Tenduck, vile Slave t his Vanity and the Passion of his Mother, tha I woul justify my self: This is to use me indee like a Captive, to carry his insolence in places wher my liberty is taken away. Doth not my natura aversion to you suffice, without augmenting it b proceedings full of injustice and temerity? Go, pre¦tended King of Tartary, and solicit for the loss o Zingis: but know at the same time that whatsoeve state your common furies reduce him to; he shall b always dearer to me than my life▪ perhaps I ha neve said so much▪ if he had not been unfortunate but in the state we are, I have nothing more to car for, and to requite what he has done, and what h suffers for me, all my love is insufficient. At thes words Taxila passed ito a Closet, where she enclo¦sed her self,; and Timur full of Rage and confusion said to Axione an infinite number of things withou respect, and without reason. She answered to the  with much Spirit and assurance, and did not de¦viate from the Sentiments of the Princess; which e¦creased the Son of Zamar's fury to such a degre
that he returned to his Mother, to exclaim against Taxila, and urge the loss of a Rival, whom he could not suffer to enjoy the preference. Ʋndkan so ardently solicited by persons all-sufficient over him, soon took a fatal Resolution. Almundzar, whom the interest of Zingis made careful to observe him, perceived what was acting in his Soul, and went to seek the King of Thibet, to inform him of it. Then Zerbin, without any further delay, was ordered to assemble the Mon∣guls near Cambalu, and Almundzar took the same care for those Tartars that had declared themselves in favour of Zingis. The King of Tartary, who had a mind to act with some form of Justice, to avoid the censure of the world, thought he had a sufficient motive to con∣demn the King of the Monguls, in that he was sur∣prised in the night at the Gates of his Palace, with a design to enter secretly. Zamar made choice of Judges that condemned the illustrious Zingis, pur∣uant to her inspirations, to lose his head in three days. This Judgment was pronounced to him, without appearing in the least disturbed. But the King of Tribet and Almundzar, upon whom Gene∣rosity was so predominant, trembled with horror nd confusion, resolved to ruine all, or to preserve him. They acted with so much diligence and se∣recy, that they soon obtained a formidable par∣ty, which dispersed it self in the twelve Suburbs of he City of Cambalu, to be at liberty to go when t was time, and force Zingis from the Guards of Ʋndkan. The King of Thibet did not scruple to ap∣pear Captain of these Defendants; he was under no obligation to the King of Tartary, and so infring∣d no Right against a person, that would com∣mit so barbarous an Injustice. The noise of the death of Zingis passed even to he Princess, who repented, but too late, for having ncensed the jealousie of Timur. She remained in
the fatal expectation of this misfortune, and shed abundance of Tears near her dear Axione; and this fair Damsel, more affected than she had ever been before, felt an affliction little different from that of Taxila. The day designed for the Death of the King of the Monguls being come, the streets were very ear∣ly filled with people. It was before the Palace he was to lose his life; and it was an easy matter for those that intended to rescue him, to mix them∣selv s in the crowd, composed of all sorts of people. The Scaffold was erected before the A∣pa tments of Zamar, that through the windows of her Chmber, she might taste the pleasure of this Spectacle. Ʋndkan himself was seated there with Zamar, Tiur, and the Kings of Ʋng, Ten∣guth, Cerguth, and Egimal, the worthy Slaves of the Tartarian Queen. People regarded with amaze∣ment this Assmbly of Soveraigns, in an Employ∣ment so little becoming the Royal Dignity; whilst the afflicted Taxila was groaning, or rather dy∣ing in the Arms of Axione. Zamar, who saw her Vengeance no longer de∣ferred, tasted those Delights which barbarous Souls for the most part find in Cruelty. The feeble Ʋndkan let himself be drawn to the same motions, and the inglorious Timur, declared enemy to Vertue, prepared to see the Sacrifice, as Heroes dispose them∣selves to the most glorious Exploits, that is to say, with a contented mind, and an assured aspect; and the four Kings, fixed to the Chariot of Zamar, ser∣ved as an Ornament to this unworthy Triumph. It was not only the K. of Thibet, Almundzar, and some Tartars more emboldened than the rest, that murmured at this horrible attempt. Amongst the People and the Souldiers, there were found those of a disposition just enough, to be sensible of the desert, and innocence of Zingis, and who demanded but a Captain, to declare openly in his favour.
He was taken out of Prison about the middle of the day, that the action might be the better observ∣ed. His Guards made him ascend the Chariot, that attended him, and the Executioner having secured his hands, familiarly sat by him, to add disgrace to Cruelty. The composed Zingis beheld all this without the least amazement: His resolution made the boldest of those tremble that encompassed him; and many reflecting upon those occasions, where they had seen him acquire so much glory, cast down their eyes and sadly sighed to see so great a Man destined to so deplorable a Fate. He never appeared with so much grace and Majesty, as in this unhappy condition: His hands which had chained so many Kings, sustain∣ed his Irons most couragiously; he dispised his ig∣nominious usage, and lifting up his Eyes to Heaven; Oh Taxila, said he in a Tone loud enough, I give you my Life as heartily, as I would have done the Empire of the Ʋniverse, if it had been at my disposal. Accept thereof, as an assured testimony of my constant Love, and remember Zingis. In the mean time the Chariot advanced, and there was seen throughout a deluge of Tears. The Men encouraged themselves to preserve Zingis. The Women asked his Life, and the very Children gave some Marks of tenderness. In coming near the great Square of the Palace, the Croud divided in a Spaci∣ous place to let the Chariot pass: 'Twas there the King of Thibet stopt. He would not suffer Almund∣zar to take Arms, that he might be the better en∣abled to Act in the consequence. Zerbin alone, was near him, and at the first signal which they gave, the Monguls and Tartars opposed the passage of the Guards. This Obstacle, which was so unexpected, caused a general surprize; the first thing which the King of Thibet did, was to strike off the head of him that was to have been officious to Zingis in the same re∣spect,
which he effectually performed at a Blow, and then untyed the hands of this couragious Prince. My Lord, said he, in presenting him with Arms, if you die this day, you shall not die alone, and it shall be after a glorious manner. Receive this Service from a Man, who, tho' a stranger to you, is not a little fixed to your Interst. Zingis accepted what was offered to him, and soon found himself in a condition to car∣ry terror every where. He dispersed it in the midst of the Tartars by his Supernatural Actions. Philing valiantly followed his Example. Zerbin surpassed himself. The Monguls appeared like so many Heroes; and the Tartars, who after what they had done, could expect no safety but from Zingis, sacrificed their Countrey-Men that favoured the Design of Zamar. Instead of one single Head that should have fallen that day, Rivers of Blood were seen to over∣whelm the steets of Cambalu. Ʋndkan, who feared nothing of this surprize, had been contented with but one Party of his Guards, for the security of Zingis, and had not armed the Old Bands of Soul∣diers, which usually were quartered in the Suburbs; and in few moments Zingis's. Party cut all in pieces that opposed their fury. But how did Zamar, Ʋnd∣kan and Timur behold this Rebelion! Malicious Pride and Anger had like to have stifled the Queen. Ʋnd∣kan was moved with several Passions at a time, and the timerous King of Tenduck became pal with fear, not doubting but he should be obliged to expose himself to the valour of Zingis, which was so well known to him. Zamar might long enough excite the Tartars with Cries and Promises. The feeble Spirits fled, and those of a braver strain, wanted assurance to advance. The Kings themselves, whose submissi∣ons made her so haughty and fierce, remained im∣moveable, without daring to attempt. What, said she, in seeing them at the Palace Gate, and in the presence of five other Kings, shall a rash Criminal tri∣umph, over the Laws, and our Authority, and bring per∣haps
to us those Irons which he has just shook off! O hu∣mersome Fortune! how blind and furious art thou to day? These Words put the Auditors into a confusion, but she had not Vertue enough to inspire them with Courage. Undkan, whose safety was concerned in this adventure, as well as his Reputation, and who, notwithstanding his Years, was perhaps the least un∣worthy of those Kings, went out, the rest attending him: The Souldiers had notice to advance, and they brought to the Engagement all that was in a state to carry Arms in the Palace. Upon the time Zingis and Philing rendered themselves Masters of the Square, the presence of Ʋndkan recalled those that fled: But his Blood was soon chilled at the pro∣digious Actions of the two Kings. Zingis knew him again, and could with easiness have proved against him that admirable Valour which formerly had ser∣ved him so successfully, but respecting him who gave life to Taxila, he turned his Sword else-where, when he saw a Horseman that had joyned his Party within some few Moments, extend his Arm to strike the King of Tartary. The generous Zingis, not being satisfyed with having spared his Persecutor, would still defend him against his proper Friends, and opposing himself to the valiant Man that fought for him; Hold, whosoever thou art, said he, and do not stain thy Arms with the Blood of Taxila's Father. Ʋnd∣kan was ot more surprized at this Action, than the unknown, to whom Examples of Vertue were fami∣liar. All the World observed the proceedings of Zingis, and Philing was so ravished at it, that his af∣fection for so great a Man encreased still more. The King of Tartary retired pale, and trembling amongst his own, and by this time the old Band of Souldiers, who quartered in the Suburbs, as we have said, and who had leisure to prepare themselves, arrived on all sides. As soon as the base Timur saw their ap∣pearance, he put forth a cry of joy, and advanced himself before them, but how dear did this inconsi∣derate
boldness cost him! Zingis who was so mode∣rate in relation to the Father of the Princess, beha∣ved himself in a different manner to an Insolent Rival, and forcing himself upon him. Thou shalt die without enjoying Taxila, or the Crown of Tartary, said he, and thy Eyes shall never observe the Sacrifice of Zin∣gis. A shower of blows pursued these words, and the on of Zamar fell without life at the feet of the King of the Monguls. His fall occasioned in his Mothers heart, who encouraged him from the Windows, the most violent effects of Grief and Rage. She sent out Blasphemy against Heaven and Men, ravingly cursed her very Husband, and fell into Convulsions, which argued her cruel Passion and Resentments. Whilst Zingis, Philing, Zerbin, the unknown, and the Monguls with a Party of Tartars went on to com∣pleat the Conquest; Almundzar, who saw the Apart∣ments of the Princess without a Guard, was got thi∣ther, and found her terrifyed at the noise she had heard, without knowing the Occasion. Well, Al∣mundzar, said she to him, is the King of the Monguls dead? No, Madam, replyed the Tartar, and I hope you'll see him in a little time enabled to terminate all your Fears. Then he informed her of all that had pas∣sed; and as she abhorred Blood-shed, the Death of Timur was not very pleasing, notwithstanding all the advantage she might receive from thence. But of all that affected her in favour of Zingis, nothing was so powerful as that brave Action, which gave the Tartars so much admiration. Oh Heaven! reply∣ed she, if Zingis persecuted and ready to fall under the merciless Sword of his Foes, defends the Father of Taxi∣la against those, whom a generos Temper arms to pre∣serve him from the severity of Undkan; what doth not she owe to such strong Testimonies of so pure an affection? Axione interessed for her Lover, and for a Prince she tenderly affected, revived her hopes with the Princess, and they redoubled their Prayers. Fortune had made an entire Declaration against
Zamar. The loss of her dear Timur, was attended by the death of several thousands of Souldiers. The Kings of Tauguth, Cerguth Ergimul and Ʋng, weakly engaging, without Valour or Courage, perished by the Arms of Zingis and Philing; and the Tartars who came from the Suburbs, were constrained to yield. Zingis would not aspire to the Crown of Undkan, seeing this Prince, amazed by such a disorder, re∣enter his Palace, he embraced the King of Thibet, whom the faithful Zerbin had informed him of, and after he had expressed all that a just acknowledg∣ment could inspire a great Heart with, he turned him self to the valiant Man, who had fought with so much advantage; and seeing his Head discover∣ed, he knew him for the Prince of Brema; their mu∣tual Embraces was an Argument of their Friendship. Zingis praised the Tartars, and the Monguls that ser∣ved him, according to their Merits. His Friends ad∣vised him to make his entrance into the Palace; but for all his impatience to see Taxila, he thought it inconvenient, out of respect to her, to insult over the King, and so retired to the same House, wherein he lay concealed for some time. The King of Thibet, and the Prince of Brema ac∣companied him, and Zerbins business was to take care of those that remained of the Monguls. But scarce had they been two Hours in this place, be∣fore Almundzar came to find them. Come valiant Princes, said he to them, in transports of immode∣rate joy, come and possess the Fruits of your brave cou∣rage, Ye have no more enemies to fear: Fury has effected upon Zamar, what your Arms have accomplished over all the est. She is dead, and Undkan delivered from the bondage her Artifices had confined him to, calls Vertue again, which he had banished from his Soul, and now breaths nothing but a happy Reconcilement with you. These words, which made so agreeable a Revolution to be hoped for, did not immediately find a perfect cre∣dit in those, to whom they were addressed, but at
length 'twas proper to believe them, and follow Al∣mundzar to the Palace. Tranquility was already e∣stablished; all the World made Prayers for Zingis; No body so much as pitied Zamar, and less her base unworthy Son. Arriving at the Palace, Zingis found the Princess there, and Philing, the charming Axione. The King of Tartary offered his hand to the King of the Monguls, and the Prince respectfully con∣descended to receive his advances. Will you no more remember Cruelties, which cover me with an eternal shame, My Lord, said Ʋndkan to him, and can you pardon what an unjust Empire, which a Woman took over my Weakness, has made me enterprize against you, in spite of so many important services you have so generously ren∣dered me? 'Tis by your first actions that you deserve the Crown of Tartary, and all that you have annexed to it, and by that Life which you have preserved in favour of Taxila, you fully merit the Princess. I give her to you Zingis, and with her all Tartary; and whatso∣ever is subdued to her obeissance, being no more sensible of any satisfaction, than to behold both Reign. At these words he took the hand of the Princess, who full of joy accepted that of Zingis. My Lord, said he to Ʋnd∣kan, your goodness infinitely exceeds my hopes, and the small merit of my Services. I receive with all due respect the precious advantage of being united with the Princess, but for the Crown of Tartary, I will not affix mine to it, but to make you the Master. Reign, my Lord, and peaceably, and only accept of my Hommage No, no, interrupted Ʋndkan, I have been too much King, since I have acted in this quality things so little just: Reigning by you, you shall reign for me, and I shall make my glory of it. Then he asked pardon of the King of Thibet, praised his generosity, and was perfectly reconciled to him. But in casting his Eyes upon the Prince of Brema, who had not changed his Equipage, he knew him for that formidable Man, against whom Zingis had defended him. He was a little moved at the sight; but rege∣nerated Vertue, which began to exclude from his
Soul, all that approached near Vice, would suffer no Resentment. He embraced him as he would have done his own Son. The King of the Monguls would no permit you to revenge him, Omir, said he to him, and and yet I won't complain of him that set upon me for so just a cause. Omir answered to this discourse with much submission. Almundzar also came to receive of Ʋndkan new Testimonies of his Friendship who spoke with much good Nature and Sweetness to all those who had taken Arms for Zingis. In the mean time, Love was triumphant. Zingis and Taxila mutually acknowledged it in their con∣tented Eyes, and afforded one another the tenderest assurances thereof. Phling said to Axione all that he had suffered in some days of absence, and conjured this scrupulons person to be a little less fixed to her Resolutions, and to consent to make him happy. She gave him thanks for what he had performed for Zin∣gis; and after this first interview, the Princes ha∣ving received some slender hurts, which were con∣venient to be lookt upon retired all together with Almundzar. There was nothing considerable nough to oblige them to be confined; and they disposed themselves to see the Princess, when the Prince of Brema directed his discourse to the King of Thibet thus. I know not, my Lord, if what has happened to me in your Dominions, will not procure me your displeasure; I have committed a fault there which I can't possibly repent of: The Princess Thamirize is at Cambalu: 'Tis I have brought her hither; but when you shall know the reasons, Perhaps you'l pardon me. This discourse surprised Philing. He questioned not but Love was concerned in it, and as he possessed a heart, that was indisposed to condemn this Passion which had so much empire over him seeing the Qua∣lity of the Prce of Brema, and sensible of the service he had rendred to Axione, whatsoever you have done my Lord, said he, I am perswaded that my Sister is obli∣ged
to you, and being my self extreamly in your debt, beleive that I am incapable of condemning you. But since Thamirize is at Cambulu, let us see her instantly, that she may receive the embraces of a Brother, who always tenderly affected her. Philing and Zigis would accompany the Prince of Brema; but Almudzar beg'd the favour of them not to stir, and went with Omir to seek the Princess of Thibet whom they forthwith conducted to the Palace of Ʋnkan: The Brother and Sister gave all the testimonies of a perfect Love. Zingis saluted her, and admired her Beauty; The King of Tartary, in∣formed of her arrival, came to respect her to shew the more consideration for Philing, and would him∣self wait on her to an Apartment, where Taxila and Axione soon came to see her. As oon as Thmirize had saluted the Princess of Tartary she gave her Hand to Axione, who received her Caresses with a respect∣ful tenderness. The King retired, and there being a general ambition to know by what adventure Omir and Thamirize were come together, the Prince of Brema, with the permission of the Princess, thus ex∣plained himself to those Illustrious persons. The History of Omir and Princess hamirize. No body is ignorant that I have been an unfortu∣nate man from my most tender inancy; being the Son of a Prince conquered and subdued by the Arms of the Tartarian King, without Fortune, having lost all by this Revolution, and without any hopes of rais∣ing my Family, but through my Courage, and the asistance of my Friends. Ʋndkan was not neglectful of my Child-hood, and I am under an obligation to him, for having allow∣ed me the Education of a King's Son: but with a lit∣tle more age▪ the insolence of Timur made me discern-that I was but a Slave because he used me as his Inferi∣our. I suffered a long time, not hoping what to de∣termin. The arrivall of Zingis in Tartary detained me there, by the affection I selt for him; we carried our first Arms together; but at my return from the
War, being unable to live under a Power which the Authority of Zamar and the credit of Timur made unjust. I departed silently from Tartary, and went directly to visit those unhappy places, where I re∣ceived my Birth. Such melancholy Objects served to afflict me. I descended towards the South, and came insensibly to the Kingdom of Thibet. 'Twas not long after the King's departure from Kachen when I arrived there: all things were in a solitary posture: Those that governed the State; taking the advantage of his absence and of the small experience which the Princess had in Politi∣cal Affairs, aimed at their own profit, and usurped too much Authority. I first saw Thamirize in the Temple, where she made her Devotions. Her modest and melancholy behaviour rendred her Beauty to my heart all-power∣ful▪ I well perceived I went to be in Love, and had not force enough to combat this disposition. Having seen her but a moment, I burnt with a desire to re∣view her: but how could I be introduced to her presence? The absence of Philing made a solitary Court, and would admit no strangers to the Palace. 'Twas necessary thn to expect from Fortune an oc∣casion to satisfy my growing passion. The Idea of Tamirize did not abandon me; I returned to the Tem∣ple, but as it was a Publick place, she went but sel∣dom there. I learnt, after I had made some residence at Kac∣hen, that since the departure of the King, the Princess lived retired: That men had no sort of Liberty near her person, not so much as those of the first Quality; and that she gave her own time for read∣ing, walking, or any other employment of that na∣ture. Those that I conversed with in a little time, made me a description of her humour, which ravish∣ed me. I learnt that she was generous, compassio∣nate, of an easy access, when there was some reason to make application to her; ingenious in Conversa∣tion,
and incapable of doing any Injustice. She had several Ladies of illustrious Families to attend upon her, and this small Court, so little favourable to our Sex, inspired me with the design of a young Man, fantastical, and bold at the same time, but the only one I thought capable of succeeding: Being of a to∣lerable aspect, I resolved to take the habit of a Wo∣man. In Thibet they are negligent enough, and I gave orders for some to be made, that were proper for a person of Quality, by the mean of a Damsel I got acquainted with and who was faithful to me. There is no body but this disguise might have impos∣ed on, even amongst those that were my Familiars, having nothing of affectation in my actions, and my face being likely to pass for that of an greeable Damsel. Ravished to have found this opportunity, I aimed at nothing more than to put it in use; and two days more having perfectly accustomed me to the behaviour of a Woman, I directed my self to the Gardens of the Palace, where my Habit easily introduced me. I walked there for some time a∣lone: but at length Thamirize, who betook her self to the Garden every day, came at her accustomed hour and passed near the place, where I was▪ I salu∣ted her respectfully: she returned my civillity with an extraordinary goodness; and some few paces from thence, the Idea of my unknown Face strike∣ing her imagination, she asked her Ladies, who at∣tended her, if any of them had an acquaintance with me? All having answered no, and Fortune, willing that the Princess should observe in me some∣thing worthy of her curiosity, she sat down, and ordered one of her Ladies to go and pray me to come to her. I obeyed with some confusion; and Tha∣irize took for an effect of modesty, what was no∣thing but the effect of. Love Don't take it amiss, said she to me, with a sweetness full of grace, if I have a desire o know you: you are made after such a manner, that is eventing in your favour; and I wish I could be necssary to
you, to give you some assurance that I speak by incli∣tion. These obliging words peirced to the very bottom f my Heart and conveyed thither a sensible delight. don't admire, Madam, replied I, that I have had such  advantagious character of your Generosity and Beauty, find they are both of an equal starp; I was born in Tartary, Madam, bred up at Cambalu, near the Princess Taxila, being of a Rank that procured me that Honour. De∣lorable misfortunes have obliged me to absent my self from hat Court, and Heaven has directed me to Thibet, where I emain, to avoid more dangerous evil; unknown to all your people, without protection, and without friends, I have al∣ready passed here some tedious, melancholy days: but Madam, they'l be more agreeable hereafter, and the ad∣vantage I receive too day, will make me soon forget my past afflictons. Thamirize attentively lookt on me as I spoke, and offering me her hand with a behaviour full of goodness. I am sorry, said she, that Fortune un∣grateful to your merits, has exposed you to any Sufferings: but I am glad at the same time, that she affords us an occa∣sion to releive you: You may remain with us, and all that depends on me shall not be wanting to you. I cast my self at the feet of the Pincess, being transported with Love, and Pleasure; and after I had reurned her thanks for this particular favour, I made her a feigned recital of adventures, which were but probable, and told her that my name was Irmisa. Behold how my amorous Intrigue succeeded; I remained in the Palace amongst the Ladies of the Princess, and I forgot no cautions that migh assure my secret, and leave me quiet possessor of the advan∣tage I enjoyed. In a few days I obtained no incon∣siderable share in the affection of the Princess. She gave me a thousand innocent marks thereof, and seemed pleased to hear me talk: but that which I found most difficult was to conceal my Love, which I perceived each moment to encrease. I had this Ad∣vantage
in my happiness, that it excited no Envy a∣gainst me, and that all the Ladies of the Princess shewed an extream civility to me. Alzina daughter of Hildezar the Fugitive, and cause of the King's ab∣sence, often bewailed the crime of her Father before the Princess, who told me that it was Axione, who had obliged the King her Brother to go out of his Territories; and I made her sensible of no small joy, by giving her some News of the lovely Axione. My greatest care was, not to abuse the goodness of the Princess, in affording my eyes too great a Liber∣ty. I always retired, when the sight of Women is for∣bid us I never came into her Chamber before she was dresed, and always withdrew before she went to Bed. See how I passed my first Months at Kachen: but I could not be always there without isturbance. The absence of the King and that of Hildezr, who had been the most considerable next to this Prince, puffed up the courage of some persons, who durst not pretend to any thing till then. Supposing that neither would return, and seeing the Princess deined to suc∣ceed her Brother; Othriz and Benzd, who bore up the quality of Princes, did not stick to appear in Love with her, and made an open declaration of it. The King, who had judged them capable of giving advice to Thamirize, the youngest exceedig thirty years, at his departure recommended to them the State, and a Sister that was valuable to him, and they made a Ty∣rannical use of this Commendation. Altho' Thamirize was desirous of shunning all sorts of men, yet those had priviledges which she could by no means contradict. As soon as they knew the ves to be Rivals, a division immediately  ded: they were both very proud, and  deserving; and a Soul as curious as that  Princess, could not be affected in their fa∣v As for me, I soon perceived that their Love  eresied and little respectful. They had  nformed of my Adventures; and seeing the
liberty I had obtained near the Princess, both used their Endeavours to win me to their party, and prayed me to be serviceable to their Love. As their Discourse to me was of the same nature; my an∣swers too were much alike to both. My Lord, said I to Benzid, who was the Eldest of the two, and whom I judged to be the most advised, The Princess is too wise to ask Advice upon the Subject you treat of: But if she should do it, and should address her self to me, I would reer her to her own Heart and Reason▪ fit a one to mea∣sure the Sentiments of such a Person as she: But, since you honour me with your confidence, permit me to tell you, that the humour I know the Princess to be of, will hardly dispence with the Declarations of Lovers, especially in the absence of the King. Philing, replyed Benzid, will ne∣ver return to Kachen, and the occasion which obliged him to depart, will unquestionably ruine him: But it is not that which perplexes me, and all my disquiet, is to know the difference, which the Prince s makes between Othriz and my self. I believe, said I, she observes none at all. Very well, pursued Benzid, little satisfied with me, it's necessary that I make a stinion then, and I hope I shall be so fortunate as to do it. Thus he left me, and the Princess, who perceived that he did it with disturbance, came up to me, to draw me from the meditation, this Entertainment had put me in. What are you become my Rival, Irmiza, said she to me smil∣ing; doth Benzid come to make an amorous Declarati∣on? Ab how extreamly should I be obliged to your Beauty, if it would deliver me from his importunities? I am but the Confident of Benzid, Madam, answered I; He solicites me to serve him in relation to his love with you, and wishes that I could render him agreeab to you. My dr Irmiza, replyed she with a sigh,  afraid Benzid and Othriz will be the occasion of g misfortunes to me. It was not without reason,  she entertained this fear; and never two amb Men pusht on their rashness to a greater extr As for me, I lived with desires less unju
which did not leave me undisturbed The Beauty of Thamarize flattered the present time, and left me nothing to be hoped for, for the future. I had put a Criminal abuse upon her; for all the purit of my intentions, it was to be supposed that she would not excuse this Conduct. After I had blindly satisfied the first motions of my Love, these Reflections took me up intirely; the least regard of the Princess caused an Emotion: I could not persuade my self but that she pierced into the truth, and was acquaint∣ed with my ex. That made me fall into so deep a Melancholly, that I often ballanced between a Decla∣ration of my Crime, and the exposing my self to the just indignation of Thamirize, to be punished as I deserved; and a Retirement, to assure the Secret for ever. These agitations made an impression both up∣on my Body and Mind. Thamirize, who loved me, was sensible of this Change with displeasure. Irmiza, said she to me one night, when I was alone with her; you are always in my thoughts, and I don't believe that I have the least concern in yours. Without doubt this misfortune, which has conducted you to Thibet, inspires you with a disturbance, which I can't discern without trouble, and which I would disperse at any price what∣soever. Madam, replied I, as you have sweetned, or ra∣ther fixed this cruel Fortune, which has disquieted my first years, it's impossible that I should be an instant, without reflecting upon my Obligations to you. Alas Madam, it is not the Crime of being forgetful of you, that I can be guil∣ty of; and if you could never have any other occasion to reproach me, I should be perhaps less troubled than I am. I blushed as I pronounced these words: Thamirize perceived it, and lookt upon me with an attentive Eye; but comprehending nothing in this Mystery, I don't believe, replied she, that any thing can make you Criminal with me: but, Irmiza, speak sincerely, and if you would have me satisfyed, tell me the cause of your Me∣lancholly? If ther appears a Fire in your Eyes, it seems that you endeavour to conceal it. If you are suprised, you send
forth little sighs: Sometimes you look up to Heaven after a ntreating manner: You appeared much out of order before me, in the beginnings of our Acquaintance, and at his time it seems as if my presence was disturbing to you. You are here at liberty, and I have not afforde you a place of safety, with a design to put a constaint upon you. But my dear Irmiza, added she with a Smile, and offering me her hand after an obliging manner, I must discover my thoughts to you: I fancy you are in Love, and that some illustrious Tartar enjoys this heart, wherein we are so am∣bitious of a little share. During this Discourse, I was a hundred times ready to declare my self: but con∣sidering that Thamirize would perhaps shew me more severity, than she had done sweetness, I still concea∣led my Love, and used my endeavours to dispose my self to a less agitated State. If any one had a greater share in my heart than the Princess of Thibet, answered I, it's more than probable I had never seen her, and a person of my humour could not easily depart from places, where such a one should have his Residence. I don't say, pursued I, that my Soul is free from Love, and 'tis that perhaps which makes me sigh and languish. I question not, said Thamirize, more perplexed than before, but that you know well how to choose; and in this Opinion, I promise to be favourable to you in that person, that shall be so happy as to please you And what would you say, Madam, re∣plied I, you that have so much Reason and Pru∣dence, if you should find a Damsel resolute enough to Love, and dare disclose it? I should not con∣demn a Freedom of my own encouraging, answered Thamirize and as there are legitimate Affections, if hers were of that nature, I should esteem her ne're the less for the discovery. If you should ap∣prove in me, said I, this passion▪ hich so many others have condemned, it is not ulikely, Madam, that a Prince deserving of you, by his Birth, and Merit, may one day be so happy as to affect you.
It is true, pursued Thamirize, with a modest Blust that I don't feel my self incapable of loving what most amiable; and you see, Irmiza, since I lov you, I am not altogether insensible Ah! Ma¦dam, answered I, the Friendship which you ho¦nour me withal, would not satisfy an amorou Prince; and I know some, who would no be contented with it, as precious as it is. Sinc you have been in places, that are unknown to me added the Princess, you may give me Instructions But, Irmiza, as it is not in favour of Benzid, and Othriz, that I would make use thereof, it is no inconvenient to expect some other opportunity. I was not sorry for having found a pretence for my Melancholly; I let Thamirize believe I was in love; and since this Conversation, she put no more Questions to me in relation thereto. The two Rival Princes then redoubled their importuni∣ties, and began to be Competitors in Thibet. It was in this occasion I admired the inconstancy of the People. Altho' Philing was goe from Kachen but for a Journy; his ungrateful Subjects no soon∣er saw his Absence, but they flattered the ambiti∣on of two Usurpers, declaring that they would not live without a King, and that the Princess was incapable to Reign alone; the hopes of Re∣compence emboldened these interessed Souls, and the Lovers of Thamirize, got but too strong a Party. Their Conduct had been so secret, that it was as it were, impossible to foresee what happened. These two Men, inspired by the same interest, acted after the same manner; and one morning, when the Princess was in the Garden, with her usual attendance, that is to say, some Guards and her Ladies, we saw Benzid approach at the head of several Armed Men; his Behaviour as stately, as if he had been at a glorious Expedition: And Othriz at another place, with a like number of persons, and an equal boldness. Ah! Irmiza, said the
Princess to me, what's the design of these two Princes, and what do they pretend to with so many Arms and ouldiers? I had already formed my Judgment upon : I did not doubt but that they intended to become Masters of the Liberty of Thamirize; and being determi∣ed to perish for her, don't be afraid, Madam, replyed , Heaven protects no Violences, and you are not so much abandoned to their Fury, as to be fearful of heir intentions. As I concluded these words, they oth came near the Princess; but they did not direct their Speech to her. What is't you come to seek for here, said Benzid to Othriz? And what is't you pretend to here, pursued the last? I well perceive both our intentions are upon the Princess. Come on then, let us fight for her, since 'tis by Arms we must decide our Quarrels. They began in ear∣nest to dispose themselves to Blows, with more fury, than Address; and whilst they only ex∣ercised themselves one against the other, I stood an unconcerned Spectator of their Combat. But Othriz more fortunate than t'other, having made him fall at his feet dangerously Wounded, and forced his party in disorder, run to the Prin∣cess, with a design to seize her Person. It was then I was sensible of what I was, and that no consideration could retain me. Will you permit your Princess to be taken Captive, said I to the Guards, and will you not rather perish than appear so cowardly, and so perfidious? The party of Othriz was strong, because he had sustained but little loss, and Thamirize had with her but a small number of her Guards; but not contenting my self with an Encouragement, by words, I added an Example to them, took up the Sword of a dead Man, and in spite of the perplexity of a Womans Habit, I fought with an eagerness that much amazed the Princess. He that had often sought for indifferent Interests with some advan∣tage, was not long before he was successful over
the Enemies of Thamirize; who full of astonish¦ment and fear, encompassed with her Women, re¦garded what appeared prodigious to her. Th Guards believed it was an assistance which Hea∣ven miraculously sent her, and became the Bra∣ver. I spilt abundance of Blood, but not without losing my own; and fixing my felf upon Othriz, I wounded him in several places: But at the time he fell, pierced with my Blows, in sight of Tha∣mirize, and that his Men gave place to the valour of her Guards, a Man affectionate to Othriz, be∣ing mortally hurt, and furious to find himself at the extremity, came behind me, and run me through the Body with his Sword. This painful thrust made me fall also, and the ground which received me, forced out the Sword from my Body, where it remained before. The Princess saw her self at the same time without Enemies and with∣out a Protector; being moved at my misfortune, thinking my Death most certain, she past through the Dead, and dying Bodies, and sound me in a State worthy of her Tears, which she poured out abundantly. Irmiza, said she to me, my Dear Irmiza, why did you precipitate your self into this danger? If my repose is procured at the price of your life, it's impossible it should ever be happy. I am not worthy of Life. answered I, with a feeble Voice; and the Blood which I give to the reparation of my Crime, is not capable of excusing it. Retire, Madam, con∣sult your Security, and abandon the unfortunate O∣mir, Prince of Brema, who has abused your Goodness, but who dies in adoring you, and who would never have comitted an offence against you, if he had not loved you with too great a pssion. I can say no more. Thamirize concluded I was dead, and was more sensible, as she has told me since, of Grief, than Anger. Benzid and Othriz had received dangerous wounds, but they did not prove mortal. Their Creatures
took care of them, and by the Orders of the rincess, I was conveyed to an Apartment of the alace. My Sex was learnt with amazement: but mongst all the Persons that were in the Inte∣ests of the Princess, not one was incensed a∣ainst me. When I was absolutely out of danger, and in a ondition to speak, Thamarize came into my Chamber one Evening with two of her Ladies.  did not expect her, and was extreamly dis∣rdered. When I had saluted her as respectful∣y as the scituation I was in would permit me, she at down; and after some moments of silence, You ave deceived me, my Lord, said she to me, and a Person more disposed to Passion than I, would un∣oubtedly exclaim against this Offence: But you have erved me, and I will forget an Injury thats great nough in it self, in favour of a considerable Ser∣i e: Behold my Sentiments, my Lord; But how ha l I justify my self to the Publick? Who will be∣ieve that you have lived disguised in this Palace, without judging me concerned in the Intrigues; and what will the King my Brother think of such an Adventure, when he comes to hear of it? Ah! my Lord, how uch trouble you had eased of, if you ad been a little more retentive. All that the Princess said, was too full of Justice, not to give me a true Remorse. She saw in my Confusion, that I was an imploring Criminal. I have nothing o answer for my Vindication, Madam, said I, I m gilty and will undego without complaint, all be pains your just Resentment shall condemn me to. Those that know the Powers of Love, will have a little indulgence perhaps for mine. But I ought to ex∣pect none from you, and must dye for your Satisfacti∣on. Whatsoever disturbance you have caused me, inter∣rupted Thamirize, I don't d mand such Reparations. Live, my Lord, and only thank of departing from Thibet, where I can't behold you without disorder.
And you are not revengeful, replyed I, in choosin me such a cruel Punishment, as absence. If you con¦demn me to it, its necessary to obey, but I will dye that's beyond dispute. Since to the end of seeing you I have been so unhappy as to offend you, my Life is undoubtedly fixed to this satisfaction. In the mea time, Madam, I will not cease to depart, and at thi very moment, if my strength will permit me. No, no My Lord, replyed the Princess, with a les absolute behaviour, be cured first, and when you are perse ly re∣covered, we'll choose the time of this departure, which disturbs you. At these words sh left me, and I passed the Night peaceably enough. The sight of the Princess had such an effect upon me, that I forsook my Bed in a little time, and soon af∣ter, my Chamber, but under another figure, than that of a Damsel, in spight of the rage and jea∣lousie of Benzid and Othriz. I went to the A∣partments of the Princess with a trembling Air, and she appeared to me so confused, that I con∣ceived a new disturbance from the Trouble I oc∣casion'd her. The Habit I procured was very be∣coming, and served to make an advantagious fi∣gure. I was very Amorous, full of Fear and Res∣pect This moment was faourable to me, and Thanirize granted a Pardon to my servent Sup∣plications, without which it was impossible for me to live; and if she did not altogether treat me as she had done rmiza, I was notwithstand∣ing very well contented. Those that saw me dwell at Kache, and held the Party of my Rivals, believed that the Princess ws really concerned in my Disguise. But Othriz and Benzid openly declared themselves my Foes, and swore with the utmost confidence, my ruin. They had seen me well enough defend my Life, not to assault it with some advantage. In a word, my Lord, their Factions were so powerful, and fury was so predominant in their Parties, that they came to
the resolution of obliging the Princess to make a oice. She might long enough have represented e Royal Power, offended in the absence of the ng: Her words were of little use to stop their ld attempts, and the two Princes came to an greement, that whosoever Thamirize would de∣are for, should remain undisturbed, Master of r Person, and the State. She resisted for some me: But what could she do in a general Re∣lt? I offered my self to dye for her service; nd if you should perish, said she to me, shall I be ss unhappy? Well, Madam, replyed I, believe  advice, which you may think perhaps proposed for terest, but which at the same time is rel and sin∣re. Trust your-self to my Respects: let us depart om Thibet: and direct our selves to Tartary, where e King your Brother will without doubt have found e fair Axione; and when we have seurd your rson, it will be very esie for us to om ad pu∣sh your unworthy Subjes. Thamirize ade a ousand Scruples, which my reasons furmounted, nd in spight of the number of our Oservers. I ook such just and happy measures, that we left achen without any hindranc▪ and soon after hi∣et; having but one Damsel of the Princess to onduct with her, and twenty Men for our Con∣oy. By our diligent cares, and different Convey∣nces, we entered Tartary; the Princess couragi∣ously supported the Faigues of so long a Journey, nd yesterday we came to Cambalu, where I learnt what pat, and immediately determined to expose y life for that of Zingis. Behold, my Lord, said Omir, to the King of Thibet, what's my Crime, and he state wherein we have left your Kingdom? The Brother of Thamirize tenderly embraced her Lover, and gave him thanks in terms full of ac∣knowledgment, for what he had performed in her service. The troubles of Thibet did not much disturb him, being perswaded that Benzid and O∣thriz,
whom he knew, would destroy each othe Omir, charmed at his felicity, tasted a perfec satisfaction at the feet of Thamirize, who did no stick to let appear without constraint, an affe¦ction authoized by the King her Brother. Th thoughts of Zingis were singly employed on Tax∣ila, and Philing still presied in vain the obstinate Axione to make him happy. Ʋndkan being returned from his Fury, had con∣sidered the death of Zamar, and that of Timur, as an effect of Heavens justice. Finding himself now free from the Empire of the Ambitious Queen, he re∣pented of his weakness, and renouncing the gran∣deurs which had served for nothing, but to make him appear unjust, he had no other inclination, than to abandon them to Zingis and Taxila, for whom he at length felt a real tenderness. Whilst the three satisfyed Lovers entertained the three most charming persons of the World, with their ardent Passions; the careful Almund∣zar endeavoured to efface the Queen, by his dis∣courses full of Vertue, from the Memory of Ʋndkan. She was enclosed without much Pomp, toge∣ther with her Son in a Tomb, where lay the Bodies of several Tartarian Princes; and as she was not generally beloved, eight days eclipsed her from the worlds remembrance. The King of Tartary gave orders for all things to be prepared with a Royal magnificence, to solemnize the Marriage of Zingis and Taxila, and the Ceremo∣ny of their Coronation. Six Diadems were in one day united to the Crown, and the valour of Zingis promised many more. Almundzar ap∣plyed himself most agreeably to the Observance of those cares; and one day when he was in the Great Square of the Palace, where he ordered to be erected a most stately Triumphal Arch, instead of the disgraceful Scaffold, which had
it's Scituation there not long before, A Man whole figure surprised him, came up to him: He was old, but Venerable enough. My Lord, said he to him, as your power is all-commanding here, 'tis to you I address my self to make me obtain a moments Audience from the King of the Monguls, whom I would inform of some things, which are of very great importance. Al∣mundzar, full of zeal for any thing that had the least relation to Zingis, brought the old Stranger with∣out delay to the Apartments of Taxila, where the King of Monguls was accompanied with the King of Thibet, the Prince of Brema, Thamirize, and Axi∣one. As soon as the Old Man had cast his Eyes upon the last, he appeared astonished at the sight: Great Gods, cried he transported with Joy, Is it true then that you at length restore me this Prin∣cess, whom I lost in Thibet? O Axione! O Zenelia; who could have assured me, that I should see you again? His exclamation surprised this Illustrious Com∣pany: but the Stranger renewing his discourse, and addressing himself to Zingis. My Lord, said he to him, this fair Axione whom you behold, is the Princess Zenelia your Sister, who was forced a∣way from the Queen your Mother by a company of Robbers in the Tartarian Mountains; but it's neces∣sary to prove to you this truth with a little more order. I am Mongul, my Lord, born the Subject of the King your Father, and tyed to the Service of the Queen, by the first Charges of her House-hold I was her Attendant in the Journy, which her indisposition obliged her to take. She took the young Princess along with her, being unable to bear a Separation, and passing through a Fo∣rest, these Cruel Men, whose number infinite∣ly exceeded ours, compelled us to submit, and carried away Zenelia without any Difficulty.
The Queen was overwhelmed with grief, and I with several large Wounds deplored her mis∣fortune, and reproached my own Incapacity. As soon as I was cured, I made a Vow to enjoy no repose till I had found Zenelia; And leaving the afflicted Queen, I was in all places where I thought to have any Information of the Ravish∣ers of the Princess. More than two years pas∣sed in a vain Enquiry; and I learnt by Rumour the death of the Queen of the Monguls; I still rambled, having no Family at Molg, and one day more happy than the rest, made me en∣counter in Thibet the Captain of those Robbers, who had forced away Zeneiia, and the Princess her self, who was near him. I easily remem∣bred her, but she entertained not the least Idea of me, I asked this Ravisher what he pretend∣ed to do with a Child, who did not belong to him. He answered me immediately, and called her several times Axione. Weary of speaking to him in vain, being then as well accompani∣ed as he, I fought him, and we had all put our selves in that Condition, that Axione alone remained standing. She was then seven years old. There came immediately several persons on Horseback, who in all probability took away Axione or Zenelia. As for me I lost all know∣ledge, and was a long time in this unhappy stae. But some Persons who lived in the midst of the Forest, where they kept some Flocks, came to the place where I was, and finding me not ab∣solutely deprived of Hear, they conveyed me in∣to a Cave. It was more than six Months before my Legs could sustain me, having no other assistance than some simples for my Cure. For want of strength, I was obliged to live in this. Desart se∣veral Years. I by degrees accustomed my self to it. But when time had sent me a better health, the Remembrance of Zenelia revived my Zeal:
I left the Forest then at length, wherein my weak∣ness had so long enclosed me. I have since searched and wandred in a thousand places; but at last, hearing there was at Cambalu an unknown Damsel, named Axione, I directed my course hither; I have seen her, and I find that 'tis Zenelia, so near resembling the Queen her Mother, that the least distinction is not to be discerned. Then Me∣taphanes produced a Picture of the Queen of the Monguls which he had preserved; and if it had been made for Axione, there could not have been a more exact Resemblance. All the Circumstances of her fortune so justly relating to that of Zenelia, no body questioned but that she was the Princess of the Monguls Zingis a thousand times embraced this lovely Sister, who tenderly returned him her Caresses. Taxila and Thamirize testifyed their Sen∣sible Joy for Zenelia, by all that could express it; and Philing transported, cast himself at her feet. Zingis assured him that she was his own, and the young Princess did not contradict this Illustrious Brother. Ʋndkan learnt this discovery, whereof Old Metaphanes told him the Particulars. In a word. Joy was dispersed through the whole Palace, and the wished for time, when these six Persons were to be united, was fully come. This great day was solemnized after a glorious manner. Never did so much Pomp and Splen∣dour appear at a time. The Temple where the Ceremony of Marriage was to be performed, was filled by an infinite Number of Tartarians, and Strangers. The King of Thibet and the Prince of Brema bore up the Imperial Robe of Zingis, and Zenelia and Thamirize, that of Taxila. The Scep∣ters and Crowns were laid upon a stately Throne, and after these happy Lovers were for ever joyn∣ed, Ʋndkan Crowned Zingis and Taxila, with his own hands▪ After which the New Emperor
Crowned Philing and Omir, and the Empress Taxila did the same Honour to Zenelia and Tha∣mirize. All places Ecchoed with Exclamations of joy. The People repeated the Names of Zin∣gis and Taxila without intermission, and all sorts of Pleasures in the Palace, concluded this re∣markable day. Ʋndkan would be no more con∣cerned in Cares, nor preserve the least Mark of his dignity, resigning all to Persons that so well deserved such Honours. A little after it was known, as Philing had foreseen, that Benzid and Othriz had perished in their Factions, and Em∣bassadors from Thibet came to assure their King, that his People had submitted to him. He re∣mained in Tartary, by the Importunities of Zingis, as well as Omir with the Title of King of Bre∣ma. Zingis much encreased the Limits of Thi∣bet, and testifyed by his Liberality to the Princess his Sister, how dear and valuable she was to him. Ʋndkan lived but a little while, and was lamented because the last of his Actions had ef∣faced the remembrance of the rest. In a word, Zingis founded the most powerful Empire of Asia, and rendered his Name so Illustrious, that the whole World was filled with it. He Subdued the Indies, Persia, and all that part which extends from the River Tigris to the Ʋolga. Philing and Omir were sharers in the glory, and followed him in his prosperous Expeditions. Almundzar was considered by him, as he well deserved; Metaphanes dyed with the satisfaction of seeing Zenelia Queen of Thibet: Zerbin received rewards due to his fidelity; and these Princes, loaded with Honours and with happy Years, left behind them a large and glorious Posterity. FINIS.
