L3214 C.20.f.10[54] 99888137 193196
The Love-sick Maid of Portsmouth See how by Heavens great Providence, thse Lovers did Ʋnite, For she lov'd him, and he lov'd her, and did themseves delight. At first he seem'd to deny, at last he seem'd to bow, and gratified her faithful Love, by keeping true Loves Vow. To the Tune of, Genny Gin. Entred according to Order: a woman a man extending his hand to a woman a woman holding a fan THere is a lad in our Town, a proper handsome Youth, He is a Carpenter by trade, I tell you but the truth. There is a lass in our Town, to him a wooing came, Give ear and listen unto me, and I'le declare her name, She is a proper handsome lass, compleat in every part, She told this young-man such fair Tales, she thought to win his heart, She came to him both night and day, as plainly doth appear: His name is Richard and she said, she loved uim most dear. Her name is pretty kissing bess, a comely lass but brown, She is as kind a loving lass, as lives in Portsmouth Town: But I have head it often said, of all the Neighbours by, Although she followed him so close, still he did her deny. Maid. Give me one word of comfort now, to ease my troubleb breast, Alas alas 'tis you alone, that can my help procure, 'Tis you your selfe that made the wound, and none but you can cure. Alas my dearest love she said, you do not know my smart That I endure for your dear sake, ah me twill break my heart, 'Tis for your sake good Sir indeed, that I these pains indure, Vnless you help me in my need, I cant expect a cure. Man, The thing it is so great he said, that you of me do crave, Then take this for an answer flat. my heart you cannot have: A Carpenters heart it is too small your lofty breasts to fill, You said you'l have forty for a great, in that you did doe ill.
a man a woman extending her hand to a man Goods farthest fetcht and dearest bought, may lull your sence to sleep: But since you made so slight of me, i'le be as slight to you, Such scornful and Pragmatick Dames, perchance your selves undone. Sweet heart you know it cannot be, alas I am too young, And to a Mariage state I know, not what thereto belongs, You say a Caulcer needs must be, a favourite in thy breast, But as I am I'le still be free, only my mind is still exprest. Maid. Indeed good Sir it is not so, a Caulcet I defie, And you will quickly break my heart, if you do me deny: Therefore come help me in distress. so strong is my desire. That I do burn in fiery flames, and feel Loves scorching fire. Alas good Sir now will I stay, this seven years for your sake And if you prove but kind to me, my vows I ne'r will break, Let gentle Cupid bend his bow, and with his nimble dart, So penetrate that you may know, the pains of Lovers smart. Oh never more expect from me, a kind glance from mine eye, I hate blind Cupids cruelty, and must your suit deny: But what of me you seem to crave, For till I'me layed in my grave, my fancy shall be free. This Damsel then did trembling stand, to hear this young man speak, Alas said she what shall I do, with love my heart will break, And therewithal she wrung her hands, her colour came and went, By which you well may understand, that true loves passion ment. Her Cherry lips that were so red, did wax both wan and pale, And for the sorrow she conceiv'd. her vitals they did fail: And falling deep into a trance, for half an hours space, This young-man with an akeing heart, beheld her lovesiick face. He seeing of this sudden change, his heart began to melt, Full soon the heavy wounding smart, of Cupids Arrows felt: This pain he could no more endure, but went to her in haste; And kindly in his loving arms, this Damosel he imbrac'd. My dear said he content thy self, to end all further strife, As soon as e're my time is out, thou shalt be made my wife: Thus you may see when Providence, a Marriage doth decree, That they shall meet in spite of fate, and cannot hindred bee. FINIS. Printed for I. Blare, on London-Bridge.
