13159 99839723 4170
LONDONS LOVE, TO THE ROYAL PRINCE HENRIE, MEETING HIM ON THE RIVER OF THAMES, at his returne from Richmonde, WITH A WORTHIE FLEETE OF HER CITTIZENS, ON Thursday the last of May, 1610. WITH A BREIFE REPORTE OF THE water Fight, and Fire workes. LONDON, Printed by EDW. ALLDE, for NATHANIELL FOSBROOKE, and are to be solde at the West-end of Paules, neere to the Bishop of Londons gate, 1610.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Sr. THOMAS CAMBELL, KNIGHT, LORD Major of this famous Cittie of London: And to all the Aldermen his worthie Bretheren, &c. I Holde it but right & iustice (Honorable Lord, and you the rest of this Polliti∣que bodie) to giue you that which you haue best deser∣ued: to wit, a true taste of that dayes sollemne Triumphe (in honor of so hopefull a Prince) and wherein your
great loue appeared not a little. Your time for preparation was verie short, and mine, for your seruice, much shorter: yet (of mine owne knowledge) bothe of them were verie Royally and gratefully accepted, which J am sure was all your chiefest expectation, and, then which, nothing could be more de∣sired by my selfe. Accepte then your owne, and me at your continuall seruice.
LONDONS LOVE, TO THE ROYALL PRINCE HENRIE, meeting him on the Riuer of Thames (at his returne from Richmonde) with a worthie Fleet of her Cittizens, on Tursday the last of May. 1610. &c. IT hath euer bin the na∣ture of this honorable & famous Cittie (match∣lesse for her loue and lo∣yaltie in all ages past and present) to come behinde none other of the worlde whatsoeuer, in dutie to her Soueraigne, and care, not only of common good, but also of vertuous and neuer-dying credit. And such hath alwayes bin the indulgent endeuour of her worthie Magistrates, from time to time, that they would neuer let slip any good occasion,
whereby so maine & especial respect might be duely and successiuely preserued. And so much the rather, because Plato termeth Ma∣gistracy, to be the Anchor, Head, and Soule of any Citty: & holdeth it for the same thing in any commonwealth, as the Heart is in the body of a liuing creature, or as Reason in the Soule: which being the chiefe and essen∣tiall parts of either, the life and existence of the whole, is in that power, & their cheerful motion, giues courage and alacritie to all the other partes of the bodie. Whereof no better exemplarie rule can be made, then the late apparant testimonie of Londons Loue to Royall Prince Henrie, appointed by our dread Soueraigne his Fa∣ther, to be created Prince of Wales, and Earle of Chester, euen now in the assembly of the high Court of Parliament: that he might be the twelfte Prince in that Royall creation, succeeding those eleuen so long since passed.
For our Chronicles and Recordes doe name but eleuen, that (since the Conquest) were Princes of Wales. Whereof the first was Edward, Sonne to King Henrie the third, who afterward was King Edward the first, he was created Prince at London. The second was Edward his Sonne, cal∣led also afterward King Edward the se∣cond, and he had his creation at London likewise. Thirdly, Edward his Sonne being after that King Edward the third: but he had his creation at Yorke. Fourthly, Edward, surnamed the Blacke Prince, who was Sonne to King Edward the third, that conquered France, and quartered their Armes with ours: he also was created at London. The fift was King Richard the second
Sonne to that worthie warriour the Black Prince, who liued not to enioy the Crowne: he had his creation at Hauering. The sixt was Henrie the fift, eldest Sonne to King Henrie the fourth, and he had his creation at London. The seauenth, was Edward the Sonne of King Henrie the sixt, whose creation I read to be at Reading. The eight was Edward, the Sonne of King Edward the fourth, afterward called Edward the fift, neuer crowned, but made away by his cruell vnckle Richard the third: he was also created at London. The ninth, was Edward, Sonne to King Richard the third, created at London also,. The tenth was Prince Arthur, Sonne to
King Henrie the seauenth, who deceassing, his brother Henrie (afterward King Henrie the eight) who was made the eleuenth, was also created Prince of Wales, and bothe of them at London. All these fore-named Princes of Wales, were created sollemnely, by and in the Court of Parliament; except three, which were Ri∣chard the second, Edward the fift, & Edward the Sōne of Richard the third. And those that were created out of Parliament, were Prin∣ces of hard and disaster fortune: For Ri∣chard the second was deposed: Edward the fifte murdered, and Richard the third, his Sonne dyed with in three moneths after, as a iust iudgement of God for his Fathers wickednes. But now our Royall Henrie comming to be the twelfth Prince in this great dignitie, and Londons cheefe Magistrate the Lord
Maior, with his worthie Bretheren the Al∣dermen, hauing very shorte and sudden in∣telligence thereof: after some small consul∣tation, vnderstanding that the Prince was to come from Richmonde, by water; they de∣termined to meete him in such good man∣ner, as the breuitie of time would then per∣mit them. Wherfore, vpon Thursday, being the last day of May, about eight of the clocke in the morning, all the worshipfull Companies of the Cittie, were readie in their Bardges vpon the water, with their Streamers and En∣signes gloriously displayed, Drommes, Trumpets, Fifes and other Musickes atten∣ding on them, to awaite the Lord Maior and Aldermens comming. No sooner had his Honor and the rest ta∣ken Bardge, but on they rowed, with such a chearefull noyse of Hermonie, and so
goodlie a shewe in order and equipage; as made the beholders and hearers not meanely delighted; beside a peale of Orde∣nance, that welcomde them as they entred on the water. To beautifie so sumptuous a shewe, and to grace the day with more matter of Tri∣umphe, it seemd that Neptune smyled ther∣on auspitiouslie, and would not suffer so fa∣mous a Citties affection, to goe vnfurnished of some fauour from him: especially, be∣cause it is the Metropolis and cheife honor of the Island, whereunto him selfe euer bare such endeared affection. For, according to the affirmation of An∣nius de Viterbo, Diodorus Siculus, Higginus, and Pictonius, Neptune being called King, or God of the Seas, had by his Queene Am∣phitrita diuers Children,Script. Bri. cent. 2. and as Bale setteth downe, each one of them he made King of a
seuerall Island. Britayne, which himselfe tearmed to be Insula beata, he bestowed v∣pon his fourth, but best affected sonne Al∣bion, who subduing the Samotheans, be∣came sole ruler thereof, according to the te∣stimonie of Nicholaus Perottus, Rgmanus Philesius, Aristotle, and Humphrey Lloyd, and after his owne name, called it Albion. Now it is not without good reason to be imagined, that in meere loue to his sonnes memorie, and for his auncient affection to this Island; no blessednes at any time can befall it, but it shall receiue some especiall and regardful noate of his fauour. But more especially at this time, when Heauen, Earth, Sea, and all had enterlaced loue together, to honor the generall reioycing, for so fayre a fortune, so royall a hope, and a Prince of so vnusuall straine or expectation. For where mortalles doe consent together
and sing as in a Quire of setled ioy; the su∣premer powers can neuer sit as ydle spec∣tatours: but seeing how weaker strength ex∣presseth it selfe; they, in great bountie, must needs add applause vnto it, and out of their riche aboundance, enable their meaner power, by their helpe, and expresse also their owne lyking thereof, by some familiar ad∣dition or other. Wherfore let vs thus thinke of Neptune, that out of his spacious watrie wildernes, he then suddenly sent a huge Whale and a Dolphin, and by the power of his comman∣ding Trident, had seated two of his choycest Trytons on them, altring their deformed Sea-shapes, bestowing on them the bor∣rowed bodies of two absolute Actors, e∣uen the verie best our instāt time can yeeld; & personating in them, the seuerall Genii of Corinea, the beautifull Queene of Cornewall, and Amphion the Father of hermonie or Musick.
In these two well-seeming and richelye appointed persons, the Dukedome of Cor∣newall, and the Principalitie of Wales, (by order of Neptunes Prophet, or Poet, call him whether ye will) caried some tipe or fi∣gure, and not improperly to them so ap∣plyed. For such representations and misticall vn∣derstandings, haue alwayes bin reputed law∣full, and are euermore allowed to holde and carrie correspondencie, with such solemne shewes and Triumphes; as before in Elder Antiquitie, so likewise in Moderne and la∣ter vse. Let it suffise then, that thus was this good∣ly Fleete of Cittizens accompanied, and vshered the way so farre as Chelseye, where houering on the water vntill the Prince came: all pleasures that the times interim could afforde, were plētifully entercoursed, and no disorder or breache of arraye in the
whole Nauie. Vpon the Princes neere approche, way was made for his best and aptest entertaine∣ment, which by multitude of Boates and Bardges (of no vse, but only for desire of sight) was much impeached for a while, Till order being taken for the contrarie, the Princes Bardge accosted the Lord Maiors, where dutie entertayning on the one side, & Princely Grace most affably accepting on the other: Corinea mounted on her Whale, presented herselfe in this manner to his Highnesse.
CORINEA, a very fayre and beautifull Nimphe, re∣presenting the Genius of olde Cori∣neus Queene, and the Prouince of Cornewall, suited in her watrie habit yet riche and costly, with a Coronet of Pearles and Cockle shelles on her head, saluteth the PRINCE.
THE SPEECHE, SPOKEN BY CORINEA, riding on a Whale. GRacious Prince, and great Duke of Cornewall, I, the good An∣gell or Genius of Corinea, Queene to Brutes noble Com∣panion Corineus, the first of fayre Britaynes Regions, and your owne worthie Duke∣dome; in honor of this generall reioycing day, and to expresse the endeared affections of Londons Lord Maior, his Bretheren the Aldermen, and all these worthie Cittizens, Merchants that holde Commerce with me and the wide worlde, in our very best and richest commodities: doe thus vsher them the way, to applaude in this Triumphe, and
to let you knowe their willing readines, by all meanes possible to loue and honor you. The shortnes of time, hath bin no meane bridle to their zealous forwardnes, which (else) would haue appeared in more flow∣ing and aboundant manner. Neuerthelesse, out of this little limitation, let me humbly entreate you to accept their boundlesse loue, which is like to Iaacobs Ladder, reaching from Earth to Heauen. Whereon, their hourelie, holie and deuoute desires (like to so many blessed Angelles) are continually ascending and descending: For their Royall Soueraigne your Father, his Queene your peerlesse Mother, your sacred selfe, and the rest of their illustrous race. That vnpolluted soules may be euer about yee, false harts or foule hands neuer to come neere yee; but the Hoaste of Heauē, alwayes to defend yee. Heere could I wishe for such a copious
braine, and liberall plentie of Arte, as might suffise to declare the Royall respect and affa∣bilitie of the Prince, not only to my Lord Maior and his Bretheren, but to all the Com∣panies in generall, spreading his gracious ac∣ceptaunce of their loue and kindnes, like to the large extended winges of Ioues Birde the Eagle, euen ouer them all, and standing in the dore of his Bardge, he suffered no oc∣casion to passe him, but still it tooke holde of his grace and liking. And thus they set on towards White Hall, in so soft, milde and gentle a pace, as the very Thames appeared proude of this gallant burden, swelling her breast to beare them with pompe and Majestie: and not one wrinckle appeared in her brow, but as plaine and euen, as the smoothest yuorie. Nor durst any rude storme peepe foorth his head, or the leaste noyse of an vngentle winde stirre: but all were whist and still, as
forgetfull of those vnciuill offices, and ouer∣come with admiration of the dayes delight. Beeing come neere White Hall, the Bard∣ges (according to their qualitie and degree in order & dignitie) deuided themselues on either side, to make a spacious passage for the Prince and his traine betweene them, euen vntill they came neere to the Courte Bridge, the Lord Majors Bardge being then the formoste and neerest. Now the Prince being readie to land, Amphion on his Dolphin saluteth him.
AMPION, a graue and iudicious Prophet-like personage, attyred in his apte habits, euery way answerable to his state and profession, with his wreathe of Sea-shelles on his head, and his harpe hanging in fayre twine before him: personating the Genius of Wales, giueth the Prince this Farewell.
THE SPEECHE, OF AMPHION ON a Dolphin. ROyall PRINCE of Wales, in this figure of Musicall Amphion vpon his Dolphin, we personate the Carracter of Wales your Principalitie. Who hauing with my faire Sister Corinea thus farre attended you, on behalfe of Lon∣dons Lord Major, his worthie Bretheren, and this goodly Fleete of well affected Cit∣tizens; we are all now forced to an vnwil∣ling departure. See how our Streamers hang the head, as lothe to leaue you: Our Bardges lagge and
seeme lumpishe, as greeuing to forgoe you: Our Trompets and other Musicks appeare tongue-lesse, the worde of farewell is so of∣fensiue to them. And except you put spirit into them all, with a gracious acceptaunce of this their loue and loyaltie: the bosome of fayre Thames shrinkes, and they feare swallowing. But the Sunne of true-borne Majestie shines in your bright eye, and your more serious affaires calling you hence, speakes bothe your loue to them, and liking of their humble dutie at their dismission. Home againe then fayre Fleete, you haue brought a Royall freight to landing, such a burdē as hath made the Riuer not meanely proude to beare. And since we must needs parte, in our lowdest voyce of Drommes, Trompets and Ordenaunce, be this our last accent: Long liue our Prince of Wales, the Royall Henrie.
At which very instant, off went the Cham∣bers, and such a triumphall noyse of Drom∣mes and Trompets, as made the very Ayre to Ecchoe: which done, they returned back to London agayne, wherwith we conclude this sollemne dayes Triumphe. Vpon the Sunday following, fiue and twentie Knights of the Bathe were made by his Maiestie, in honor of the Prince his Sonne, and they all rode in their apte habits, with their Squires and Pages, from Durham house to White Hall, to their no little praise and commendation. On the Monday, the King and all the Nobilitie, going by water from the Courte to Westminster; in the Courte of Requests (which then was reputed as the Parliament house) the Prince had his creation of Prince of VVales, Duke of Rotchsaye, Earle of Chester, and Knight of the moste noble Order of the
Garter, with all the due ceremonies and vestures therto belonging, his Maiestie him∣selfe girding on his Sworde. Which being ended they returned in the like manner to the Courte againe. In the euening of the same day, it was expected that the water Fight & Fire workes should haue bin perfourmed, no meane multitude of people attending to see it· But whether by the violent storme of rayne, or other appointment of his maiestie, I knowe not (albeit Protheus mounted on a Sea Monster, had deliuered the intent of the de∣uise to his Highnesse) yet was it deferred till the Wednesday following. Vpon which day, after a moste Royall and sumptuous Tilting, the water fight was worthilie perfourmed, and by such reporte as was thereof made to me, thus it was or∣dered:
A Turkishe Pirate prowling on the Seas, to maintaine a Turkishe Castle (for so their Armes and Streamers described them both to be) by his spoyle & rapine, of Merchants, and other Passengers; sculking abroade to finde a bootie: he descried two Merchants Shippes, the one whereof bearing to winde somewhat before her fellowe, made the Pi∣rate wafte her to strike sayle and come in, which the Merchant either not regarding, or no way fearing, rode still boldely on. The Pirate with drawen weapons and other me∣naces, wafts her againe to vayle her bonnet, but the Merchant still refusing: the Pirate sends a commanding shott, which the Mer∣chant answered againe, encouraged therto by her fellowe Merchant, who by this time was come neere her, and spake in like lan∣guage with her to the Pirate. When he per∣ceiued his hope defeated, and this bolde re∣sistance returned; he sent shot vpon shot very fiercely, wherto they replyed as resol∣uedly:
so that betweene them grewe a verie fierce & dangerous fight. Wherein the Mer∣chāts wexing to be somewhat distressed (by reason that the Castle likewise often played vpon them) two men of warre happening then to be neere, made in to helpe and re∣leeue their hard detriment. And now the fighte grewe on all sides to be fierce indeed, the Castle assisting the Pirate very hotly, and the other withstand∣ing brauely and couragiously: diuers men appearing on either side to be slayne, and hurlled ouer into the Sea, as in such aduen∣tures it often comes to passe, where such sharpe assaultes are vsed indeed. In conclusion, the Merchants and men of warre, after a long and well fought skirmish, prooued too strong for the Pirate, they spoylde bothe him, and blewe vp the Ca∣stle, ending the whole batterie with verie rare and admirable Fire-workes, as also a worthie peale of Chambers. FINIS.
