13560 99845065 9941
¶A new treatyse in ma∣ner of a Dialoge / whiche sheweth the excellency of mānes nature / in that he is made to the Image of God, and wherin it restyth / and by howe many wayes a man dothe blotte, and defyle the same Image. Remembre man, thou art earth playne And therto shalt, returne agayne. Iob. OF late as I lay, musynge all alone Reuoluynge a certayne thynge in my mynde Whiche troubled me so, that my herte was gone But beynge compelled, remedy to fynde Myne olde custome, not beynge yet resynde I ose from my bedde, and forth dyd departe And then herde I a byrde synge, O man vnkynd I say remembre thou man, what thou arte.
¶Whiche thynge so heryng, made me moche to muse And as I loked, what byrde it shuld be She spyde me and sayd, nowe fayne thyne excuse For truely I haue, a quarell to the And with that, I sawe hyr syt in a tre Whiche made me I tell you, glad at my harte But she spyenge that sayd, streyghe vnto me Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶I perceyue by thy countenaunce, quod she That thou dost moche reioyse, in my presence But lytell cause hast thou, thou mayst truste me For nowe art thou, with me out of credence Because thou hast not done, thy dylygence To performe thy promyse, made on thy parte Therfore in reproche, of thy neclygence Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶Why what matter quod I, hast thou to me That thou shludest me, thus spytefully reproue Matter ynoughe, I warant the quod she For that thou dyddest not, as dyd the behoue What is it quod I, tell me for my loue Haue I in my promyse, ben ouerthawrte Ye none excuse quod she, can it remoue Therfore remembre, thou man what thou arte. ¶Thou dydest promyse me, yf thou call to mynde To set forth a songe, whiche I sange to the And nowe because vntrewe, I do the fynde Thou dost me prouoke, displeased to be That songe forth quod I, thou mayst truste me I se no profe quod she, for who doth reuarte From theyr vyce reprouyd, not one I case Therfore remembre, thou man what thou arte.
¶It is forth quod I, though small proyte apee Consernynge of mannes lyfe, the amendment Thou mayst reproue synne, and neuer the nere We are vnto the flesshe,All this worlde is set on mys¦chefe. 1. Ioh. . so fully bene Then my laboure quod she, in vayne haue I spent But no doute at length, for it ye shall smarte Oneles that by grace, your faute ye repente Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. ¶Thou art but vyle earth, and shall turne to dust Though all the worldes good,Iob. thou haddest at thy wyll At the laste cōmes death, and then hense thou muste There is no treasure, can kepe the here styll Therfore thou vayne man, why dost thou fulfyll Thy flesshely luste, and from god dost reuarte Wylt thou for thy flesshe, thy soule deadely kyll Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶God hath apoynted, of his meare goodnesse Howe eche man shuld lyue,Let euery man abid in his cal∣lyng whe in he is called. 1. Co. 7. in his vocacyon And scrypture doth, vnto you all expresse So that ye can make, no excusacyon But that ye prouoke, your owne dampnayon Oneles ye repent, or death with his darte Of body and soule, make seperacyon Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. ¶Somwhat I haue, toched to the before Howe moste people here,In the  of the myse∣y of the worlde. doth lyue out of frame Not one shalt thou ynde, scay in a score That lyueth in his Offyce, vnworthy blame Nay clene to necelee, yet they haue no shame Or els they abuse it, so ouerthwarte That they seme not, to haue a chrysten name Remembre therfore thou man what thou arte.
¶What nedes thou quod I, this thynge to reherse It is superfluous, as farre as I here In thy songe before, in many a verse Thou hast touched this, as well doth apere What though sayd she, I am neuer the nere I se no man grafte, my wordes in his harte Therfore I warne the agayne, playne and clre Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶I shewed the ones, and so I do agayne Howe euery creature, without blame Doth kepe theyr course,ake we en to our wne lyke¦nes and . as nature doth constrayne But thou man whiche God, so nobly dyd frame Unto his ymage, thou wylt graunt the same And yet lyke a beaste, from God ouerthwarte Thou defylest his ymage, to thy great shame Therfore remembre, thou man what thou arte. ¶I knowe quod I, that thou toldest me all this Trouste thou that I haue, so dull memory To forget what goddes goodnesse, to me is Ye sayd she, I beleue it verely For thou art so replete, with mysery No thynge can moue the, from synne to reuerte But yet whan thou fedest, thy lust besely Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶What thou meanest sayd I, I can not tell I pray the shewe me, what thou dost intende Thou checkest me, me thynke for not lyuynge well And yet with no faute, dost me reprehende Haue I not sayd she, howe dost thou attende Unto my wordes, whiche enter not thy harte But in all thy tyme, that thou dost here spende Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte.
¶Dyd not I say, howe in synne thou dost lyue By whiche thy soule, thou dost moste foully defyle Whiche God of his goodnes, to the dyd gyue Made to his ymage, and lyke no beaste vyle And yet the deuyll, from the for to excyle He suffred death here, with paynfull woundes smarte Amende therfore, and euery meane whyle Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶Thy soule thou knowest, well is made immortall Hauynge wyll reason, and vnderstandynge In whiche thou dost deffer, from beastes brutall And therin to God, thou arte resemblynge But nowe in what case, thy soule thou dost brynge I purpose to shewe the, or thou departe That for feare, thou wylt quake at the herynge Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. ¶Fyrste thou ha reason, a gyfte excelent Whiche to the father, is apropryate Because that he is, alway permenent And dyd his persone, neuer derogate Note ones altrynge, but in deuyne esate He alway abydeth, and can not reuarte For whiche by reason, he is fygurate Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. ¶Nowe syth that by reason, thou dost represent In thy soule, to the Father eternall Whiche syngnyfyeth, thou muste be dylygent To aye to reason, the powre prynyall But howe thou from reason, dayly doest fall Thou mayst be asshamed man of thy parte As somwhat herafter▪ tell the I shall Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte.
¶So longe as to reason, thou dost agree In all thy workes, and conuersacyon So longe aperyth, i thy soule to be Thymage of God, by his creacyon Let reason than, haue domynacyon Folowe not wyll, and set reason aparte Put not the Father, from his mancyon Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶I trowe quod I, thou knowest not what thou sayest Thou hast forgot clene, what thou dyddest begyn Me thynke thou doest spende, many wordes in waste Wylt thou not, the other two powers brynge in Yes quod she, but bycause thy wyt is thyne I wolde that to reason, thou shuldest conuarte Whiche thou dayly, doest so fowle blot with synne Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. ¶But for thy sake quod she, I am content The other two powers, to the to expresse Whyll in thy soule, doth the sone represent For as moche as he dyd, hym alway dresse To do his fathers wyll, with great mekenesse Wyllyngly suffynge, for thy synfull harte Thus christe of good wyll, thy synnes dyd redresse Therfore remembre, thou man what thou arte. ¶Nowe lyke as Christ, onely of his good wyll Toke here thy nature, 53. and redemed the From the deuyll and synne, whiche dyd thy soule kyll He wyll not his death, thy sauegarde shall be Onelesse thy wyll, freely to his agre Not compelled,e that Lo¦yth me kepih my cōmaunde¦mentes. Ioh. 15. but by loue from thy harte This meane by Iustyce, apoyted hath he Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte.
¶Nowe stay there quod▪ I, I pray the be styll Let me in this poynt, vnderstande the well Wylt thou affyrme here, that man hath fre wyll Thou sayst that God, doth not mannes wyll compell Mary syr yf I, that abrode shuld tell Some wolde say that I, the trueth dyd peruarte Wyll they quod she, agaynst that thynge rebell Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶A thou wycked man, nowe well I perceyue Thou woldest fynde, away thy vyce to excuse For yf thou couldest proue,God lemp¦yth  to euyll. Ia. . the no free wyll to haue Thou woldest for thy synne, gods goodnes accuse Bycause thou wylt say, he wolde not infuse Grace in to thy soule, from synne to conuarte Alas man do not, thy lyfe so abuse Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶God offryth his grace, to the man dayly Knockynge at thy soule, by many away Declarynge his wyll, moste mercyfully To haue the saued, yf thou say not nay Therfore yf thou wylt,God old hue all . be saued thou may Gods helpe is redy, yf thou do thy parte Thou mayst consent, yf thou wylt I dare say Remembre therfore,If thou ylt  to lyf kepe the cōmaund¦mentes.  thou man what thou arte. ¶In this quod I, thou hast peased my mynde But may ha all other, so wyll not be For in this matter, great fate they wyll fynde When so euer they shall, it rede or se What tho and they do, I pray the quod she Trueth wyll be trueth, though they wolde it peruarte Therfore to all them, as well as to the I say remembre, thou man what thou arte.
¶I passe not sayd she, what any doth say So longe as the trueth, I do demonstrate To please all myndes, I do not knowe the way Onelesse I shuld, gods pleasure vyolate And that wyll I not do, for none estate Nothynge shall cause me, from trueth for to starte But let all this passe, early and late Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶If thou hast sayd I, in this sayd thy mynde I pray the, in thy fyrste purpose prosede Conent sayd she, I haue it not resynde Though I dyd degresse, as I thought it nede Understandynge, is nowe the next in dede Or memory whiche twayne, can not departe In this the holy ghost, thy soule doth lede Therfore remembre, thou man what thou arte, ¶By vnderstandynge, well may syngnyfy In thy soule the Ymage, of the holy ghost Bycause it is a powre, whiche inwardly Doth worke,. in thy soule a thynge whiche doth most Profyte thy soule helth, this well I dare bost For therby gods wyll, thou knowest in thy harte Without whiche, thou shuldest, be blynde as a post Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. ¶None I trowe sayd she, thou doth playne perceyue Howe to gods ymage, that thou art create And in what it restyth, openyd I haue Nowe syth that God, in the is socyate Let not his grace, in the be vacuate Kepe this ymage pure, in euery parte So shalt thou with hym, be peticipate Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte.
¶What nede That thou  thyng deyle For nowe I se playne, th work do report Thou hast don it redy, by thy  yle For whiche cause I se, I muste turne my style To shewe howe thou dost, these th powres peruarte By whiche I feare me, thou  god excyle Remembre I sy, thou man what thou arte. ¶Fyrste for as mche, as I tolde the before That reason is the powre, moste pryncypall By whiche onely, thou dyerest eermore From all other bees, the whiche be brutall For set reason asyde, and proue I shall That beestes may compare, with the in some parte Consernynge the powres, whiche be naturall Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. ¶The lyon in strength, doth man greatly passe And so doth th Egle, in clerenesse of syght In herynge also, compare may the asse The grayhounde to ronne, moste nemble and lyght In smellynge the hounde, by day or by nyght And in memory beestes▪ in plough and arte Nowe yf they had reason, passe the they myght Therfore remembre, thou man what thou arte. ¶But nowe as scripture,. to the do recorde It hath pleased god, for to ordayne the Ouer all beestes of the earth, o be lorde And them But howe, by reason, or els thou If beestes of reason, had now any pae By the in no  they wolde be Therfore remembre, thou man what thou arte▪
¶Nowe beees by reason, thou dost make To serue the , as God dye them ordayne And so muste reason, also Rule all thy ▪ whihe in the remayne With all thy workes; whiche prosede from the playne But worse is thy actes, reason to conuarte Then al brute beestes, whiche the worlde doth contay Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte▪ ¶Sensualyte in the, beryth suche rue That when reason, shulde haue domynacyon Frowarde wyll, causeth hym for to recule To thy great shame, and defamacyon For wyll ought to be, in gubernacyon Of reason, fro whom he ought not to starte But wyll doth rule all, I se probacyon Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. Reason wolde thou shuldest, to god haue respecte Alway consyderynge, his goodnes to the But that moste vnkyndly, thou dost reiecte Abusynge reason, that dayly I se Unreasonable, thou semyst to be From gods lawe, thy lyfe is so ouerthwarte Whiche way I wyll declare▪ or els blame me Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. ¶To thy fylthy carkase,. thou hast suche delye That thou louest it more, then god or his lawe What thynge can bynd the, from thye apetye Can scrypture cause the,  lust to withdraw From the fowle fedyge, of thy beestly Nay truely, th dost thou reason peruarte A beeste and thou, doth not dyffer a stra Remembre I say, tho man what thou arte.
¶Nowe thou man quod she, thou sayst very well That Christe cōmaunded, that thou shuldest faste here Agaynst whiche, yf tho dost rebell To be christes discyple, thou dost not apere But moste lyke a beest,. agaynst reason clere Thou regardest no tyme; but dost gods lawe peruarte Christes insample, with the no rule doth ere Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶Good reason wolde, that thou shuldest sacrafyce Thy carnall body,. to our lorde aboue Whiche is by fastynge, and other suche wyse But thy vyle carkase, so moche thou dost loue That neyther lawe, nor reason can the moue To cause thy body, by fastynge to smarte But dost lyke a beest, suche vertue reproue Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶Thus of thy bely, a god thou dost make And to that stynkynge Idole, dost sacrafyce For pleasure of it, more payne thou dost take Then thou for god, wylt do in any wyse Ye, to please it, gods lawe thou wylt cleane dispyse As though from hence, thou shuldest neuer departe Reason agaynst this, dayly on the cryse Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶Truely quod I, I confesse this to the That in this matter, I haue none exscuse But yet me thynke, this a small faute to be And yf I my soule, a ryght to god vse Ye mary quod she, but thou dost it abuse As and yf thou harkyn, that shall here parte Therfore to here, my wordes do not refuse Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte.
¶To make thy oule, a sacrafyce perfyte Thou oughcest it, to our lorde to elyuate By deuoue prayer,A  hart god dothe not despyse. Psalm. . wherin he doth delyte If it come from a herte, inmaculate But alas man, when thou art in that estate Thou goest aboute, good prayers to subuarte By whiche thy soule, thou doste sore vulnerate Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. ¶Chryste taught the truely,ath. 6. howe y• thou shuldest pray Knowlegynge thy nede, and great mysery And not seasynge,. im. .  but as seynt Paule doth say Make prayers to God,Watche & praye that ye enter not int temtacyō. ath. 6. contynually And thou shuldest also, as Chryste doth testefy Watche in prayers, with all thy mynde and hart This is the sure meane, thy soule to mundefy Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. ¶By prayer Moyses,Exod. 17. optayned victory By prayer the red see,Exod. 14. also deuyded By prayer kynge Dauid,. heg. 1. optayned mercy By prayer Hely,1. Reg. 1. the deed chylde reuyued By prayer Susan,Danel. . Iosa. x. The pray∣er of the ghteous aayle the much. Iacob. 5. from deth was saued By prayer of Iosue, the sonne dyd reuarte Thus prayers of the iust, God neuer depraued Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. ¶Nowe prayer of all workes, beyng moste hye For the which our lorde, great wonders hath wrought Why doste thou not man, thy selfe more apply Wnto this vertue, in harte, wyll and thought But alas it semeth, thou regardes it nought For all tymes thou thynkyst, longe spent in that parte But no short tyme to play, thy lust hath sought Remembre I say▪, thou man what thou arte.
¶Yf good prayers, thou regardest nothyng Thy soule to god, thou canst not sacryfyce Then into what case that thou dest it bryng Reason can tell that, thou dost that dyspyse By which thy soule, trewly to god shuld ryse And it moueth the dayly, to conuart But reason can not thy foule flesh suffyse Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. ¶Thou haste in this quod I, bene somwhat playne For in prayer in dede, man is neelygente But yet for all this, one doute dothe remayne Whether that scrypture, of vocall prayer mente Or lles of mentall, which is moost excellente By my trouth quod she, thou arte ouerthwarte I haue moche a do, thy mynde to contente Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶With vocall prayer,. when that thou dost praye Thy harte from god, then beyng alyenate That prayer doth not meryte, I dare saye For vayne thoughtes, doth make thy prayer frustrae But mentall prayer, of more hye estate Yf thou vse it, to vyce wyll not euarte But doth thy hart pure, to god elyuate Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. ¶Then quod I,Lorde  to y•  of my praier. Psal. 129. I se I nede not all To praye with the voyce, for that is but vayne Yf the effecte rest, onely in prayer mentall I meane not so quod she, I tell the playue For when the harte, with the voyce doth remayne Two wayes thou doste meryte ehe in his parte Where as one doth, but halfe so moch obtayne Remembre therfore▪ thou man what thou arte▪
¶Whan that thou dost pray, but in hare onely It is knowne to god, and he doth it here But that doth not, be∣fore  that they maye se your go workes▪ & ath. 5. thy neyghbour edify Because good example, doth not apere Therfore double merite, thou shalt haue clere When the voyce doth shew, what is in the harte This kynde of prayer, to god is moost dere Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte▪ ¶Thou hast my mynde, quod I well satysfyed Consernyng prayer, in euery thynge That is meruayle quod she, for I haue spyed It is hard in thy heade, vertue to bryng For which with sorow, thy handes thou mayst wrynge But thou dost not care, vntyl tyme that thou smarte Yet in the meane whyle, I gyue the a warnynge Remembre I say, thou man what thou art. ¶Now haue I tolde the, how thou oughtest alwaye Thy body and soule, to god to sacrafyce Which thou canst not do, onlesse thou obaye Unto reason, and thyne owne wyll dispyse But how thou doste that, thin owne wyl Eccl. 1. thy lyuyng well tryse Wyll doth rule the, lyke a horse in a carte What shame is this to the▪ that shuld be wyse Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶But in the matter, farther to procee Reason wold also, that thou shuldest truely Thy goodes sacryfyce, in hart wyll and dede Unto our lord▪ owlegyng therby That he is the gyuer, of them onely After what sorte▪ I wyl shewe the a parte How thou must vse them, vnto gods glory Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte.
¶Fyrste gyue thankes to god,ake you frendes of the wicked ammon that they maye re∣ceaue you into eter∣nal taber∣nacles. Luke. 16. for thy rychesse all And helpe the poore, in theyr necessyte And vnlose those, whiche are in pryson thrall Forget not the wedowe, in her mysery Nor the fatherles chylde, in thynfancy Take the poore howles, vnder thy couarte Suffre not the poore, in the strete to dye Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶This shuldest thou do,. whiche hath ryches at wyll Sacrafyce to god, with ryghteouse abell Whiche offrede the beste, gods lawe to fulfyll And not the worste, for whiche to hym beell That his offrynge, dyd please our lorde right well His fyre brent bryght, declarynge his good harte But caynes dyd smolder, the cause I wyll tell Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶Good Abell thought, the best was not to gode To gyue to god▪ the gyuer of all thynge But cursed Cayne, whiche no grace vnderstode Thought the worste▪ to good to burne in offrynge For whiche his sacrafyce, brent all smoldrynge Whiche declared, that he from god dyd reuarte But this matter, nowe in thy mynde nothynge Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶It is not mete quod I, in our tyme I am sure To burne our goodes, to god for sacrafyce That is trueth quod she, but they in fygure Burnt theyr offerynges, in many sodry wyse Whiche fygure in trueth, ye muste excersyse As thus Abelles fyre, burnynge bryght in eche parte Sygnyfyeth charyte, whiche all good workes tryse Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte.
¶The bryght fyre, causeth the smke to assend And so doth charite, cause thy good workes all Before god to haue rewarde at the ende As sayth,. the holy apostell sayt paull But whan that thou from charite dost fall Thy workes doth smolder & thou playest Cayues parte Abusyng gods gyftes, with thy lyfe bestyall Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶Now of those that offer with good Abell A lytel before I haue shewed to the And now of another sorte I wyll tell Whiche doth offer with Cayne in eche degr And of these no small nombre ther be I can scantly thynke on them all by harte Therfore though I happe some to ouer se Remembre I saye, thou man what thou arte. ¶The fyrst that be fygured by Cayne chefely Be those that ther tenthes vntruely doth paye Gyuyng vnto god vnreuerently The worste of euery thyng that they may Tushe it is good yough for the preest they say And yet they here scripture call it gods parte This offryng smuldreth with Caynes musty hay Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. ¶No more of that quod I, and thou loue me For yf I abrode shuld playne reporte thys The preestes proctor streyght called I shulde be But from that reporte I wyl me sure blysse My tongue shall not yet runne so farre amysse What quod she wylt thou now from trewth reuar Darest thou not now tell the truth as it is Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte.
¶Well quod I, I praye the yf thou intende To procede farther, shewe forth thyne intente Marye quod she, thou doste me reprehende When I wolde shewe the, my mynde euidente But trippe me no more, and I wyll not sente Tyll I haue shewed the, my hole mynde and harte And whatsoeuer, I saye here presente Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶All suche as mony,. to theyr neyghboures lende Therof to haue profyte, by vsurye With cursed Cayne, oure lorde they do offende Because that theyr worke, doth lacke charite For agaynst gods worde, no good worke can be Let them glose what they can trewth to peruarte They are a curste of god, from heauen on hye Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. ¶To speake more of that, quod I, shall not nede For thou doste, but throwe stoness agaynst the wynde Do quod she, then wyll I forth procede To those that offer, in another kynde With cursed Cayne,. and they be those I ynde which giueth large mony theyr neyboures to subuarte Which way, I wyll tel the as comes to mynde Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶All such as gyueth mony, leaces to take Of theyr neyboures houses, for the intente That they themselues so, the rytcher wold make By vnreasonable, raysyng of the rente To theyr neyghboures great hurt, and detremente Poore men crye out for this, in euery parte These with cursed Cayne, shall haue punyshmente Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte.
¶Nexte cosyne to these, be all such trewlye Which doth theyr neyghboure, by crafte cyrcumuente By goynge aboute, preuely to spye Such houses as they thynke, for them conuenyente Not passyng on the poore men, there in resydente Let them go and beg, or elles dryue a carte Trowe these to scape hell, onlesse they repente Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶Because thou speakest, of dryuyng carte quod I Some sayth, that both cartes and plowes decayes All those that so sayth, quod she, doth not lye For I am a byrde, that flyeth many wayes And where I was wonte, to feede many dayes Upon swete corne, which comforted my harte Nowe is there nothyng, because the plowe stayes Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. ¶To what vse quod I, then serueth the grounde For pastor quod she, for beastes for to fede So where many poore mennes, lyuynges was founde Now twayne or thre, theyr lyues alone doth lede Not forsyng at all▪ for the poore mannes nede These do the common welth, falsly subuarte But for this at laste, hell shal be thy mede Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte ¶It bootes not quo I, to speake more of this The cause why, I could to the playne expresse Ye quod she, I know full well where it is Those men which chefely, shuld this thyng redresse Haue vauntage therby, therfore nothyng lesse Entende they, then to speake on the poore mans parte This is trew surely, all men wyll confesse Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte.
¶Say not so quod I, though thou doste so thynke No more I wyll quod she, I haue all sayde But thou knowest, the cate at swete mylke can wynke When she feedes therof, and is well apayde And so can such, this can not be denayde Wynke at that, whiche from theyr welth doth reuart But this thynge among them, beyng well wayde Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶ush, quod I, I praye the tell me no more Of this matter, I loue it not to here To rehearse it quod she, doth greue me sore But yet to speake this, I could not forbeare Syth that my mynde is, for to shew the clere The trewth, how thou dose reason peruarte In all these sortes, it doth well apere Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. ¶Farther now quod she, thy mynd to fulfyll Euyn lyke as thou doste, thy reason abuse In lyke maner, so thou dost thy frewyll As I wyll proue, thou caust make none excuse For gods grace dayly, thou dost here refuse From which thy wyll ought neuer to reuarte Thou blottes gods Image, whiche y• shuldest well vse Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶Wyll as I tolde the, ought to be subiecte Unto reason, in euery degre And to consent to nothyng in effecte Whiche agaynst reason, any thyg shuldbe The which yf thou do, I dare assure the I meane, yf wyll from reason do not starte God his owne Image, in thy soule dothe se Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte.
¶But as I before, haue tolde vnto the Thou sayest that frewyll, in the hath no place But onely to synne, in that it is fre And not vnto vertue, though thou hast grace Which sayeng is false, but yet in one case Thy wordes is well proued, trew on thy parte For the pathe of synne, thy wyll doth styll trase Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. ¶In one case, I say, thou dost proue trewlye That vnto synne, thy wyll is euer fre For wholly to synne, thou dost thy well aplye And then doste affyrme, the chefe cause to be For that, there is no vertue in the It is because, god wyl the not conuart So is he the cause, of thyne iniquite Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte, ¶The hyest gyft, which god to the hath lent Aboue all creatures, on earth create Is thy frewyll, by which thou mayste consent To vertue or vyce, both early and late For yf thou couldest not, frewyl were frustrate And all gods preceptes, in euery parte In vayne to the, they were all promulgate Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶If frewyll can not, but to synne consent Thou canst not proue it, a frewyl to be For yf wyll can not chose, this indifferent Uertue or vyce, there is necessite Which compelleth wyll, to synne thou mayste se And then is not wyll, fre in any parte But god as a dome instrumente, doth vse the Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte.
¶Thy phrase of speache quod I, is very obscure Thou sayest me thynke, that mans wyll is not fre Yf it can not chose, for to put in vre As well vertu as vyce, in eche degre Yf not, than thou sayest god must nedes be The cause of my synne, in dede or in harte And that can I proue, be thou sure quod she Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte ¶Fyrst thou must graunt, thou arte a christen man And pated, in Christes churche by helpe of grace I speake to the, and not a to pagan For I knowe ye twayne, are not in one case Thou with that grace, I say mayste purchase To haue further grace, from synne to conuarte Euen by thy frewyll, thou canst not this deface Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. ¶Now synce thou must needes, graunt this to be true That by thy frewyll, thou mayste alway consent Not onely to synne, but also to vertue By helpe of grace, which is euer present Now to saye frewyll, is not permynent In thy soule, the dyuell doth the man peruarte As I wyll proue to the, euen contynent Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶Whan that thou doste saye, thou haste no frewyll Thou mayst as well saye, no faute is in the For that, that thou canst do nothyng but yll Thou canst, in no wyse to vertue agre And then,. for lacke therof condempned to be Thou woldest proue god, to play a tyrauntes parte But leue that erroure, and learne this of me Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte.
¶By that reason quod I, I se in dede That I shuld proue god, the cause of my synne And the farther me thynke, that I procede In this matter, more blyndnesse I fall inne Therfore I wyll leue, for nought I do wynne Nor they neyther quod she, whiche doth take thy parte To defende an erroure, thy wytte is to thynne Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. ¶In denyenge frewyll, now thou mayst se That thymage of god, thou doste full defyle For by wyll, gods sone is fygured to be In thy soule, from which thou woldest hym exyle But beware thy selfe, thou dost not begyle For wyll, I feare me wyll make the to smarte Thou doste so abuse it, euery meane whyle Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte. ¶How wyll doth rewle,It is not good to haue re∣specte of person i Iugeme  to reason contrary I reportee, to trew experience Doth not moost iuges, from Iustice vary Yes yes, and that well knoweth, theyr conscyence Iudgement is defarde, but for what pretence I know not, for I can not, serche the harte Onlesse I may iudge, with the wyse mannes euydence Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶What sayth the wyseman quod I, in that thynge Doth he agaynst Iudges, any thynge surmyse Ye mary quod she, his wordes I wyll brynge Forth vnto the, thou shalt here what he cryse Gyftes and rewardes sayth he, doth blynde the eyese Of Iudes, which hath a couetous harte Causyng them, trew iudgement cleane to dispyse Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte.
¶I coulde hewe the scriptures,. many Which doth reproue such, as iudge not ryghtly Oh what curse is that, whan god doth cry w Unto all rewlers, in auctorite Which doth not mayntayne ryght and equitie O man thynkest thou not from hence to departe And that as thou doste iudge, iudged thou shalt be Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶What rewle doth frendshyp nowe bere in eche place Without dew respect had to the offence Fauoure doth Iustice,. euen clearly deface Beynge by frendshyp now brought in presence And yf I lye looke on experience Doth this with gods lawe agre, in any parte A udge to syt, in a chayre of pestilence Remembre I saye, thou man what thou arte. ¶But the cause hereof, what is it but wyll When he doth rewle, and hath reason reiecte It is  thou sayest, such thynges to fulfyll Trewlye so it is, thou shewest the effecte But canst thou turne nowe, or arte thou subiecte So much to this vyce, thou canst not conuarte Then art thou damned without more respecte Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶Softe quod I, me thynke thou speakyst very large Agaynst Iudges as though all dyd amys Wylt thou with fautes of some, all the reste charge Me thynke in that small charite there is Nay quod she, thou mayst vnderstande, in thys That all such, as doth play a trew Iudges parte Are not blame worthy, for doyng Iustis Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte.
¶In that quod I, thou hast answered me well But yet in one thyng, thou doe me offend Thou sayest, I must nedes be damned in hell So thou woldest make me dispayre, at myne ende Mary quod she, yf thou wylt styll dfende That god doth gyue the, no powre to conuarte Then mayest thou dispayre, for thou canst not amende Remembre I saye, thou man what thou arte. ¶Yf god dyd not offer, to the his grace Which by thy frewyll, thou mayest leue or take Of iustice he coulde not, damne the in that case But syth wylfully, thou doest it forsake Thy most greuous payne, in thinfernall lake Shalbe for that thou, woldest not here reuart From synne, but wylfully gods preceptes brake Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶Do lewde preest lacke grace,These are cursed chil¦drē leung the ryghte waye and are geu  rrours . Pet. . which kepeth not theyr Do ryhe mē lacke grace, which help not y• pore (vowes Do lawer lacke grace, which from the right bowes Doth that man lacke grace, whiche doth kepe an hoore Doth those men lacke grace, which do false mē succoure Doth he lacke grace, whiche doth gods worde peruarte Doth he lacke grace, which doth poore men deuoure Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶Wyll thou saye quod I, that these lacke not grace Yes forsoth quod she, they lacke grace in dede But why, because they wyll it not inbrace For god doth offe it, theyr soules cleane to wede From all fylthynesse, and forth wolde them lede To farther vertu, yf they from it hot starte So that they lacke therof, of wyll doth procede Remembre therfore, thou man what thou arte
¶Now thou wretched man, here thou mayest perceaue How thou doest offende, through thy wyckednesse Euen worse then a beaste, thou doste thy selfe behaue No threatnyng nor preachyng, can thy lyfe redresse No plage of god, ca turne thy wylfulnesse Surely I beleue, thou haste Pharos harte That thus abusest wyll, agaynst gods goodnesse Remembre I saye, thou man what thou arte. ¶I praye the quod I, speake no more of wyll For truely I fele, in my conscience The faute is in me, yf I my soule kyll For of gods wyll, I haue experience Yf I peryshe, it is my neclygence Is it so quod she, then thou mayest conuarte Why doest thou therto, slacke thy diligence Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶Now to leue wyll, and to another thynge The which I told the, that thou doest abuse It is gods hye gyfte, of vnderstandynge The which the holy ghost, in the dyd infuse Ioyned with reason, so that none excuse Of yngnoraunce, thou shuldest aleage on thy parte But knowyng good and yll, and how them to vse Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶Understandynge, as I tolde the before Is in very beastes, in a certayne kynde Through which they, are brought euermore To serue the man, accordynge to thy mynde And when disobedient, thou dost them fynde With correction, thou makest them to smarte And then as a lambe, the strongest thou mayste bynde Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte.
¶But vnderstandynge, now beynge in the Thou haste it, with reason for to discus All thynges, which are good or bad in degre And them to vse, to gods honoure as thus All good thynges to vse, as gyftes gracious And euyll thynges perceauynge, from them to reuarte But how thou doste vse it, it is marueylous Remembre I saye, thou man what thou arte. ¶As god hath made, beastes to be vnder the So arte thou vnder god, hym to obaye And because to know his wyll, sure thou shuldest be Understandynge he hath gyuen the alwaye Not lyke to a beaste, and yet I may saye Soner dost thou make, a beast to conuarte Then thou wylte, to god by nyght or by daye Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶The beast by sore beatyng, here thou dost eache To knowe thy mynde sure, and it to fulfyll But god in his ministers, to the doth preache Declaryng dayly, vnto the gods wyll But thou lyke one, which therof colde no skyll Wylt not obaye god, although thou doste smarte And yet wyll saye, thou arte gods darlyng styll Remembre I saye, thou man what thou arte. ¶In that quod I, me thinke I coulde answere the By the wordes of the wyse man, wrytten playne The chylde whom the father doth beate, sayth he The same doth he loue, and wyll hym mayntayne Now by this I may saye, to the agayne God scourgynge vs, playeth a good fathers part That is truth quod she, but more grace to optayne Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte.
¶Lyke a father, god doth the admonyse Many sondry wayes thy soule for to wynne And with dyuers plages, he doth the punyshe But when to conuarte, wylt thou once begynne Nay rather thou wylt defende, thy foule synne How arte thou gods chyld, in dede or in harte When thou for his lawe, doth not passe a pynne Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶Therfore onlesse, thou thy lyfe doest amende To call gd father, thou arte not worthy For such father such sonne, shall not contende Therfore god, vnto his chyldren doth cry Be holy sayth he, as I am holy Turne vnto me, and from synne reuart And eternall deth, ye shall neuer dy Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte, ¶Thus god is god, to the man moste vnkynde To call the by grace, which thou doest abuse Understandynge, in the doth seme to be blynde or as he shulde be, thou doest hym not vse Thou thynkest to be gods chylde, and yet doest refuse To do that pertayneth, to a good chyldes parte Which is to please hym, thou shuldest dayly muse Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶Thou oughtest, vnderstandynge hole to aply Unto gods honoure, with a faythe perfyte But thou from god, turnest it cleane a wrye By takynge scripture, to thyne apetyte I pray the, what vertue can I resyte But that thou fyndest, scripture it to peruarte By false vnderstandynge, from gods truth quyt Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte.
¶Of this sorte,Yf th make  owe vn∣to god be not  to perfor∣me it. Eccl. 5. Dent▪ 2.  6. thou hast full many a one As preestes chefely, which there vowes do not kepe And yf kytte wyll come, they wyll not lye alone ushe say they, we are nother stones nor shepe This makes them to make, when other doth slepe Such vnderstande, gods worde ouerthwate They feare not, ne thynke the paynes of  depe Remembre I saye, thou man what thou arte. ¶Some sayth quod I, that they ought to haue wyues For they say in dede, they can not lyue chaste They muste nedes o quod she, whom the dyuell dryues For of vertuous lyuynge, they haue no taste As to faste and praye, nay  of that haste They wyll fede, and playe a reuelers parte For to saye theyr seruyce, they counte yme waste Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶They vse not the meanes, to lyue a chast lyfe For where as they, shuld be solytary Conrarye, to all pleasures they are rye And commonly, cout lyght company Then reason they, there is no remedy We must nedes mary, our fleshe to subuarte Thus for theyr vowes, they care not a butterfly Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶Thus of vnderstandynge, the grace they distroye And lyke beastes they lyue, without godly respecte Uery Epicures, sekynge belly ioye With which, all the realme they haue ifecte Fastynge is now, so clearely reecte That no good preacher, can make them conuarte Well, I say no more, but this in efecte Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte.
¶I pray the quod I, of them speake no more Nor yet of none other, it is yme to ende I se well, vertue decayeth very sore I haue herde as moche, as I do intde Arte thou wery quod she, god the amnde o here thou mayste se thy myscheuous harte Thou thynkest tyme longe, thy lyfe to reprehende Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶I haue done quod she, but now thou mayest se That I haue kepte promyse, as I dyd saye Haue I not proued the, so wycked to be That thou gods ymage, in thy soule doest decaye o moch as lyeth in the, thou canst not saye naye I haue not flattered the truly, in no parte ut now thou arte warned, conuart whyle thou may Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶Defarre not amendment, leste tyme do fayle the Uncertayne thou arte, whan deth shall the kyll Therfore to be sure, take warnynge of me aste, watche, and praye, and do not thy soule spyll Turne thou to god, and turne to the he wyll I can say no more, for now I wyll departe But yet at my goynge, kepe this in mynde styll Remembre I say, thou man what thou arte. ¶When she had thus spoken, awaye she flewe Mountyng wonders hye, into the wynde So that where she became, I neuer knewe Then dyd I reuolue, her wordes in my mynde And when that I, the next leasure dyd fynde I wrote out her sentence, hole with my penne Wherin I perceaue, how people are blynde Whom god graunt to mende, saye we all amen. FINIS.
¶The enuoy of the Auctor. ¶rthe my booke, speake thy mynde And flatter none, of no degre All men, be men of Adams kynde Without any diuersite For all mens soules created be To gods ymage, as thou dost tell Which they foule blotte, as they may se Yf that they do, peruse the well. ¶And I praye the, tell all men this Yf chaunce I fayle, in any thynge That I erre not, of no malys In erroure, any man to brynge But am redy to reformynge In any thynge, that thou dost saye But truely, to my knowlegynge Thou tellest the truth, nere as thou maye ¶And where, as lacketh eloquence To make the pleasaunt, for to rede Axe pardon, for my necligence For I confesse, in very dede That of lernynge, surely I nede To make the, a more pleasaunte style But a rude wytte, rudely doth lede So rudely nedes, I must compyle
¶And all doutes, cleane to put awaye Who was thyne auctor, the to frame Saye Myles Hogarde, so swee thou maye Though some doth thynke, he settes his name To that, which other men myght clame But of that, no man profe can brynge And yf they can, et them hym shame As well they maye, prouyng that thynge. ¶But now an ende, of the to make Trustynge thou shalt, be taken well God graunt vs all, vyce to forsake And to thynke on both, heuen and hell With feare and loue, not to rebell Agaynst gods lawe, in any case And then no doute, but we shall dwell With hym, in his moost ioyfull place. FINIS. ¶God saue the Kynge. ¶Imprynted by me Robert wyer, dwellinge in S. Martins paryshe at Cha∣rynge Crosse. ¶Ad .
