15690.7 23121103 26270
A TRVE Relation of all SVCHE ENGLISHE Captaines and Lieuete∣nants, as haue béene slaine in the lowe Countries of Flaunders, together with those now liuing, as also of such as as are fled to the Enimie, Col∣lected by Iohn Lingham, Clarke to Captaine William Martin Seruitore there this 8. of Iuly, 1584. Imprinted at London, by Roger Warde, dwelling néere Holburne Conduit at the Signe of the Talbot. 1584.
❧Newes out of Flaunders. WHen Menelaus the gal∣lant King of Greece, for the recouerie of faire Hellena his wife, besee∣ged for ten yéeres space the noble town of Troy, there was nothing that did more com∣fort his hart in hope of victorie, then to think that he was accompaned with a sort of wise & hardie Captaines, whose pollicie and prowes assured him in the ende of a fortunate conquest. And on the contrarie parte, there was nothing that did more embolden Prince Prya∣mus to withstand the force of his cruel enimies, then the valiant exploites of noble Hector, and the rest of those cou∣ragious knightes, which were on his side in the Cittie. But if euer Greece had cause to spred the praise of Achilles
and the residue of their renowned cap∣taines, or haplesse Troy to sound forth the due deserts of vnfortunat Hector. Then hath Englande triple cause to declare the excéeding courage of her faithfull Countrimem, who (notwith∣standing the great peace and tranquil∣litie wherwith God hath hitherto bles∣sed ye Land) hath sought in forrain cun∣tries for their cōscience sake, & the glo∣ry of the Gospell, as also for the succor of Gods Saints, to spend their dearest bloud for defence of the same, and ther∣by to become ye more profitable to their Prince in time of néede and necessitie: whose déedes doth manifest their man∣hoode, to their immortall praise & end∣lesse glorie, giuing thereby iust occasi∣on of their worthie commendation vn∣to all posterities. And because their hardie seruice and painefull trauell in the lowe Countrie of Flaunders, all the time of these daungerous warres maye bee knowne among you, I haue thought it good to declare the names as well of those Captaines that be alrea∣die
slaine, as of suche which yet beeli∣uing, with the number of those whiche vnfaithfully are fled to the enimie, to their euerlasting shame and eternall reproch for euer. First therfore of the number of those notable and worthy Captaines which yet are liuing,Captains liuing. the right hardye & vali∣aunt Gentleman M. Notrice is chéefe, whiche at this presente is Generall of the Englishe Armie, whose renowned déedes is by fame sounded through the whole Worlde, and whose presence procureth the enimies payne, of whom they stande so much in dread, that his onely sighte causeth them to shake, yea if they may knowe or perceyue that hee is in place, then doe they seeke by all meanes possible to escape the fu∣rye of his fiste, for rather then they will come vnder his clawes, they will desperatly drowne or slea themselues, suche rough reuenge dooth hee take on all his foes, and accursed enimies. So that there is fewe or none that dare approch his presence being in battell,
in so much that in Flaunders he beares the palme of praise from all the rest. Nexte vnto him is our Coronall Morgan, whose couragious stomacke and prudent pollicie, hath had suffici∣ent triall in Flaunders, where he hath fought many a cruell battayle, and sca∣ped manie a harde brunte, to the ho∣nour of his Countrie, and his owne e∣ternall glorie. After him is Coronall North, who also amongst the spitefull Spanyardes hath giuen many a bloodie blow, shew∣ing himselfe at all times a right hardy and valiaunt Captaine, inforcing his enimies to flie before him for feare of death and daunger. Captaine Willyams also hath not shrunke to shewe himselfe at all times to the vtter dismaying of those whiche came against him, casting them to the ground, and scatering them before him like chaffe against the wind. There is moreouer that gallaunt Captaine M. Edward Yorke, whose seruice since his comming hath got no
small credite: and also that woorthie man Captaine Cromwell, who hath with sworde and shield cut in péeces so many thousand Spanyards. Then there is an other Norrice, bea¦ring as braue a minde as the best, and being as curteous to his frends, as ter∣rible to his foes. Captaine Wilson also for his good seruice is sufficiently knowen to the e∣nimie, whose bloody strokes hath put them to manie a hard brunt. And amongst all other, M. Captaine Martin shall neuer bée forgotten, for that his manhoode and mighte hath not seldome been tryed, but in many a hard and cruell assault, he hath shewed him∣selfe a moste worthie and couragious Captaine, inforcing his stoutest enimy to retire, or els to bide the brunt of his deadly bloes, vnto his immortal praise, & endles glory. He was borne in Heri∣ford-shire, and for 9. yéeres hath béene & remained in the warres, séeking by dinte of sword to win him honour and fame.
Then is there Captaine Morgan deseruing great praise for his prowes, and also Captaine Bannister in good credit and estimation. Captaine Hauers likewise very wel thought of, and Captaine Huddy of no lesse account then the others. Captaine Morrice the elder hath al∣so continued in good credit. Captaine Hammon, Captaine Lu∣car, and Captaine Tannor, all thrée worthie captaines, and such as haue & will spende both life and lande, for the honour of their Prince and country. And according to the example of the reste, Captaine Androwes hath at no time spared his paine for the aduaunce¦ment of his honor and credit. Captaine Huntly in like manner hath not bene found inferiour to any of the aforenamed in declaring his good will. And captaine Price in the face of the enemie, hath at all times shewes himselfe of gallant courage & might. Also to the vtter spoile of the Spani∣ards, ye worthy man captaine Salisbury
hath full often bene found in the field. Captaine Marchant in like maner for his approued deedes of armes hath purchased to himselfe the commendati∣ons both of friendes and foes. And to make vp the number of thys gallant companie of couragious Cap∣taines, captaine Lettelton is esteemed as one, who although hee be the last in number, yet is his faithful heart ready with the formost in anye maner of ser∣uice, being by his iust desertes estee∣med a most worthie man. And all these aforenamed being yet liuing, hath e∣uermore made themselues worthie ex∣amples for others to followe the like valiaunte actes and honourable ex∣ploytes. And notwithstanding theyr great payne and trauell in defence of those countries, yet is their pay so slen∣derly performed that oftentimes they haue not wherewith to prouyde for their present necessities, whose want and neede is not vnknowne to ma∣ny, and althoughe they sustayne ma∣ny a hard brunt, many a sharpe shower
and manie a hungrie meale, yet will they not be found selfe to their frends, nor vnkinde to the Country, although pinching néede doth often times dryue them thereunto, yet had they rather valiantly venter upon their cruel foes, to pluck the bread out of their mouths, then contrariwise to become cruell to the Countrie, whose parte they take. But if it should chance through their harde dealing with our Englishmen, that therevpon they shoulde worthely leaue them to their owne defence, alas full soone would the enimie make a ioyfull tryum {con}he of their wofull Tra∣gedie, then might the babe vnborne be∣waile the losse of such a sort of valiant Captaines, who hath spente their blood for their benefite. If they should seeke for succour of other straunge nations, whose frendshippe is very fickle, then might they soone make account of their cursed estate. Therefore may they con∣tinually pray for the prosperitie & hap∣pie raigne of the good Quéene of Eng∣land, who hath alwaies béene their on∣ly
comfort in all calamitie, against all such spitefull enimies as do daily mo∣lest and inuade the Country: against whom many of our worthie Captains haue withstood, vntill their hart bloods were shed on the colde ground. Whose names I haue thought also good to re∣hearse. First Coronall Cotton,English Captains slaine. most vali∣antly, and like a hardy man of courage resisting the foe, after manie a cruell skirmish, and bloodie battell, and after he had giuen manie a man his deadlie wounde, hee was himselfe vnhappily slaine, to the great gréefe of all his wor∣thie companie, and the residue of his frends, and well willers. Then Captaine Leggins in like ma∣ner fighting in fielde against his eni∣mies, and putting many of them vnto deadly foyle, was at the last so gréeous∣ly wounded, that in the end he lost his life among them. Likewise that hardie and couragi∣ous Captain M. Bingham, after manie a cruell conflicte, and bloodie broyle,
wherein he had manfully declared his force against his foes, was at length laid in the dust by deathe: whose well approued deeds shall neuer dye so long as the world doth last. Captain Palmer also was in Nonny fielde, moste worthely founde a right stought, and bould Champion, whiche had well shewed his seruice against the enemy, by whose force they were of∣ten constrained to flie the fielde, and hide their heades, for feare of his fu∣rie, and yet in the ende was most vn∣fortunately slaine. Also Captayne Chambernowne a hardy man of courage, was brought in battell to his vntimely end. And in like sorte captaine Cobham by whome the enemy hadde receaued many a shrewde assault, and brought oftentymes to many a hard plunge, at last like a Lyon fighting among the thickest of them, he receaued his dead∣ly wound. Moreouer, captaine Marckham like a valiaunt souldiour among his dead∣ly
foes fought so long, till it cost hym his dearest bloud. And in like honourable sorte dyd captayne Poole spende hys life to the great griefe of all his Souldiours and friendes. And captaine Gill, whose welfare his foes coulde hardly affourd, by rea∣son of his manhoode: was at last slaine in skirmish, to the reioycing of al those that before had tasted of his deedes. Captaine Weedon also moste man∣fully lost his lyfe among them, of whose good seruice the Spanyardes are able to report. Likewise captaine Iones, after good seruice done of his side, did worthely end his life among them. Also Captayne Corne, Captayne Floud, and Captayne Ellice to the hard escaping of some, and the deathe of a number was at length slaine in the field. And Captaine Browne whose val∣lientnes, and hardines of courage made ye enemie to muse, at ye last, to the honor
of his Cuntry, and his continuall com∣mendations and credite, most valiant∣ly ended his life in the warres. Also there was slaine in sundry skir∣mishes, these worthie and valiant men following: Captaine Almond, captain Woodshawe, captaine Morehouse, and captaine Blunt, whose losse Flaunders hath good cause to lament. Moreouer, Captaine Fitzwilliams, captaine Doy∣ly, captaine Bishop, captaine Cotton, captaine Chatterton, captaine Buckley captaine Carew, Captaine Hamman, captaine Morrice the younger, captain Morgan, Captaine Sutton, Captaine Ashfeeld, Captaine Tatam, Captaine Chute, captaine Neuell, captaine Ro∣gers, captaine Taylor, captain Edwards captaine Burley, captaine Bowes, and captaine Gamsfoorth. All these notable and famous Cap∣taines, so long as life indured, spared no paine nor trauell for the defence of the lowe countries, but like Lyons in the fielde, they enforced their foes to beare the brunt of their deadly blowes
so that the spanyardes to their paine can report, the inuincible courage of our english-men, whiche alwaies ar∣med themselues for the succour of the poore distresses countrey of Flanders being neither procured thereunto by Lucar, wealth, or riches, but onely for the good desire they haue for the main∣tenaunce of the trueth, in which cause they haue spent and lost their liues. There is also slaine of notable and worthie Liefetenants these following,Liefete∣nāts slain in the low countries. Foster, Harding, Turner, Smith, Chā∣berlaine, Dennis, Griffin, Haruie, Sāp∣son, Long, Mascoll, Chubbe, Demp∣stere, Fowler, Rogers, Kitchin, Clip∣well, Dawton, Allin, Walker, Cornish, Drakes, Askew, and Horsey, all which since within these fewe yéeres bare a goodly sway in those parts, whose losse is no small gréefe vnto all such as were of their acquaintance, and kindred. Ne∣uerthelesse, they died so honourable to their cuntrie, that thereby they haue purchased to them selues immortall fame, and endles glorie. But as these
before mentioned lost their liues to the credite of their countrey, and the defence of the oppressed, without re∣spect of pelfe and transitorie riches, so there are some whiche to the shame of themselues, and the griefe of their countremen, to gaine the commoditie of corrupted coyne, hathe contrarie to naturall affection and without respect of their good name and their Coun∣tries credite, shewed themselues faith∣lesse to their friendes, and hathe taken part with the enemy: whose names to bring all other out of suspecte, I will here declare. Captains fled to the enemie.First Captaine Peggot, Captaine Smith, captaine Taylor, and captayns Vincent, captaine Welch, and captain Dethicke, all whiche are faulsly fled to the enemie, bending their force against those, which of right they should defend as friendes, although they haue shew∣ed themselues professed enemies, and against all conscience drawing theyr swordes to cutte their countreimens throates, such is the crueltie of coue∣tousnes,
that it spareth none for profit. And suche force hath the desire of gaine in some mens heartes, that they will refuse no fraude or deceite, that maye bring them any commodity, be the déed neuer so tretcherous, neuer so villai∣nous, and neuer so cleane contrarie to conscience, in so much that it hath cau∣sed some to betraye their owne Soue∣raigne Princes, to sell their Cuntries, yea, father and frendes, and all for mo∣ney. Nay further, Couetousnes was the cause that Judas solde the Sauiour of the world, his owne déere maister into the handes of his enemies: and there∣fore Couetousnes is iustlie called the roote of all mischiefe. But to leaue this matter, and some∣thing to consider the present estate of this wofull country, which hath béene so manye yeeres plagued with cruell warre, that ther is no place which hath béene frée from the enemy, wherby the people is brought in suche a case, that they knowe not where to remaine in
safetie. To daye they may bée in good estate, to morrow cleane vndone, their houses burned, and themselues infor∣ced to flie for safegard of their liues: no man can sleep in saftie in his own bed, no man can inioy the fruite of his own labours, but all thinges in so great ha∣zard of the enemy, that if they enioy the loot thereof, it is more then they looke for, and not onely their goodes is in such sorte to be spoyled, but also thē∣selues made as slaues, their wiues ra∣uished, and their daughters defloured, and that many times before their face, which is no small griefe to behold. And therefore howe muche are wee bound to our good God, which doth so blessedly keepe vs in peace, and so gra∣ciously defend vs: notwithstanding so many traiterous practises deuised a∣gainst vs by moste lewd wretches, the consideration whereof may worthely moue vs vnto thankfulnesse with con∣tinuall prayses to his name, whiche is our only defendour against al our foes, and therwithall pray vnto his Maiesty
for the prosperous Raigne of our most gracious Queene, by whose meanes we are so peaceably gouerned. And thus I end, hauing shewed you truely all such captaines as are both li∣uing and dead, with the names of such as are gone to the contrarie parte, wi∣shing all men to haue a regard both to their Countrey and credite, least with these fickle minded men, they worthe∣ly procure their perpetuall dishonour and endlesse shame, and wishing vnto the rest prosperous suc∣cesse, and the victory o∣uer al their ene∣mies. FINIS. Iohn Lingham.
