16621 99844422 9233
THE First part of the Diall of Daies, Containing 320. Romane triumphes, besides the triumphant Obelisks and Pyra∣mydes of the Aegyptians, the Pillers, Arches, and Tro∣phies triumphant, of the Graecians, and the Persians, with their Pompe and Magnificence: Of feastes and Sacrifices both of the Iewes and of the Gentils, with the stately games and plaies belonging to these Feastes and Sacrifices, with the birthes and funeral Pomps of Kinges and Emperours, as you shall finde more at large in the 2. part, wherein all kind of tri∣umphes are enlarged. By Lodowick Lloid Esquire. Prou. 20. Lucerna Domini spiraculum hominis. London Printed for Roger Ward dwelling at the signe of the Purse in the little old Bailie. 1590.
To the Right Honourable Sir Christopher Hatton, Knight of the most Honourable order of the Garter, Lord Chauncellor of England, and of her Maiesties most Honourable priuie Councell. CAesar (right Honourable) wrote but three wordes of his victorie from Pontus to his freends at Rome, Veni, vidi, & vici: thoughe not like Caesar a Conqueror, & victorum victor: yet like Solon not con∣quered & agestatis victor, presuming but with the like wordes to dedicate this little Booke vnto your Lordship, Veni ad te, vixi per te, & spero de te, and so I rest, as one that hath registred himselfe your olde seruant, and so hath decreed cum vto, to continue in good will and seruice. Your Lordships old seruant, Lodowick Lloyde
How and when all Nations begin their yeares and daies, &c. AMong the most nations of the world after the confusion of tongues at the building of Babel for manie hundred yeares, they had no certaine time for their yeares, euery countrie then vsed time without anie sound reason or anie true period of the Sunne or of the Moone,Plin. lib. 1 Cap. 48. almost the whole world then vsed annos Lunares, as the Egiptians in the beginning though after most expert, from whence the Gre∣cians and the Romans were instructed for their yeares, yet the Egyptians yeare in the time that Abraham was in Egypt, was sometime of two moneths, sometime three, sometime four, sometime lesse,Ioseph. lib. cap. 1. 8. and sometime more vntill Abraham being taught with the Chaldeans, instructed the Egyptians in the course of the Sunne as Iosephus affirmeth. The Romanes before Numa Pompilius time vsed ten mo∣neths for their year, the Grecians vsed Lunares annos, y• Arca∣nenses 6. monethes, the Arcadians 4. moneths, & so confusedly all nations of the yearth vsed their yeares in the first beginning vntil the Egyptians first found the true period of the Sunne, & appointed their yeare to be 365. daies. Of this yeare Iulius Caesar after his wars in Egipt brought with him the Egiptian yeare to the Romanes, & by the industrie of Sosigenis a great Mathematician which Caesar brought with him to Rome from Egypt,Sosigenis Annus Iulianus was made which we now vse. In like manner in their moneths so diuers and so erronious and especiallie the Grecians, euen Plutarch himselfe so much deceaued in the Athenian moneths, referring the moneth He∣catombeon which is Iune to April, euen so he did referre Me∣tagitnionMetagit∣nion. which is Iulie to Maie: others in like sort referre Memacterion,Mema∣terion. which is September  August, October to Ianuarie, and so Thargelion which is Aprill by Lu, Floren∣tinus
is set downe in Plutarch for Februarie,Errours both in yeares & in mo∣neths. but the Greci∣ans excell all in their errours, thus the Grecans and others er∣red in their time and in their histories, for that they were igno∣rant of the Hebrue moneths. And therefore I will set downe in what moneth of the yeare all countries and kingdomes of the world begin their yeare, and first I will beginne with the Hebrewes, for they are chieflie herein to bee followed for being ignorant of their moneths and yeares, made manie prophane writers to erre. The old auncient Hebrewes began first their yeare in the la∣terThe He∣brewes began their year in Sept. ende of the moneth of September containing part of Sep∣tember and of October for that they supposed the world to bee created at that time, for trees, hearbes, corne, and all good thinges, the earth was full, yet after they were commaunded to beginne their yeare in Nisan which is Aprill, and the first moneth of the yeare, for that the yeare of Iubilei began that moneth the Hebrewes were commaunded to begin their yeare then, so that Nisan which is Aprill was in dignitie before Tisri,Nisan in dignitie before Tisri. which was October with the Hebrewes in respect of the yeare of the Iubiley, and of the feastes which God commaunded Moses to bee kept, yet Tisri was before in time and in nature vntill Moses time when the commaundement was geuen o∣therwaies but now since y• Hebrews began their year about the 25. of March and so forward to the moneth Aprill. So the He∣brewes began their yeare in March and ended in Aprill. The Egiptians began their yeare in SeptemberThe Egip∣tians be∣gan their yeare in Septemb. Censor cap. 15. de nat. deorū. All good deuines agree that the yeare be∣gan in Septemb. which the Egyptians called Thod, which is their first moneth, and they haue this reason for it, that Nilus beginneth to flow in that moneth Thod, which Cicero doth call Mercurius Egypti, be∣sides the Egyptians haue another marke for the beginning of the yeare per ortum caniculae by the rising of the starre cal∣led Canis, which are the dogdaies, at what time the riuer Ni∣lus beginneth to flow which as Plinie saith was in Iune, and not in September, but it is agreed of all the best writers that the Egyptians begin their yeare in September, in the which moneth the Persians do also beginne togither with the Egip∣tians their yeare beginning at the moneth Phordimech, which is rhod with the Egyptians, and with vs called Sptember.
The Grecians begin their yeare in the moneth of Iune, which they call Hecatombaeon, of the which for that I would be breefe, I will set downe at what time euery nation do begin their yeare as followeth. The Hebrewes in Marche. The Aegyptians in Sep∣tmer. The Graecians in Iune, I meane the Athenians. The Persians with the E∣giptians in the moneth of September. The Arabians and the Sa∣razens began their yeare in Maye. The Cyprians in Marche. The Macedonians and the rest of the Grecians in Iune. The Romanes and wee of Europe, Christians, be∣gan our yeare in Ianua∣rie, and thus shortlye I haue shewed howe and when euery nation began their yeare. In like manner when these begin their dayes, heere also I set them downe, how some from midnight to midnight, as we Christians, Spaine, Fraunce, Germany, England and others, doe begin our daye, for that the Sunne dooth from his hemy∣sphere begin after midnight to ascend towards the East, and also for that the Sonne of God Christ Iesus was borne about midnight of the Uirgin Marie. The Egiptians, the Umbrians, and the Arabians, begin their day from noone to noone, which is twelue of the clocke the next day, the olde Astrollogers followed the Egiptians in their dayes, for that then the sunne entreth into the highest part of the heauens. The Babilonians began their day from sunne rising to sunne rising, which is the common day of the most vulgar people, re∣ferring the night following to the day before. The Iewes began their day from Sunne setting to Sunne setting, Pantaleon saith, that the Bohemians, Polonians, and the Slesians, imitate the Iewes, for the beginning of theyr dayes. The olde Athenians began their day in like manner as the Iewes did, and so Sensorimus and Beroaldus doe bothe affirme. FINIS.
OF THE MONETH Ianuary, with the Latins the first, with the He∣brues called Thebet, their tenth Moneth, with the Athenians called Gamelion, their eight Moneth, and with the Aegyptians called Tbi, their fift Moneth. The first Daie. THis Moneth Ianuary was made by Numa Pompilius, the 2. king of Rome, the first Moneth of the yéere. For Romulus his prede∣cessor the first king of Rome, began his yere in March consecrating this Moneth vnto his supposed Father Mars: for at this time the Romans had but ten moneths in their yéere, called Annus Romuli after Romulus time. Ianuary and Fe∣bruary were added to Romulus yéeres by Numa Pompilius to make the yéere twelue moneths. Ianuary he dedicated to God Ianus, and caused it to bee the first moneth in the yeere amongst the Romanes, making March to be the third moneth. For Nu∣ma preferred peace before warre, and ciuill things before Mar∣tiall, and therefore Ianus was set before Mars, for were this Ianus either king or demy-God, he was in former age very ci∣uill and politike, of whom the Romans brag most: for hee had temples, altars, sacrifices, and ceremonies done to him this moneth. In the Temple of Ianus the Consuls, the Senators, all the Magistrates of Rome should solemnly méete to deter∣mine
and to consult about wars or dangers of the Citie when occasion so serued. By the temple of Ianus it was knowne whe∣ther the Romanes were in warres or in peace: if it were open as alwaies it was, it signified wars, if it were shut, which was neuer but thrée times, once in Numa Pomp. time, the second time in Augustus Caesar, and the third after Titus Vespasian triumphed ouer Hierusalem, then it signified peace, if there the Senators and Magistrates of Rome had agreed vpon wars, one of the Consuls should goe presently to the temple of Bello∣na, and take a speare in his hande, and flourish with the speare before the Altar of Bellona, and thereby pronounced warres in the Romanes behalfe. Genial. lib. 1. cap. 14. All Calendes which is the first day of euerie moneth, was consecrated to Iuno, and the Ides to Iupiter by the Romanes. For in the Calendes of Ianuary, the king called Rex sacrorum, and the priestes called Flamines, vsed to offer vp in sacrifice to Iuno a lambe or a yoong dooue for good successe of that moneth: for euerie first day of euerie moneth they vse the like sacrifice with all ceremonies therevnto belonging, to Iuno, for that the olde Romanes supposed Iuno and the Moone all one. Macrob. lib. 1. cap. 15. This day in Rome they were wont to elect newe Magi∣strates, and to present them with laurell braunches and giftes, with great mirth through the Citie. They celebrated the feast of Iuno in Rome called Gamelia, as the Greekes were wont to do to Bacchus the feast of Lenaea the same day, with all due solemne ceremonies belonging vnto the Goddesse Iuno. In this feast of Gamelia, Iuno had these ce∣remonies in hir sacrifice: of all married women and of yoong women, which were to be married, they should come vnto the temple of Iuno to make their supplication to their Goddesse, to remoue all bitternes and choler from that present sacrifice, and to bury all displeasure and offences which might moue Iuno to anger, openly before all the people vnder hir sacred Altar, vpon the which they offered their sacrifice, that it might be signified, that all marriages ought to be without strife, bitternes or an∣ger. Genial. lib. 6. cap. 4. In like manner in Athens the feast of Lenaea is celebrated
withall too much licentious and vncomely spéeches with foo∣lish & wanton gestures, where also the Poets did vse to make slaunderous and biting verses one against another, in such sort as he that could excell in scurrilitie, scoffes, and floutes, eyther in prose or in verse, hee was crowned with a garland made of Iuy, and Thyrsus giuen to his hande, as one of the victors in Bacchus feast. The Grecians were nothing inferiour to the Romans for their ceremonies in feasts & sacrifice. Plut. Marius Censorinus likewise this day triumphed in Rome with a victorie gotten in Macedonia. 713. Temples were dedicated to Iupiter & Aesculapius, in the Ile of Tiberina, where eyther of them had their yéerely sacri∣crifice and feasts of the countrymen with all deuotion. Albertus the second being married to Sigismundus the Em∣perors daughter, was crowned king of Hungaria, & was this day also elected Emperour of Rome: for they vsed to elect the Emperour eyther being king of Germany or of Rome, some∣time also they elected the king of Hungaria or Bohemia. Lewis the twelfth king of Fraunce, in the 18 yéere of his raigne, 1515. died at Paris. Pantal. lib. 1. Magdalen the daughter of Frauncis king of Fraunce, was espoused to Iames king of Scotland. Sleid. lib. 10. Fredericus the third was elected king of the Romanes at Franckford 1440. whose election was with great solemnitie and pompe, as I haue saide in the crowning and inauguration of the Emperors. Titus Liuius a great historian, died this yéere at Padua, at the age of 70 yéeres, and the Poet Ouid was borne the selfe same day, in the yeare of Christ 18. Voleteramus. Christ Iesus the Sonne of God was circumcised this day to fulfill the law of Moses. This day the Image of Ianus was set vp in Rome, with a keie in his righthand, and a rod in his left hand, and vpon the keie was written the figures of 365. to shew the numbers of all the daies in the yéere. He had 12 Altars, with the iust num∣ber of the moneths of the yéere, dedicated and consecrated vnto Ianus, he had thrée statues, which were pictured with two faces in the market place, and had diuers names: as Geminus pater,
Quirius, Visuuius, &c. In the Calends of Ianuary, the feast and plaies called Hil∣laria in the honor of Berecynthia the mother of the Gods, were celebrated. Lucius Antonius that yéere when he was elected Consul in Rome, had a gallant triumph graunted him by the consent of the Senators for his victorie ouer the people of the Alpes 712. and the yéere after vpon the selfe same day M. Censorinus try∣umphed ouer the Macedonians, whose solemnitie and pompe were such, that I omit to set downe the manner and order of e∣uerie seueral triumph, for that I haue set some downe at large, you may suppose the like ceremonies and solemnities in all o∣ther triumphes more or lesse, according to the victory. Goltz. The second Daie. THis was a dismall day to the Romanes and a most in∣fortunate, and therefore their Bishops and Southsayers appointed the next day after any Calend, None, or Ide, to be recorded an vnlucky day, in remembrance of the vn∣fortunate victories had ouer the Romanes at the riuer Allia, in the taking of the Citie of Rome by the Gaules, for the great ouerthrowe of the Romanes at the battell of Canes by Hanni∣bal. The Bishops and the Southsayers made a decrée that n exploit, nor battell should be taken that day, and these daies to be recorded. Atros dies. Macrob. lib. 1. cap. 16. It was also an vnfortunate day amongst the Aegyptians, for the Prophet Ezechiel did foreshew the calamitie and ruine of the kingdome of Aegypt vpon this day. Ezech. 29. This day the statue of Commodus Antoninus was thrown downe from the place where it stood, within three daies after his death. So wicked an Emperour was this Commodus, and so farre from the vertues of his father, that all Rome honoured the father, and hated the sonne, and the moneth of September which he commaunded to bee called Commodus, was after his death presently restored to his former name. Charles the second was crowned king of Hungarie with much solemnitie and pompe vpon this day. 1310.
Philippus surnamed Longus, king of Fraunce, died 1320. Pantal. lib. 1. Iohn the fourth king of Lusitania, and father in lawe to Charles the second, died, leauing his wife with childe, which within twentie daies after his death brought a sonne and a Prince named Sebastianus. 1542. Galeatius Duke of Millaine was slaine in the Church at seruice, by a Citezin of Millaine named Andreus Lemponia∣nus, 1477. Charles the fift caused a méeting of many learned Catho∣likes and Protestants at Vnormatia a Towne in Germany, for conference sake about the religion, 1541. Sleid. lib. 13. Pius the fourth was elected Bishop of Rome vpon this day, of whose solemnitie I haue laide downe in his inauguration of his papacie. Upon this day Iohn Baptist bare witnes of the true Messias before his comming. Math. 3. Machareus priest of Alexandria was martired, 314. This day sheweth the nature and state of September. The third Daie. THe third day of euery moneth was in Gréece consecra∣ted vnto Minerua among the ancient Gréekes, of whose feasts, sacrifices, and ceremonies, you shall read in their seuerall places: for Minerua had her festiuall daies, and all solemne sacrifice in Athens, as Iuno had in Rome. Marcus Tullius Cicero was borne at what time Quintus Scipio, and Quintus Serrano were Consuls, before our Saui∣our Christ 110. yéeres. This verie yéere the Cymbres inuaded Italie. Gellius lib. 15. cap. 28. Vitellius was proclaimed Caesar by the souldiers in Germa∣ny after the foundation of Rome 821. yeeres. Nicholaus Bishop of Florentia was elected to bee Bishop of Rome 157. Antherus Bishop of Rome and many other Christians suf∣fered martyrdome vnder the Emperour Maximinianus, 239. There was in Rome vppon this day a meeting of the Citi∣zens
to see the performaunce of vowes, which they made to the Gods for their victories, and to finde out the effect and purpose why these were made, but being made they would also knowe the cause of the breach thereof, if any were such. The order and maner of vowes in what sort they were made and solemnized, are set downe. Upon this day happened such an earthquake, so violent and so straunge, that all the parts of the world were shaken there∣with, and much losse thereby in euery place sustained, in the yeere of Christ 1117. The fourth Daie. IN the moneth of Ianuary when the daies began to lengthen they held a great solemne feast at Rome with publike games and plaies, in which the women went before they sacrificed vnto Venus, to wash and to bath themselues in swéet water, the next morning they were crowned with garlands of mirtle, and so passing most solemnly through the stréetes of Rome into the Temple of Venus, they offered to the Goddesse in sacrifice certaine yoong white pigeons. In Athens this feast was so ce∣lebrated with great mirth and triumph in ioy, that the spring came on: the yong men had a publike feast wherein they vsed many ceremonies to the moone. In India the king with his traine (according to the maner of the countrie) was wont to wash himselfe at a certaine riuer, and after offered to the Gods in sacrifice blacke horses & blacke buls, for that colour is of greater estimation than white, and more holy and acceptable to their Gods, and after vsed much mirth. He thought himselfe a most happie and fortunate prince to sée the sonne to come to visite him. Genial. lib. 4 cap. 20. Calis a hauen towne in France, for the space of 211. yéeres in the possession of English kings, was againe recouered and woonne vpon this day: but Aemilius Paulus referreth it to the sixt of Ianuary. Pantaleon lib. 1. Sigismundus king of Poland, and sonne to Cazimerus, was borne this day: some say the first of Ianuary. Charles the fourth of that name the Emperour, entred into
Paris in Fraunce with great pompe and brauery, to make peace betwéene the king of England, and Charles the first of that name king of Fraunce. 1378. Iulius Caesar with a great armie passed into Gréece after Pompey the great, whom Caesar the next yéere after ouercame in the battell of Pharsalia. This day dooth forshew the nature and state of Nouember. The fift Daie. ALL Nones, Calends, and Ides marriages were prohi∣bited with the Romanes. Macrob. lib. 1. cap 15. The None of euery moneth was made a solemne day, and kept holy in Rome, for that Seruius Tullius the sixt king of the Romanes was borne vpon the selfe same day, vpon the which day the seruants and bondmen of Rome had as much libertie as their maisters in some things, like to the feast Saturnalia. Caius Iunius Brutus at his beeing Consul in Rome the 2. time, triumphed ouer them of Lucania, and after ouer the Bru∣tians, after the building of Rome 470. yéeres, solemnly with such pompe and solemnitie as was then in Rome vsed. Rome was not yet come to hir great pompe and dignitie: for none of their seuen Kings rode in any triumphant Chariot, but eyther on foote like the triumph of Ouation, or else on horsebacke from the Temple of Bellona where the Senators met them, and brought them through the Cittie into the Capitoll, where after sacrifice done, they celebrated the feast called Epulum Iouis, which feast was also called Epulum triumphale. In the Ile of Andria a Well was consecrated to Liber Pa∣ter, and two other fountaines, the one in Caria, the other in A∣rabia, which being drunken this day, tasted like wine. Calend. Rom. Rodulphus surnamed Haspurgensis was crowned king of the Romanes this day, 1274. Benth. The pompe of Caius Marius in his triumph which hee had in Rome ouer Iugurth king of Numidia, at what time Metel∣lus depriued him of much of his honour in the conquering of Iu∣gurth,
which spited Marius sore, that the glory of his triumph should be thus hindered by Metellus; but the greatest glory of his triumph had Silla, by the meanes of Bocchus king of Nu∣midia father in law to Iugurth, who through trecherie deliue∣red Iugurth into the hands of Lu. Silla. This was the originall cause of the cruell and bloody ciuill warres after in Rome, be∣tweene Marius and Silla, to the ouerthrow almost of the whole Empire. Silla was then but Quaestor vnder Marius, in the lat∣ter end of the wars. Metellus which deserued best the triumph was also cut by Silla, howbeit Marius had a solemne triumph granted in spite of Silla and his adherents, and that with great solemnitie and pompe. Plut. in Mario. Charles Duke of Burgundy was slaine, and his armie o∣uerthrowne vpon this day in a great battell at Nausen by the Heluetians, whose onely daughter and heire Maximilian the Emperour married, and thereby got the Dukedome of Bur∣gundy to him and to his heires for euer: as Philip Cominaenus affirmeth, 1477. Ferdinandus Archduke of Austria, was with great solemni∣tie and pompe crowned king of the Romanes in Colonia, 1509. Sleid. A great slaughter of Frenchmen at Gent began by factions and ciuill discord, and ended by shedding of much blood in a bat∣tell betwéene partie and partie, 1568. Frederike one of the Electors of Saxonie died vppon this day, 1429. The old auncient Romanes had vpon the fift day of Ianu∣ary in the first time of their kinges elections certaine ceremo∣nies of white beanes, which among the Grecians were signes of good euentes to come, as the blacke beanes prognosticate thinges infortunate to come. Beside in y• time of Romulus they sacrificed in Rome with milke and not with wine: and so the Athenians did appease the furie of the Gods in sacrifices with water and honie clarified, and not with wine of a long time af∣ter: the first was vnto Dionisius, in the which they sacrificed wine, honie, and milke.
The sixt Daie. THis day among the Romanes was counted vnluckie, called Ater dies, though otherwise among all Christen∣dome great mirth and feasting for the appearing of the starre this day: for the three Kinges called Magi of the East offered then golde, mirrhe & frankinsence vnto Christ at Bethlem. Math. 2. Iulius Caesar entred into Rome vpon this day with thrée se∣uerall triumphes, at what time he was first named Perpetuus dictator. He had fiue seuerall triumphes at Rome: the first time ouer the Frenchmen, the second time ouer the Aegyptians, thirdly ouer the Affricans, fourthly ouer the king of Pontus, and fiftly ouer the Spaniards, at what time hee vanquished Sextus Pompeius sonne to Pompei, the great, Cato, and others of Pompeis frends and confederates. It is written that in his first triumph he entred Rome with such a pompe, that hee pas∣sed through the Cittie in the night time with fortie Elephants, which carried lampes and light before Caesar, twentie on the one side, and twentie on the other into the Capitoll, beeing set with such deuise as made a solemne sight, at what time his Chariot was so laden with rich spoiles, treasures, and sump∣tuous tents, that it was like to breake. Of the region of Pon∣tus hee wrote of his triumph to his frendes before hee came to Rome in thrée words, Veni, vidi, vici, hee got the victorie with such celeritie: after the building of Rome 225. Pantal. lib. 1. Upon the selfe same day, 26. yéeres after, Augustus Caesar made his great and last triumph in Rome, hauing brought all the kingdomes of the world subiect vnto Rome: he caused Ianus Temple to bee shut, and was neuer opened during the whole time of Augustus, which was neuer shut but once by Numa Pompilius, once by Augustus Caesar, and once in Titus Vespa∣sians raigne, which was in all but thrise during the whole go∣uernement of the Empire of Rome, which was a thousand yéeres and more. Philip surnamed Pulcher, was solemnly at Rhemes crow∣ned
king of Fraunce, 1286. This day Henry the fift was crowned king of the Romans at Aquisgraue, 1099. 200. yéeres after Henry the seuenth was crowned king in Rome vpon this day, 1299. Charolus the brother of Lewis the ninth, was crowned king of Rome and of Cicilia vpon this day, by Pope Clement the 4. of that name. Gethes king of Herulans, with all his Péeres and Nobles came to Constantinople, and was baptised in the time of the Emperour Iustinian, 530. vpon this day. Katherine the first wife of Henry the eight died vppon this day, 1535. at Kimbaltn, & was buried at Peterborow. Adulphus Countie of Nassouia was elected Caesar, and 18. yéeres after vpon the same day Lodowicke Duke of Bauaria was also chosen to be Caesar. Naucler. 1315. Epiphanius saith, that Christ wrought his first miracle at a marriage in Canaan, a Cittie of Galilie, where he turned wa∣ter into wine vpon, this day. Idan 2. Pius the fourth was with great ceremonies in Rome vpon this day consecrated Pope. Onoph. 1560. Alexander Medices Duke of Florence was slaine in Mil∣laine at seruice time, by the trechery of one Laurentius an Ita∣lian, 1536. Iouius. Stephanus the sixt, Clement the third, and Pius the fourth, thrée Popes, were vpon this day elected, yet in time distant 700 yeeres and more, one after another. The seuenth Daie. VPon the seuenth day of the moneth Thebi, which is Ia∣nuary, a festiuall great day is solemnized vnto Mars in the Cittie of Papremus in Egypt, after sunne setting, where the priests standing in the verie porches of Mars his chappell with great woodden keies in their handes, hauing no leysure to looke vnto the sacrifice within the chappell for the great multitude which would violently enter in, to sée the se∣crets of the ceremonies: with these Priests were certaine per∣sns which vowed to do their best with the Priests, and to stand with them against these violent persons: for in that chappell
was the Image of the mother of God Mars honored and wor∣shipped, with such secret ceremonies as none might knowe but such as the Priests had appointed. No man might enter int this temple, vnlesse he were cleane washed ouer, Post venerem, which in other countries was lawfull, supposing multiplicati∣on to be acceptable vnto their Gods, sauing in Egypt and in Gréece, which abstained to defile their Temple. In diuers Citties of Egypt, as Heliopolis, Butis, & others, they haue this custome for their sacrificed beasts, they are kept with such care from the father vnto the sonne, being vowed to be sacrificed to the Gods in this manner. When any Egyptian doth consecrate any beast or fowle to any of their Gods, as in Egypt euery seuerall God hath his seuerall beast or fowle for sacrifice: they shaue their childrens heades, or halfe the haires of their heades, they lay that in the one part of the ballance, and in the other ende a piece of siluer that shall weigh downe the haires: this money they gaue to those that keepe this sacred beast for sacrifice, and by the lawe of Egypt if any man kill any of these beastes willingly, he shall die for it, if against his will, he shall bee so punished, or hee shall pay as much money as the Priestes of Vulcan shall set downe, but whosoeuer killeth the bird Ibis shal die the death without any excuse. The like law is read of the Thessalonians of their storkes, and among the old Brittaines of their kites and rauns. But of the Egyptians feastes and sacrifices, you shall read as they happen vpon their daies in their monethes, which I haue laid downe as I found them. Valentinus Cletus and Isidorus, Bishops of Hispalensis, were martyred vnder Domitianus the Emperour, 630. Upon this day in Rome there was great solemne sacrifices and feasts celebrated vnto Ianus, and likewise in Greece was the like vnto Isis, which is called Ceres. Pantal. lib. 1. This day in Rome by decrée of the Senators, were orders prescribed in this sort, that the Consuls, Pretors, Proconsuls, and Tribunes of the people should examine and view the state of the Cittie, least the like should happen to Rome as did in the time of Cateline, Lentulus, Pompey the great, and Iulius Cae∣sar, Marius and Silla, and such others. This was appointed be∣side
their inquisition, which was euery fiue yeare by two Cen∣sors of Rome elected for that purpose: that inquisition was cal∣led Lustrum. Appian. lib. 2. Carolus king of Cicilia died vpon this day, and Laurentius the Patriarch of Constantinople died at Uenice. A great turnement and triumph at Madenburge, of all the nobilitie of Germany, was caused by Henry the first Emperor of that name vpon this day, 938. This was the first tilting in Germany of 32. lib. Torn. Christ began vpon this day to fast fortie daies, as Martia∣nus Scotus lib. 1. Iohn the sixt Pope of that name, a Gréeke borne, was mar∣tyred. Upon this day began the Tridentine Councell, 1546. Sleid. lib 17. A great disputation in Berna a towne in Heluetia about re∣ligion on this day, after which in many places religion was al∣tered, 1528. Sleid. As vppon this day Tiridates king of Armenia entred into Rome in Chariots sent by the Emperour Nero, for him and the quéene his wife, and his children, and for other states which Ti∣ridates had in his company into Naples, where the Emperour Nero was. Tiridates golden helmet was carried before him, as the manner of the kings of Armenia be, hee was commaunded to lay his sword from him while he talked with Nero, in obei∣sance of the Empire of Rome, to whom the Armenians paid tri∣bute: the king tooke his keie and lockt his sword in his scabard, and therewithall made some reuerent obeisance vnto Nero, In Naples hee was feasted with great pompe and solemnitie, hée was brought to see the Gladiatory plaies, and other triumphes by sundry men done, and by sundry women, and beside strange ghts and inuentions by Ethiopian yoong men, with all kind of hunting within the Amphytheater of wilde beastes, with tame beasts fighting one against another. After this Nero brought the king with all his pompe into Rome, where all the Cittie in most sumptuous manner was adorned and set foorth with gar∣lands of flowers and crownes of laurell, and there in presence of all the people, the king of Armenia said: I am Tiridates king of Armenia, nephew vnto the great Arsaces king of Parthia,
and brother to king Pacorus, and king Vologaesius, and thy ser∣uaunt Nero, whom I honour as the Sunne, and I am euen he whose fortune lieth in Neroes hand, to whom I came from Eu∣phrates with the Quéene my wife and these young princes, to yéeld my seruice & due honour, whereat the people showted out, and Nero rising from his chaire, laide a diademe of gold vpon Tyridates head, saying: For that thou camest from Euphrates to Rome, and shewest thy obedience vnto the Empire, beholde, I will bestow that kingdome vpon thee, which neither thy Fa∣ther left thee, neyther thy brother could giue thee, after which solemne speach being done, many triumphes, plaies, and feasts were shewed vnto the king of Armenia. The charges of Tiri∣dates iourney from Euphrates to Rome, which was nine mo∣neths, stoode the Cittie of Rome in 8000. crownes euery day one with another. Sigon. lib. 3. The eight Daie. THe eight day of euerie moneth in olde time amongst the Gréekes was consecrated to their God Vulcan, as the third of euerie moneth was dedicated vnto Minerua. This day before noone declared the nature of Iune, and after noone the nature of May. Ferdinandus king of Castile entred with great tryumph in∣to the Cittie of Granata, which was vnder the Saracens for eight hundred yéeres, he subdued the Saracens, and woon the Towne. Pantal. lib. 1. Sp. Caruilius, at what time he was Consul at Rome, try∣umphed as vpon this day ouer the Samnites, the pompe and solemnitie whereof, and of all other great triumphes, you may read in the generall triumph heere following. The order and generall forme of the most greatest and re∣nowned triumphes of the Romanes, appointed for the worthi∣est conquerors, by consent of the Senators and Consuls, were in this order: the triumph should begin to be set out, euen from that place where they tarried for the Senate and Magistrates of Rome, with all the Cittizens, called Territorium triumphale
Vaticani, out of the walles of the Citte in olde time harde by th Temple of Bellona, tipstaues were commaunded with siluer trunches and staues to go before and rid the way, and to kéepe the people in order. From thence the state of the Cittie go in or∣der, their Censors, Tribunes, Aediles the Pretor, the Consuls and the Dictator, in most solemne order kept Viam trumpha∣lem before them, from Bellonas temple through the fields of Flo∣ra vntill they came to the gate of the Cittie, called Triumphalis porta: from thence they went with the greatest solemnitie and the most imperiall pompe that might bee deuised, through the stréete called Platea Iudaeorum, from thence to the temple of Iu∣no, from Iunos temple to the temple of Ianus, and so vntill they came to the Capitoll, going before as you heard, the Senators and the Magistrates of Rome: after followed the religious men, the high Bishop, called Pontifex Maximus, the Priestes Flamines, & their Augures, Southsayers, singing edes & psalms vnto their Gods in verses: after came Sal, which carried the golden targets, called Ancylia, dauncing and leaping as their manner is, when they carrie Ancylia: before whom went all kinde of swéet harmony and musicke, clothed and crowned in most sumptuous manner: after these followed the Uestal Uir∣gins, with their ceremonies sacred, in carrying the eternall re of the Goddesse Vesta: then the Priests of Bacchus men & wo∣men, with their haires loose, and naked, with Thirsus in their hands, & crowned with Iuie crowns, Haud secus quā in orgyis, beside tumblers & stage-plaiers, & such like iesters, as others before mentioned, did set foorth the dignitie of the triumph: these triumphes were nine houres going from Territorium tri∣umphale where they began, vntill they came to the Capitoll. After the conquerour was carried in a triumphant Chariot by foure braue white horses,. and somtime carried in most solemne sort and pompe with huge and stately Elephants, as Pompey the great was carried in his Affrican triumph: and Iulius Cae∣sar in his triumph ouer the Gaules, and Gordianus in his try∣umph ouer the Persians: sometime carried by great tamed Hartes,Flauius Vopiscus lib. 1. as Aurelianus was: other with Tigers, and others with monstrous Dogges. To such excéeding pompe and glorie grew the Romanes after their Affrican victories, that within
the triumphant Chariots were carried with the conquerour▪ the simulacher of Iupiter with his scepter in his hand, Neptune with his thrée picked forke, Mercurie winged about his shoul∣ders and his legges, and Iuno carrying in her hande Quirinus speare: thus the triumpher marched into the Capitoll, the sol∣diers crowned with laurell, round about the Chariot singing songs in praise of the conquerour, where after sacrificing an Ox vnto Iupiter, with publike thanks vnto the Gods for the victo∣rie, the feast was prepared, called Epulum triumphale, which was the common banquet appointed after any triumph. Ferdinandus the Emperour returning from Frankford, and comming vnto Basill, was receiued and welcomed with great honour, 1563. Pantal. lib. 1. Albertus Marques of Brandenburge, after many sharpe battels and long warres in diuers places of Germany, died at Fortzhemi, 1557. being 35. yeeres of age. Celestinus the third Bishop of Rome died, and on the same day Innocentius the third was elected into his place: this made the Decretals and other bookes: this caused the Councell, cal∣led Laterense to come together, 198. Volat. Likewise Constantinus Sirus, a Pope whom Iustinianus the Emperour, and second of that name, reuerenced so much, that he went from Constantinople to Nicomedia to méete him, and there to submit himselfe vnto the Pope to haue his absolution for sinne. Seuerinus a godly learned man that preached Christ, about the Riuer of Danuby died, 483. The ninth Daie. VPon this day the feast, called Compitalia, was celebra∣ted in Rome, at what time the Pretor should speake these wordes in presence of the people: Die nono post Ca∣lendas Ianuarii, Quiritibus compitalia erunt.Li. 7. de. 3. Also Compi∣talia festa were those feasts at Rome, when the plaies, called Compitales ludi were celebrated: in the stréetes in euery towne of the country. To these games were there Images and Idols brought with all solemne ceremonies of the people, they were
set vpon the table where Epulae Iouis were celebrated they were also laid on Altars, crowned with all kind of garlands, and set foorth with swéet flowers, deckt and trimmed with chaines and Iewels, &c. Also it was commaunded by Seruius Tullius, that once euery yéere in the temples of the Gods vpon this feast, so∣lemne sacrifice should be consecrated vnto the Goddesse Mania, and the Gods called Lares, vnto whom the people offered ony∣ons heades in stéed of mens heades. Augustus Caesar vsed this play in his daies, to bring his country Gods to be carried from the place where these Compitalia were celebrated, at what time they began to be called Augustales ludi, the sacrifice whereof was solemnized vnto Lares.Lares, hou∣shold gods. This was inuented first by Tar∣quinius the proud: these plaies had sundry names among the Romanes, as Compitales plebei, Curales, and Augustales, For vn∣derstand, that among the olde Romanes there was no games or plaies instituted, but had their proper feast, with all the pompe that might be, and their sacrifice to one God or other more or lesse, either before victories vowed in the Temples to the Gods, or after victories inuented, and he that was conque∣rour, had a Ram for reward of his victorie giuen him. Macrob. lib. 1. Likewise the feast Agonalia, was solemnly kept to Ianus a∣mong the Romanes, at what time the best Magistrate of the Cittie should commaund a Ram to be killed, being the chiefest of the flocke, hee himselfe being the chiefest man in the Cittie, whosoeuer he were, should solemnly offer vp the Ram in the Temple of Ianus, for sacrifice and dutiful seruice to God Ianus: these daies of sacrifice were called Agonales. The wife of Charles the eight, and after married to Lewis the twelfth, both kings of France, died 1514. she was an En∣glish woman, as the Chronicles f the kings of Fraunce doe record. Hadrianus the sixt schoolemaster of the Emperour Charles the fift, was elected Bishop of Rome vpon this day, Praeter opi∣nionem, 1522. Onoph. Iohn the twelfth of that name, was the 133. Pope elected, 938. an infamous and vicious Pope, and therefore driuen to exile by Otto the Emperour, at what time he died in a cae for
feare of Otto.Vol. Iohannes Aduentinus, a learned Germaine, died vpon this day at Ratisbone, 1534.Pantal. Under Valentinianus the Emperour was martyred vpon this day 358. Iuuencus a religious man of Antiochia,Euseb. hist. trib 8. and one Marcella, as I inde in Eusebius. Stephanus surnamed Porcarius a Romaine, moued se∣dition, and thereby fell to armes in Rome, where he was taken and hanged vpon Hadianus the Emperours Piller or arche 1433.Pantal. This daye openeth the nature of August before noone, and after noone dooth shew the state of Iuly, as in Practica rusti∣corum is laid downe. The tenth Daie. THis was woonte to be a dismall day to the Romaines, for euery fourth day before any Ide, Nones, or Calends, which the Romaines forbad any sacrifice to be vsed,Gell. lib. 5. cap. 17. or any ceremonies to be done, for vpon such dayes they sus∣teined great ouerthrowes, and much losse, and therefore called Atridies. Some write that Ierusalem was by Nabuchodonosar be∣sieged this day, being the tenth day of the tenth moneth, but they erre much, as it shall be said in another place, in mistaking the daies and the moneths. Charles the fift, married with Isabell the sister of the king of Portingale with great pompe and solemnitie.Monst. lib. 3. Cuspi. Honorus was by his father Theodosius elected and made Caesar and Emperor 393. This vanquished many cruell ty∣rants for 32. yeares that he raigned Emperour, as EusbeiusEuseb. hist. trip. lib. 9. cap. 45. affirmeth. Frederike Lord Elector of Palantine, vpon this day chan∣ged the state of religion,Sleid. at Heidelberge in Germanie 1546. Gregorie the tenth, who made peace betweene the Veneti∣ans and they of Genua in Italie died, who also called a generall
councell at Lugduum, where Michael Paleologus Emperor of Constantinople,Sbel. was reconciled to the Latine Church, 1278. Fabianus which was consecrated Bishop of Rome 237, suffered martirdome vnder Decius the Emperor, vpon this day this Bishop made a lawe, that no marriage should he be∣tweene kindered within fiue degrees,Vlat. he also commaunded that all Christians should receiue the communion thrise in a yeare, & that euery yeare a new Chrisme should bee made, and the olde burned. This day sheweth the nature of October before noone and after noone,Reg. rust. the state of September. The Sunne entreth into Aquarius. The eleuenth Daie. THe feast called Carmentalia, was as vpon this day ce∣lebrated which continued fiue dayes by the matrons of Rome in the honor of Carmenta: some suppose her to be the Goddesse of Destinie, and hath rule and power ouer the natiuities of men,Cal. Rom. and therefore the women of Rome reuerenced this Carmenta very much: others saye, that shee was the Wife of Euander the Arcadian, which was so inspi∣red by God Phoebus, that she was accoumpted and taken for a demie Prophetesse, and tooke vpon hir to giue oracles in verse in that sacrifice which should be doone vnto her feast Carmen∣talia. other opinions there be of this Carmenta which I heare omit. The temple of Iuturna was dedicated in Martius field as vpon this daie. Ferdinandus was elected Caesar after the manner of the Electors,Sleid. and was crowned with great solemnitie at Aquis∣graue 1531. Stauratius the Emperor of the Aest kingdomes died vponDiac. lib. 24. this day, 804. Higinus a Greeke borne, Bishop of Rome, was martyred vpon this daye vnder Antonius Pius the Emperour, and was
buried in Vaticano in the first yeare of his consecration 144. This Bishop commaunded that one Godfather should be pre∣sent at Baptisme,Pantal. lib. 1. & also that matters belonging to the Church, should not be vsed prophanely by laie men. Likewise M. ltiades an Affrican borne, suffered to be mar∣tyred vnder Maximianus the Emperor 309. some doo referre this to the tenth of December, Marianus Scotus saieth, that vpon this day, Christ by the commandement of the Angell, in the seauenth of his age, was brought againe from Aegypt, when Herod was dead in Galilie, and Archelaus raigned in Herods place. Before noone, this day declareth the nature of December,Reg. rust. and after noone the nature of Nouember. Laurentius Surius saith, that vpon this day great sedition & insurrection fell in Colleine, at what time two of their cheefe Councellors were beheaded. The twelft Daie. CArolus the third surnamed Crassus the Emperour was dri∣uen ot of his empire in the tenth yeare of his raigne, and di∣ed a verie poore man,Io. Cuspi. and was buried at the lake Podimius in Augia. 888. At Colonia a great meeting with triumph at tilting and bar∣riers of al the nobilitie of Germanie both on horse and foot with great pompe and solemnitie appointed by Florentinus countieIo. Cuspi. of Holland and Sealand, 1179. Also at Bamberga in Germanie the like turnement, where many of the nobles and of the peeres met vpon this day 1486. Uppon this day 1514. were seene at Whittenberge three Sunnes in the firmament, as Licosth de Prodigjs affir∣meth. Maximilian the Emperour in 33. yeare of his raigne died at Velsa a towne in Austra whose death an eclips of the Sunne the eight day of Iune, before he died foreshewed the same. Upon this day ended the feast called Compialia, which en∣dured
three daies in Rome. Iohn Castellanus a Doctor of Diuinitie,Cal. Rom. Pantaleon liber 1. Petrus de Natalitijs. was burned for his religion in Lotharingia 1524. Satyrus, Ciriacus, and Nicanor, became martyrs vnder Claudius the Emperor, 45. This day being the twelfe, dooth foreshowe the nature and condition of the whole yeare,Reg. rust. and dooth confirme the eleuen dayes going before. The thirteenth Daie. THe Ide of euery moneth is consecrated vpon Iupiter Satori, at what daye all kinde of Minstrels and all Trumpetors doe celebrate a great feast with much mirth, dauncing and leaping in womens apparrell through the whole Citie of Rome: for the Ides of euery moneth is with great care solemnlye celebrated with the sacrifice of a white Oxe by the priest of Iupiter called Flamen Dialis. This day of any day in the moneth is most in reuerence and honour, not onelie among the Romanes, but also the Graecians: as in the Ides of October,Macrob. lib. 1. the Mysteries and solemnities are such, as they sent the Idol of Dionsyus out of Athens to leusina, during the mysteries of the feast, of the which Ides you haue in euery moneth the feast and seuerall ceremonies of the Ides, this Ide of Ianuarie they had beside the Oxe which was sacri∣ficed vnto Iupiter, a Weather to be brought into the Temple of Iupiter, crowned with a Garland of Oken leaues, in memo∣rie of the victorie that Augustus had ouer Marcus Antonius at the battell of Actium. Quintus Publius the Consul of Rome, triumphed ouer the Latines vpon this day, after the cittie of Rome was builded, 414. Caius Marius a Romane was borne as vpon this day, and was afterward the first Consul that was elected out of the com∣mon people: for before Marius time the Consuls were chosen out of the companie and societie of the Patritians, this Marius
grew so great in Rome that he became seauen times Consull of his victories, triumphes, and exploits doone, you shall in their place and time find them, but in the honor and memorie of this his birth they solemnized feasts and plaies called natalitij ludi, and Plutarch saith,Plut. that Marius died vpon that daie of the yeare that he was borne vpon, as Pompei the great did, and diuers o∣thers.Appian. liber 1. Marius died the same yeare that hee was made the sea∣uenth time Consul, being seauentie yeares of age. You must vnderstand that nether these last conquerours, or any other were he Dictator, Consull or Pretor might enter into Rome with anie triumph vnlesse he had quieted the coun∣trey subdued his enemies & slaine 5000 in the field, and the de∣liuerance of his charge to his successor by the appointment of the Senat, then had he his triumph graunted him, and the Se∣nators, Bishops, and the priestes called Flamines in their pur∣ple robes, and seuerall sumptuous garments, then the nobilitie, the magistrates, and the Romane tribes with all the state and solemnitie of musicke came to meete the conqueror at the tem∣ple of Bellona out of the citie, and so to march before the trium∣phant chariot with great pompe and state through the citie into the capitol, singing hymnes, in the praise of the victor in verses, the temples decked with crowns and garlands, the streets with sweet flowers trimmed and decked. There certaine bulles were sacrifized vnto Iupiter, with solemne ceremonies: after sacri∣fice the feast called Epulum triumphale was celebrated, this feast was often solemnised as occasions of triumphs forced: of the greatnes of these feastes and of the sundrie seuerall pompe of some triumph more than others I haue in their time & place spoken of them. Octauius was vppon this day first named Augustus, at what day a weather was brought into the temple of Iupiter, as I wrote in the Ides,Sueton. and there was offred by Iupiters. priest of the order of Flamines 711. Fridericus archduke of Austria being elected Caesar died ofOnoph▪ a consumption vppon this day 130.
Ioannes king of France sailed ouer into England to redeeme his sonnes being pledges to Edward king of England, as in the French chronicles is set downe 1364, Such a terrible tempest fell ouer all Germanie,Lycosth. de Prodig. that they thought doomes day was at hand 1551. Uppon this day our sauiour Christ fedde fiue thousand men with fiue loues and two fishes as Beda affirmeth.Beda. Carolus a king of Fraunce concluded a peace with Pope A∣lexander 1495.Pau. Ioui. Philip duke of Burgundie gaue an ouerthrow to the English men in Baauia 1425.Auent. The fourteenth daie. AS vppon this daie the feast Chytra was celebrated to Neptune among the Grecians with due and solemne sacrifice: in this feast the chiefe dish was broth or rather poddage made of all kind of hearbs, which was so dain∣tie in those daies in Athens, as ius nigrum Lacedemoniorum, called the black broath of Sparta they had yet not common to their sumptuous cheere in Greece, verie much like to y• feast of Iu. Brutus, who after he had vanquished Tarquine the proude, the last king of the Romanes, he held a feast in mount Caelia, at what time the daintiest dish in that feast was poddage made of beanes, and of the fat lard of bacon,Macrob. lib. 2. ca. 12 at what time sacrifice was done to the Goddesse Caruia: these were the olde auncient feastes of both Romanes and Grecians in the beginning. This day of the Romanes was called Ater dies, vnluckie, for as Numa the second king of Rome deuided the yeare into mo∣neths, so he deuided the month into daies,Mac. . 1. cap. 11. & Al. Gel. li. 5. ca. 17. the daies againe were deuided some into feastiuall daies, called festi dies consecrated into the gods. Other named profesti dies dedicated into men, some other called intersici comman both to the goddes and to men. Of these read Macrobius. Henricus King of the Vandoles, being of the sect of the Arrians, slew 4963 Christians in one daye, amongst whome
some godlie Bishops died,Vict, lib. 2 in the yeare of Christ 500. Upon this daye appeared a terrible Comet, which indured for the space of two moneths, 1313. Pius surnamed Aquiliegensis Bishop of Rome, was marti∣red vnder the Emperor Antonius Pius 142. Upon this daye this Bishop made it a sacriledge to doe violence to any religi∣ous man: forbidding also, that no woman should make any vowe,Plat. 2. or enter into order of religion before they were of 25 yeares. In Suenia the Faire called Nordlingenses, was kept vp∣on this daie. I found no more doone vpon this day worth the writing. The fifteene Day. THe feast Carmentalia, was onely by the old matrons of Rome vpon this daye obserued and celebrated: for you must vnderstand, that these great solemne feastes which were dedicated to the Gods,Manob. li. 1. ca. 16. were diuers times of the yeare solemnized, as Agonalia Lupercalia, and this feast Carmentalia with others. Sergius Galba an auncient Senator, after hee was chosen Emperour by the Spaniards, being 37. yeares of age, hauing beene oft Proconsul, and also Consull: in sundrie perillous bat∣tels cheefe Captaine was slaine as vpon this day,Tacitus lib. 7. & Etrop. lib. 7. Suet. by the means of Otho who succeeded him in the Empire. This Emperour Galba in the seauenth moneth of his reigne, had his throate cut in the market place at Rome, and was buried in his owne Gar∣den by the way Aureli, 10. yeares after our Sauiour Christ, Marcellus Bishop of Rome, dyed a martyr vnder Diocle∣sian the Emperour vpon this daie, 310. This Bishop deuided the Citie of Rome into 25. seuerall dioces,Onoph. & Platina. ad baptismi commo∣ditatem. Under Iustinianus the Emperour, dyed Maurus an AbbatPantal. lib. 1. and a martyr 536. yeares after Christ. In Germanie vpon this daye was a meeting of the people
called Fustelenses nundinae Germanorum,Cherubi∣nus stella de nundi∣nis. and this continueth for the space of ten dayes. Also in Bridges a towne in Flanders, is a faire which endu∣reth for three daies: this is all that I can finde of this day. The 16. Day. VPon this daye, the old and auncient Romaines were woont to doe great sacrifice vnto the Goddesse Porrima, and to the Goddesse Postuenta two great Idols at Rome, which would tell the people thinges to come,Pant. lib. 1 and therefore called Deae pra∣nuntiae futurorum. Theodosius Hispanus, who was made Emperor by Gra∣tianus which then was Augustus, died vpon this daye, 402. This Emperor oftentimes vanquished the Gothes,Blond. and sub∣dued Eugenius and Arbogastus two mightie tyrants. Theodosius the sonne of Arcadius, and Nephew to the first Theodosius, was vpon this daye created and called Augustus, who after he had taken the Empire into his hand, hee sent Va∣lentianus his Father in law against the Vandoles & Hunnes to defend the West countries, and he for 32. yeares gouerned the East kingdomes. Marcellus Bishop of Rome,Plat. died a martyr vnder Maxen∣tius the Emperour, 310. Iohannes Schonerus, a great learned man, and a singular Mathematician, was borne vpon this daye in Germanie, in the yeare of Christ, 1477. I read no more of this day worth the laying downe. The 17. Daie. AFter the murthering of Iulius Caesar the first Emperor of Rome, Augustus Caesar his sisters sonne, and his successor in the Empire, instituted in the honour and memorie of his Unckle, certaine plaies called Ludi Palatini, which should be celebrated vpon the Calende of Ianuarie, in a rounde
temple within the Pallace of the Emperor, these plaies endu∣red eight daies.Sigon. lib. 3. cap. 22. At these playes afterward was Caligula slaine by Chaerca and others that conspired his death. Furius Camillus called of the Romaines the second Ro∣mulus, reedified the Temple of Concorde in Rome, which the Frenchmen threw downe at their inuation and subduing of the cittie,Pantal. lib. 1. but by Camillus they were forced to flye to their losse. Octauius Caesar, was vpon this day confirmed Augustus 24. yeares before the birth of Christ,Oros. lib. 6. cap. 20. Sueto. some write that vpon this day he changed the moneths name before called Sextilis, ac∣cording to his owne name to be August. Theodosius the Elder died at Milane in the twelft of his Empire,Hist. trib. lib. 9. and threescore yeare of his age, and in the yeare of Christe 395. But Melancthon referreth it to the seauen∣teenth of September, others to the sixteenth of Nouember, so that in this as in others, by vatie of opinions errors rise. Georgius Castriotus, otherwise called Scanderbecke, Prince of the Epyrotes, died vpon this day in his climatericall yeare 63: a valiant Souldier, a fortunate Captaine, who for 24. yeares, gaue diuers ouerthrowes to the Turkes, and de∣fended both Epyrus and Vngaria, to the great losse of the Turke, 1466.Volat. Fredericus, that founded the Uniuersitie of Whitten∣berge, and that first receiued the doctrine of M. Luther of all the Princes of Germanie,Pantal. lib. 1. being one of the Electors for the Empire, died as vpon this day, 1525. Iohn Chrysostomes body was brought to Constantino∣ple, and was solemnlie buried, 440.Hist. trip. Upon this day the Riuer of Rhein did freese ouer, and al∣most the frost endured a whole Winter, 1514. Ps the fift, was elected Pope of Rome vpon this daye,Onoph. 1566. Stephanus Palatine of Vualachie gaue to the Turke a great ouerthrowe vpon this daye at the Riuer Barludus, 1467.
The eighteenth Day. ATilius Calatinus a noble Romane, entered vpon this day into the Cittie of Rome with a great triumph ouer the Affricans vanquished in Sicilia, for the which, the Senators and cheefe Cittizens of Rome should pre∣sent him with seuerall rewardes and presents on the day of the triumph: besides they graunted the dignitie of his seate among the Consuls, and cheefe magistrates crowned with Lawrell, to behold the games and playes in Circo Maximo, in his tri∣umphant garments, according to the vse and manners of the Romanes. To some Conquerors whose triumph excelled o∣thers, they had their statues set vp in the market place at Rome, or in the Capitoll, or in the Pallace, or in the pleading place, or in Iupiters high chancell, of Marble or of Iuorie, both on Horsebacke and on , for victories in all countries were in diuerse sorts rewarded. Among the Indians, if any Soul∣diour had brought the head of anye enemie to the king, he should haue a blacke Horsse and a blacke Bull for his rewarde. If in Scythia any victorie had beene gotten, the Conqueror should drinke of the kings cuppe, which was carried for that purpose with the armie,Pantal. lib. 1. and that euerye yeare during his life, he might after that victorie drinke of the kings cuppe, as a re∣warde for his seruice. In the games of Isthmia, the victors were crowned with the Garlands made of Pine, appointed by Solon that they should haue one hundreth drachmes: In the games of Olympia the Uictor should be crowned with Law∣rell, and haue fiue hundreth drachmes, and he that wonne the masterie thrise, should haue his statue erected, beeing 496. yeares after the building of Rme. Martinus the second of that name, a French pope of Rome died 884.Volat. It is written that this Pope got his office by en∣chantment or such other euill meanes. Upon this daye appeared a great Comet, after the which
Lodowicke King that time of Germanie died within three dayes after, 882.Melanc. lib. 4. Chron. Petrus Benbus a Uenetian, cardinall of Rome died, 1547. I reede in Pandolphus Chronicles, that Peter the Apostle came into Rome first vpon this day, 44. In the cittie of Caesaria in Palestina, Priscus, Malchus, and one Alexander, three countremen,Euseb. lib. 7. cap. 12. were crowned martyrs vn∣der the Emperor Valerius vpon this day, 259. Likewise Prisca a Virgine of that name, a martyr vnder Claudius the Emperor, 45.Falc. tem. Iohn Philpot an Englishman, a great deuine, was brned at Smithfield, 1556.Fox in Mart. Lispia was besieged by Iohannes Fredericke a Saxon, being one of the Electors in the Empire,Sleid. lib. 18. but his siege was in vaine, 1547. The 19. Day. MArcus Aemilius Paulus, proconsull of Rome trium∣phed ouer the Affricans by Sea. In this triumphe of M▪ Aemilius Paul▪ as it did in fight differ from o∣thers, so in victorie and triumphe he was contrarie to others triumphes: for their Banners, Flagges, and En∣signes, were set vp in most braue manner, their shippes hanged ouer with cloth of Tishue, Golde and Siluer, decked and trim∣med with Garlandes of seuerall floures, and the Souldiers crowned with all manner of crownes Nauales coronae, Images and statues, and all the rich poles set in publike places to bee seene, their Captiues and Prisoners bound fast to the Mastes of the Shippes,Pant. lib. 1 thus with all kinde of Musicke and pompe of triumphe, they saile with victorie towards Rome.
M. Amilius Pau. Proconul of Rome,Plutar. & Pantal. lib. 1. triumphed ouer the Affricans by sea 499. yeares after the building of Rome. Theodosius Hispanus was by Gratianus appointed Em∣perour in the East countrie vpon this daie, in the roome of Va∣lens the Emperour, 389. And after that, this Emperour Theodosius appointed his Sonne Arcadius to be with him a Caesar in the Empire▪Diac. lib. 12. died vpon this day at Constantinople, 413. Henrie the eight, King of England, after he had raigned al∣most 38. yeares, dyed vpon this daye, as Sleidon affirmeth,lib. 18. others saye and affirme it to the eight and twentith of this moneth, at what daye Edward the sixte his sonne succeeded him, 1541. As vpon this day in France were many martyred vnder the Emperour Antonius Verus, specially three notable martyrs,Euseb. 5. cap. 1. Maturus, Attalus, and Blaudina a Maide of such woonderfull constancie, that when she was martyred, she much astonished the tormentors and the beholders on. Likewise Potentiana and Pontianus, and many others, vpon this day was made martyrs, vnder Commodus the Em∣perour. In Portingale vpon this daye, a great Faire or meeting of men, for the space of 15. daies is appointed. The tvveentith Day. VPon this day, Gordianus the Emperor was borne,Herod. lib. 7. 259. of whome games and plaies were celebrated with much mirth at Rome, in remembrance of Gor∣dianus birth. Theophilus Emperour of Canstantinople, being ouer∣throwne twise by the Sarizens, of very shame and greefe dyed in the twelfth of his Empire, 842.Onoph. Carolus the eight, king of Fraunce, was created Emperor of Constantinople vpon this daye,Pantal. lib. 1. by pope Alexander the sixte of that name.
Seruius Fuluius Proconsul at Rome triumphed by sea o∣uer the Affricans,Pantal. lib. 1. vpon this day 499. years after the building of Rome. Frāciscus Valesius king of France with great regal pompeBeuth. and solemnitie was crowned vpon this day at Remes 1515. some referre it to the 25. of Ianuarie. Vladislaus duke of Lithuania was made a Christian by the Popes legat and was crowned king of Poland, the selfe same day with great solemnitie in the citie of Cracouia 1320.Martinus Chrom. whose posteritie continueth to this day, as Mart. Chromerus a Polonian writer doth affirme. Sebastianus a cittizen of Millaine a captaine vnder Dio∣clesian the Emperour in his warres suffred euerie torment, and was martired with diuers others in Fraunce for the pro∣fession of Christ as vpon this day, 304. Likewise Fabianus bishop of Rome was vnder the empe∣rour Decius tormented with martirdome as vpon this day. It is written in Martinus Cromerus that Margareta the countie Verboslay had aliue 36. sonnes, Si credi potest. Upon this day at Basil the riuer of Rhine was frosen ouerPantal. lib. 1. which was seene in no mans age before. The 21 Day. VPON this day the Iewes began their moneth Schebat their eleuenth month, on the which they held a feast, as they do vpon the first and the last day of euerie moneth cele∣brate solemnity in memory of their gouernment vnder Moses in the wildernesse, & also in remembrance of their deliuerance out of Egypt from Pharaos bondage and crueltie. The 21 day of euerie moneth the Calcedonians hold it as an vnluckie and euil day, for as the Romanes the Grecians, and other countries recorded their altros dies, blacke dayes v∣pon the which daies they would take no warre in hand, nor en∣ter into anie battell, nor take in hand any great action so this daye the Calcidonians much lamented for that Darius lieftenant and generall of his warres after he had vanquished
subdued and had spoiled and ransacked all the countrie, to adde more crueltie he caused all the male children within CalcedonVolum. lib. 2. to be gelded, and to be sent as Eunuches vnto Persea. Lodowick king of Germanie died, and was buried with his father as Melancthon affirmeth, but Scotus referreth it to the 20. of August of the next yeare following. Lodouicus the third and the last emperour of the house andMelanch. lib. 4. stocke of Charles the great, and first of that name died for verie griefe on this day, for that hee was by the Vngarians ouer∣throwne 911. Hadrianus the third was elected the eight pope of Rome, who decreed that in the election of the pope the consent of the emperors should not be sought nor looked for 884.Volat. Likewise as vpō this day Innocentius the fifth a Burgan∣dinOnoph. was elected pope of Rome, who raigned sixe moneths. Carolus the eight king of France departed from Rome with a great armie,Stumph. lib. 3. de Gallia. vpon this day inuaded Naples,Pantal. lib. 1. and help the whole kingdome for a time, 1495. Georgius Sigismundus Chauncelor to the great Emperour Charles the fifth. Ferdinandus and Maximilian the second was vpon this day borne in Augusta 1516. The 22 Daie. PErtinax the ninth emperour of Rome, which succeded Cō∣modus in the Empire beyng a verie aged man of seauentie yeares old, after he had raigned eightie daies, was slaine as v∣pon this day in an vprore which fell among his garde throughScot. lib. 2 Eutrop. 18 the treason of Iulianus,Sabel. who succeded Pertinax in the Em∣pire, 194. Selymus Emperor of the Turkes vanquished the Soudan,lib. 8. and the Mameluchos in a great battaile, of this historie reade Sabel. & Iouius. Carolus prince of Lotharingia was solemly maried to Clau∣dia the daughter of Franciscus the second of that name kinge
of Fraunce at Paris. 1559.Aemulus de Galli. Edward Seimer an English man duke of Somerset, and vn∣cle to Edward the sixt king of England was beheaded vpon, this day in the tower of London, 1552.Baleus. Ioanes the second of that name was elected bishop of RomeOnoph. vpon this day, and died after within  yeare & 4. months, 332. Anastasius surnamed Iconomachus was created patriarch of Constantinople vpon this day, 710. Vincentius was martired vnder the Emperour Maximia∣nus, vpon this day which day amongest the auncient Romanes was holded a fortunate day for marriage, and as Casparus Goldworne affirmeth, being a faire day sheweth much good lucke to the Romanes. I can read no more for this day. The 23 daie. MArcus Attilius Regulus being then Consull at Rome, after he had giuen diuers ouerthrowes to theBeut. Carthaginiās hauing discomfited Hamilcar with Hannibals father, and after ioyned battaile with 3. Carthaginian Captains, ouerthrew them and wan 73. citties in Affricke, ouer whom he solemly tryūphed vpon this day 485. Antonius surnamed Caracalla the 22. emperour of RomeMar. scot. lib. 2. Chron. of the age of 43. yeares scceeded his father Seuerus in the Empire, and was like to his father in condicion, hee was out of measure giuen to sensualitie, and vnto carnall concupis∣cence, that he espoused his mother in law called uba, he foun∣ded the bathes in Rome which were called Antonianae, he dy∣ed at Edissa as Eutropius affirmeth: but Mar. Scotus saith that he was slaine in his viage against the Parthians,lib. 8. as vpon this day after he had raigned sixe yeares and two moneths hee wanted the solemnitie of imperiall funerall, for he was buried verie poore and simplie.
Otto the 3. Emperor of Constantinople was poisoned in I∣talie, on this day 1000. his bowels were buried in Augusta, and his bodie at Aquisgraine two yeares after that he had na∣med the seauen electors of the empire called Septemer. Many houses and many other buildings fel down in Thurin∣giaFabritius lib. 1. by winde and tempest 1410. as is affirmed in the Chro∣nicles. Ioannes Leydenses king of the Anabaptists, after hee had laid siege to the citie Monasteria,Sleid. killing and murthering for 6. moneths without mercie, was iustlie punished and plagued for his tirannie vppon this day 1536. Emerentia a Romane virgin became a martir vnder thePet. de na∣tal. emperour Valentinianus 360. The 24 Daie. CAius Caligula the some of Germanicus the fourth em∣perour of Rome with his wife Caesena and his Daughter were slaine in his owne pallace, after he had three yeares raig∣ned a vicious, wicked, and cruell emperour, who had carnal co∣pulation with all his sisters and vpon his daughter gtten by one of his sisters, he was cruell and horrible towards all men altogether addicted to auarice & to fleshly lust,Suet. Eutrop. lib. 7. an. 50. and as he liued dishonourably so hee was slaine miserably as Sueton, affir∣meth and Eutrop. Philip king of Macedonia and father vnto Alexander the great ob non punitam libidinem was slaine by Pausanias in the mariage of his daughter with Alexander king of Epire in the middest of his regal pomp going most solemnlie with a traine of Princes into the theaters to see games and publick playes hauing before him twelue statues and Images of the Gods, and hi owne statue besides deckt with chaines, Iuels most ritch and sumptuous,Plutarch. before Christes birth 334. Anna the daughter of Ladislaus king of Vngaria the wife of Ferdinandus Caesar & mother to Maximilian the Empe∣rour, and sister to Lodowick king of Germanie died vpon
this day, 1547.Beuth. Aelius Adrianus the fifteene emperour of Rome, was borne vpon this day in Italicia a Cittie in Spaine, for whome the Romanes kept a yearely feast vpon this day, and graunted publike playes (to celebrate the memorie of Adrianus birthe) called Natilitij ludi, for hée was one of the number of the best Emperrours, 119.Aeli. Spa. Lu. Iul. Libo, Consul of Rome, vpon this day triumphed ouer the Salentines, 486 yeares after the building of Rome. Iohn the tenth, was elected pope of Rome, 914. ThisVolat. Pope gaue an ouerthrow to the Sarazens in Campania, and after was taken by some Romanes, in the 14. yeares of his papacie, and was smoothered by thrusting the boulster where he lay into his throate. Timotheus the disciple of Paul, and Bishop of Ephesus, suffered martyrdome vpon this daye vnder Nero the Empe∣rour, 50.Niceph. Upon this daye the auncient Romanes vsed to sacrifice to Ceres and to Tellus, and with all they celebrated the feast cal∣led Sementina. The 25 Daie. VPon this day the Apostle Paul was conuerted from his cruell persecution of the Christians, who liued when the Emperor Caligula liued, 34. Of this day the Husbandmen prognosticat the whole yeare: if it be a faire day it will be a plentifull yeare, if it be windie, it will be warres, if it be cloudie, it dooth foreshowe the plague that yeare, Clara dies Pauli, &c.Reg. rust. M. Ati. Regulus, triumphed vpon this day oure the Sa¦lentines, 486Pant. lib. 1. yeares after the building of Rome. Martianus the 64 Emperor of Rome, dyed vpon this day,Cuspi. after he had raigned sixe yeares. And Leo the fourth of that name, was vpon this day borne 751, who left behinde him his wife Irenes and his sonne Constantinus.
Fardinandus king of Sicilia, died also this day,Maucler. leauing his kingdome to his Sonne Alphonsus, 1494. Selymus the Turke, vpon this day gaue an ouerthrowe toPau. Ioui. the Solthan of Aegipt, and tooke Aelcairum which was som∣time called Memphis, the strongest Cittie in all Aegipt, 1517. Gregorie the 4. Pope of Rome, died on this daie, he institu∣ted the feasts of all Saints, 844. Gelasius the second, was elected Pope, 1118. An Earthquake in Germanie happened vpon this day, that 26. Castels fell, and many townes beside 1349. The like hap∣penedLycosth. in Uenice. Adolphus Duke of Holsatiae was borne as vpon this day,Paul. Ee. 1527. The Greekes were woont to sacrifice a feast in memorie of Theseus, for the deliuerie of Greece from Minotaurus: beside diuerse other feasts and sacrifices which they had in remem∣brance of Theseus the tenth king in Athens, and the first that brought Athens to any perfection of good gouernement. The 26 Day. AS vpon this day Maximinus the 26 Emperor was slaine at Aquileia by Pupeinus his fel∣low in the Empire, for after Maximinus time Albinus, Pupienus and Gordianus,Eutrop. lib. 9. were all three Emperors of Rome at one time, and na∣med Augusti. This Maximinus was first a Shepheard in Thracia, after became a Souldiour, and from a Souldiour became an Emperour, who raigned three yeares, & then was slaine, he, and his sonne being a verie childe, 240. C. Iulius Caesar entred into Rome from mount Alba∣nusPantal. lib. 1. with great pompe and triumphe vpon this day 727 years after the building of Rome, in the which yeare hee also was slaine. Leo the sonne of Martianus the Empepor, was chosen em∣peror of the East after his father vpon this day, 457.
Editta, Wife to Otto the Emperor died vpon this day, and was buried at Magdenburge, 948.Melanc. Chron. Henrie the eight, king of England, died vpon this day, lea∣uing a sonne behind him his successor, Edward the sixt, 1547.Lilius. Lusitania a countrey of Spaine, was so shaken with an Earthquake, that much harme and great losse of it ensued,Beuth. at what day the Cittie of Ulisbone fell prostrate to the grounde, 1531. Upon this daye in Rome was builded a temple, and dedica∣ted vnto Castor and Pollux, 270 yeares after the building of Rome. Polycarpus Bishop of Smyrna, Pionicus, and diuerse o∣thers, after much constancie and bouldnesse, were martired vn∣der Antoninus Verus, 150. Of Polycarpus death, Euseb. writeth very strange things, read 3. booke and 15. chap. of hisEuseb. 3. cap. 15. martirdome in Smyrna. Sextus Apuleus, proconsul of Rome, had his triumph gran∣ted him out of Spaine, vnder Octauianus the Emperour, 727 yeares after the building of Rome. The 27. Daie. COcceus Nerua, the thirteenth emperor of Rome, who suc∣ceeded that deadly tyrant Domitianus, after that hee had raigned almost two yeares, died vpon this day at Rome, 66. This Emperour aduaunced the publike weale, behaued him∣selfe verie soberlie, vpright and courteous, and yet stoute and manfull, he adopted after him a good man to gouerne, named Traianus, for it was hard to finde a good Emperour then in Rome, and harder for a good Emperor to liue in Rome,Onoph. such treacherie and tirannie raigned thē, that one Caesar kiled an o∣ther, and one Emperor destroied another, that the empire con∣tinued not aboue 400 yeares, but was carried, from Rome to Constantinople. Henricus, the snne of Fredericus Barbarossa, king of the Romanes,Pantal. lib. 1. was married to Constantia, daughter to Roge∣rus king of Sicilia, of whome Fredericus the second was borne.
Seffanus and Constantinus both then Emperors, were ap∣prehended and taken by Constantinus the some of Leo,Paul. lib. 1. and put into a Monasterie, being shauen like Friers, both head and beard. Upon this day by the commaundement of Charles the fift, a speach was had concerning religion, fiue yeares after the first controuersie at Ratisone in Germanie, but because of the bu∣sines and warre ensuing it tooke no effect,Sleid. 1546. Stumpf. affirmeth, that vpon this day a great battell was fought betweene the Tigurines and Heluetians, at Vila a towne in Germanie. Vitilianus Bishop of Rome, died as vpon this daye, 670. after he had beene elected 14. yeares:Volat. this bishop brought into the Romane Church the Organes and musicke. Licosth. in his bookes of woonders saith, that vpon this day appeared two golden pillers, the one on the right hand of the sunne, and the other on the left, 1704. Ignatius bishop of Antioche, suffered martirdome vnder Ar∣cadius the Emperor: this Ignatus committed his Church to Policarpus bishop of Smyrna. The 28 Day. VPon this day Charles the Great, King of Fraunce, and the first of that name of a Frenchman, was made Emperour of Rome by Pope Leo: this brought the Empire from Rome into Germanie,Pantal. lib. 1. and hauing doone many great exploits, after he had erected Colledges & Schooles in Bononia, Papia, and Lutetia, died at Aquisgrane, in the 46. yeare of his raigne. Of this Charles the great, the Frenchmen haue their cheefe anti∣quitie in matters touching the roialtie and dignity of their in∣augurations of their kings, and of the buriall of their princes, the solemnitie of either began by this king, and from his time whose Eusignes and reliques, are left as monuments to be v∣sed at the coronation of the Kings of Fraunce at this daye, as I haue written in the generall inauguration and crowning of their kings.
Alexius the 4. emperor of Constantinople was slaine vppon this day. 124. Lu. Cornelius Dolabella triumphed ouer the Lusitani∣ans,Plutar. and Spaniads 65. yeares after the building of Rome. Mari. Scotus saith, that vpon this daye 1079. a terrible battaile was fought in Germany by a place called Fladechies where countie Manfridus with many others died. A terrible earthquake was heard ouer all Siria vppon this day, at what time many townes, and manie thousands of peo∣ple perished. Cedrenus in his chronicles of the Greekes, 746. Pascalis was elected pope of Rome without the consent of Lewes surnamed Pius king of Fraunce,Volat. and also Emperour of Rome. Upon this day at Darmset by the riuer of Rhine a great so∣lemnitie of the nobles and peers of Germanie with running at tilt and at barriers,Pantal. lib. 1. and other games was celebrated, 1496. Amongest the old and auncient Romanes the feast called Equitia was solemnly wont to be celebrated and kept in Mars his field at Rome, sometime in Circo Maximo. For this feast Equitia they had certaine plaies and games where horses and Mules, some lose and some bound together, and shoult so run in Circo Maximo: Some vsed one race, some vsed another. These mules and horses made such a sport at Rome, that while this play was celebrated Romulus caused the Sabine virgins to be rauished, for the which cause great warres grew betweene the Romanes and the Sabines, and in memorie of this Romu∣lus appointed the feast called Consualia. The 29 daie. AS vppon this day the auncient Romanes were woont to create their kinges, and euerie yeare they celebrated a solemne feast in memorie of their Kinges. The solemnitie of inauguration and crowning of the Kings of Rome I did write in my other Booke.
Aurelianus Emperour of Rome borne in Ponnonia, after he had subdued the Gothes, vanquished the French men, tamed Egypt, and recouered both the East and West countries vnder his dominion and empire of Rome,Eutrop. lib. 9 and triumphed ouer Zeno∣bia Queene of Palmeria after he slue Odenatius the king her husband. And after manie other famous exploits done, he vsed Solons law called Amnistian,Amnistiā. which Thrasybulus reuiued in Athens after the banishment of the thirtie tyrantes and was as vpon this day slaine by his owne seruants betweene Constan∣tinople and Heraclia, some referre it to the fourth of Fe∣bruarie, 76. Likewise Dagobertus Magnus king of France died at Spi∣netum of the fixe on this day, 645. Philippus the 28. emperour of Rome and the first of that name, with his sonne named also Philippus were slaine in one daie,Mar. Sco. lib. 2. the elder at Verona the yonger at Rome after they had raigned seauen yeares, as Mar. Scot. affirmeth, but Eutrop. sayeth 5. yeares. Batildis the wife of Clodoueus the second of that name,Volat. lib. 3. king of Fraunce died at Paris, 670. Isabella the wife of Edward the second king of England, after manie broiles threw her husband the king into prison,Lil. and caused her sonne named also Edward, being of fourteen years of age to be crowned king of England, 1326. Gelasius the second,Onoph. Pope of Rome died in exile in the se∣cond yeare of his papacie, 1119. Upon this day great disputation began at Tigurum in Ger∣manie for religion,Sleid. after which a great chaunge began vppon the same to be in Helueia, 1523. This was accompted an vnfortunat day amongest the Ro∣manes, called aterdies. The 30 Day. GOrdianus the 27. Emperour was slaine as vppon this day through the treason of Philip, who succeded him in the em∣pire after good seruice and maine victories ouer the Parthi∣ans,
in his returne from Parthia towards Rome,Eutrop. lib. 9. ouer whose graue one of his captaines erected a monument for a memo∣riall of him,Mar. Sco. lb. 2. yet his funerall was solemnized by a decree of the Senate. Ludouicus the last Earle of Flanders of his familie and stocke dyed, and the self same day Philip duke of Burgundie and sonne to Ioannes king of Fraunce succeeded him, 1384. As vppon this day Lu. Cornelius Silla then Dictator at Rome triumphed most solemnlie ouer Asia, Grecia, and ouer Mithridates king of Pontus. The pompe of this triumph en∣dured two daies so set forth, and solemnized to the great glory of Silla: for this triumph of Silla and the roiall magnificence thereof was compted among the Romans one of their hundred great triumphes, though from Romulus time the first king of Rome vntil Probus the Emperors time were registred 320. triumphes. Anthimus bishop of Nicomedia a with manie moe Christi∣ans,Casp. euen three hundred were tormented and martired vnder Galerius the Emperour, after whom succeeded Constanti∣nus the great. Iulianus bishop of Cenomanenses, and Adelgundis did suffer vpon this day tormentes vnder the Emperour Vespasi∣anus. 665. In old time at Rome the Romanes were woont to celebrat in the temple of concord in memorie of peace and quietnesse, and this Ouid saith was appointed vppon this day. Hc erit a mensis fine secunda dies. The inhabitants of Berna in Germanie with the aide of the Heluetians,Stumf. lib. 8. afflicted and troubled sore the people of Germany, wasted, tooke and occupied much of their territories. 1536. The 31 Daie. VPon this day being the last day of Ianuarie, the Romanes vsed in auncient time to do sacrifice to their houshold gods,Gal. Rom. called dipenates.
Husbandmen say that trees hewen, or wood out downe vpon this daie,Reg. rust. will endure longer then other in anie building. Clodius a noble Romane but yet malicious and enuious of other mens good fortune, one that much troubled Rome by his greatnes,App. and caused manie good men to bee banished, as Cicero and others: but as he returned from Aricia to Rome, he was with all his companie by Milo slaine, of whose death few semed to be sorie, but Cicero had good cause to reioice: and therefore Cicero defended MiloCicero pro Milon. before the Iudges at Rome for the killing of Clodius, as it is in his oration pro mi∣lone prooued 701. yeares after the building of Rome. Noah vpon this day did let out a rauen, and after a rauen a doe,Genes. 8. which returned both in one day without finding of any land, after the creation of the world. 1657. Stephanus the third, Bishop of Rome a Cilician borne di∣d, 772. this bishop called together Consilium Lateranense vnder Pipinus king of Fraunce. In this councell Images were restored againe into the Romane church against a decree past before in the councell of Constantinople.Sbel. Within the moneth of Ianuarie died 29. Romane Empe∣rours, and in the said moneth the Romanes had 20. triumphes with great pompe & solemnity, & 7. pub∣licke solemne feastes, with so manie sacrifices. The names of the triumphers. 1. C. Marius. 2. L. Antonius. 3. M. Censorius. 4. C. Iun. Brutus. 5. I. Caesar. 6. August. Caesar. 7. Q. Publius. 8. Sp. Carilius 9. M. Aemil. Paulus 10. Ser. Ful. Petinus 11. M. Atil. Regulus 12. L. Iulius Libo. 13. C. Iulius Caesar 14. Sex. Apuleus 15. Cor. Dolabella. 16. L. Corn. Silla. The names of Feasts. Gamelia, Compitalia, Epiphania, Carmentalia, Agonalia Chytra. Equitia.
Of the moneth of Februarie, with the He∣brewes called Schebat: with the Athenians called Ela∣phobelion, and with the Agiptians called Mecher. Also of triumphes, feasts, playes, funerals and natiuities within the sam moneth. The first Day. THis moneth in the olde Romanes time, was dedica∣ted vnto Neptune, for vpon the first day of this mo∣neth, they were woont to sacrifice a sheepe to Iupiter in the Capitoll, and withall a great feast they cele∣brated in the honour of Hercules, for that Hercules was borne vpon this day.Cal. Rom. Elaphobelia, is a feast solemnized in Athens to Diana, at what time the Athenians vsed to sacrifice a Hart vpon the frst day of Februarie, to honour Diana, and therefore the moneth of Februarie was so named according to the name of the feast Elaphobelia,Plutarch. for in this moneth yearelie the Athe∣nians held this feast with great solemnitie, with sacrifices and ceremonies of Harts vpon the altars of Diana. M. Valerius surnamed Corus, then Consul at Rome, tri∣umphed ouer the Vulscanes, Satricians, and the Antiates,Pantal. lib. 2. 407 after the building of Rome. Q. Fab. Maxims, Consul of Rome, triumphed ouer the Ligurians vpon this daye,Pantal. lib. 2. after the building of Rome 520. And before him Fab. Pictor had a triumph graunted him ouer the Salentines and Mesapians, 487. Tit. Coruncanus, likewise Consul at Rome, triumphed ouer the Vulscans,Liui. 473. And Lu. Aemil. Regulus hauing subdued the lieutenant of Antiochus the great by sea,Liui. lb. 7 had a triumph graunted him by the Senators at Rome, 487.
Lu. Cornelius Dolabella, proconsul then in Spaine vnder Constantine then emperour,Etrop. had a triumph at Rome ouer the Lusitantans, so that as vpon this day, sixe seuerall solemne triumphes were in Rome by the aforesaid Consuls, as you heard, 655. Lu. Sergius Catilina conspired vpon this day the destruction of Rome,Salust. but his conspiracie was preuented by M. Cicero, 691. Lewes the twelfth king of Fraunce,Ioa. Stu. entered in league of peace with the Heluetians for ten yeares, called Decennale faedus, 1499. Car. Pulcher the 48 king of Fraunce,Cron. Fra. died without children vpon this day, 1327. After whome succeeded Phil. Valesus Hic seminarium belli Anglicifuit. Ladislaus, the thirteenth king of Vngaria, died on this day, 1172. Upon this day Damiata a cittie in Egypt was taken by the Christians from the Sarazens,Pantal. lib. 2. but with great effusion of blaud, 1220. Tritemius an histographer was borne on this daye, 1462. And Con. Celtes a Germaine poet, was also vpon this daye borne, 1454.Pros. Pan. The second Day. VPon the second of Februarie Christ Iesus the sonne of God borne of the Uirgine Marie 40. dayes, was presented in the temple of Salomon in Hierusalem, according to the lawe of Moses, where iust Simeon and Anna confessed him in the pre∣sence of the people, to be the sauiour of mankinde,Luck. 2. saying with exceeding great ioy, Nunc dimittus. This was amongst the Romans accounted one of their dismal daies,Mar. scot. for in those daies that some victory was lost, or some vn∣fortunate explits doone, or any other harme by fire, by water, or by any other mischance, they called those dayes Atros dies, on which dayes they ceased from any enterprises, calling this day into minde.Gell. lib. 5. Also, as vpon this day, the Romanes hallowe
and consecrated their firebrands, for that the cittie of Rome was twise taken by the Gaules, & foure times by the Gothes, and had beene in diuerse dangers by fire, therefore the priests called Flamines by the councell of Southsaires, sacrificed firebrands vnto Vesta,Goltz. for among the Romanes the Uestall Uirgins were charged to keepe the immortall fire, alwaies burning in the temple of Vesta, as among the Grecians the old women had care of the holy Lampe in the Temple of Phoe∣bus. Andronicus surnamed Palaeologus,Ger. Mer. was vpon this daye crowned Emperour of Constantinople, 1314. in whose time Ottomanus the Turke began now his kingdom. Guntherus an Earle of Germanie, as Cusp. saith, was elected vpon this day Caesar, by the most number of the Elec∣tors of the empire at Frankfort, for hatred and priuie malice the bare vnto Carolus the fourth of that name, and at that time Emperour, 1349. The feast Hipapante with the Iewes, commonly called with vs the feast of the Purification, was by Sergius Bishop of Rome instituted:Func. in Chron. in the which feast our Sauiour Christ was presented in the temple at Hierusalem, according to the lawe of Moises, 40 dayes after his natiuitie, there was another kinde of purification in auncient time with the Romans, which Picus and Faunus two Satyricall gods reuealed to Numa Pompi∣lius with many other things, among which they taught him the purification of lightning and thundring, by secret ceremonies reuealed to Numa.Plut. in Numa. At Darmstat by the riuer of Rhein, a great meeting of the Nobles of Germanie, where much mirth and marshall ex∣ploits were done. The third Daie. VPon this day at Rome the fields were visited, and the fruits were solemnly halowed, and the Oliue trees were sanctified with processions of the priests, and with sacrifice and miste∣ries, like to Amberuale sacrum, at what time the people went together to visit their Corne,Cal. Rom. howe their fruites in the
fields prospered. In procession they goe very deuout, thrise round about the field, one going before them bedeckt with O∣ken boughes, with a comely solemne daunce, singing verses in praise of Ceres whom all follow in like sort,Cal. Rom singing and da∣cing vntill they had gone round about the field three times: then they sit vpon the greene grasse, which with solemne sacrifice of Milke, Wine, and Honnie combe, which they offer vnto Ceres the Goddesse of Corne: then they kill a Porke, which they cal∣led Praecidanea, and offer it vnto Ceres whom they call vpon in their hymnes and odes to prosper their corne. Upon this day in Rome in the Senate house were had a iust view, and an inquisition made, with a certaine care of the Cen∣sores to amend things amisse among them, and to punish offen∣dors, to direct them and to correct their faults euery fift yeare, which time was called Lustrum, at what time they might put out and in, by the consents of the rest of the Senators, such as had against the Cittie of Rome offended. The Frenchmen which had inuaded Rome, where by the no∣ble Romane Camillus,Plat. in Camillo. after they had possessed the Cittie sea∣uen moneths, driuen out of Rome and slaine, to their losse and great harme, 363 yeares after the building of Rome. Au. Probus the 36 emperour of Rome, a man of singular experience in warfare, and able to match that noble emperour Aurelianus in all good parts,Eutr. lib. 9 was vpon this day created Em∣peror next after Tacitus, 278. Henrie Duke of Bauaria, and Unckle to Lewes the fourth then emperour,Io. Auent. died on this day, 1290. Clodomanus king of Vngaria died on this day, after whom succeeded Steffanus the second,Pant. lib. 2 1114. Basilius the great Bishop of Caesaria in Cappadocia died vpon this day,Euseb. 390. Gal. Picus entered secretly by night into the cittie Miran∣dula, and then slew his Unckle Fran. Picus and his sonne, and tooke the towne, 1533. Uppon the third day of the moneth Mechir, Sesostris a most famous King of the Egiptians, who after hee had conquered diuerse countries, and made his kingdome far more by his conquest, specially by subduing of the Scythians whom
neither Cirus, Allexa. nor Darius could do, for the which cause the priestes of Vulcan suffed not the statue of Darius long after Sesostris time to be set vp before Sesostris: though E∣gypt at that time was subiect to the Persians. In memorie of his victories he erected in many regions pillers and arches of brasse of marble, & of Iuorie called Arcus triumphalis among the Romanes, but proper to the Egyptians, and his Image set thereon, in token and monument of his triumphes, for that was the order of the kings of Egypt to put their pictures and statues in stones and brasse in lue of triumph. This Sesostris in Siria had his image set vpon a high piller of brasse with this sentence written betweene both his shoulders on his backe in Egyptian characters Hanc ego regionem meis sustinui humeris. The 4 Daie. THe Romanes celebrated for 6.Cal. Rom. daies certaine games called Ludi Gotici in memorie of their last ouerthrow, or as some say, they were appointed by the Gothes, at what time they had taken Rome, and then vsed enter∣ludes as a triumphe of their victories and conquests. Therfore the Romanes farre excelled all nations in feastes & triumphes in plaies, in sacrifices and ceremonies, as I haue written of them in the places and daies appointed, the Romanes would omit nothing that might be recorded, for neither the Gothes, the Perseans, the Almanes, the Sarmatians, the Frenchmen, and many other nations are forgotten among the Romanes, but they are menioned vppon the Theators of Rome, and in Circo Maximo once a yeare, so the Gothes are remembred v∣pon the 4. day of Februarie by their games and plaies called Gothici ludi which endure 6. daies vpon the theators in Rome. Lu. Septimius Seuerus the 27. emperour of Rome the on∣ly emperor elected forth of Africke,Mar. Sco. which for his worthinesse and rare exploits ouer the Arabians and Parthians demerited to haue the names of Parthicus, and Arabicus. This Empe∣rour at Yorke in England disseased on this day when hee had
raigned eighteene yeares and foure moneths, some say he di∣ed the twenty ninth day of Nouember, these controuersies of daies cannot be well decided, 212. Conradus the third of that name a Sueuian borne,Pant. lib. 2 vpon this day made a voiage against the Saracens with a great com∣panie of the princes of Germanie into Asia, where the Sara∣cens with much blood on either syde were discomfited 1147. The Iewes vpon this day being the 15. of their moneth She∣bat do celebrat a feast of great mirth and ioy,Eber. for that the spring beginneth, and that trees and all things do begin to haue sa & to florish: at what time the Egyptians worshipped their bird I∣bis for that in the spring time a number of serpents leeing from Arabia into Egypt, are by the birdes Ibides fought with∣all and vanquished, and thereby Ibis doth often saue Egypt from the harme and danger of these serpents, and therefore re∣corded in the bookes Memphis as one of the gods of Egypt by the priestes of Vulcan. In Germanie great triumphes with tilting and barriers and other playes at Ratisbone by the nobles and peeres of aua∣ria were as vpon this day solemnized: This was the 35. tur∣nement had in Germanie, 1487. Under the Emperour Maximinus many were on this day martired, as Veronica & Philea with others of these martirs I haue in an other place entreated,Euseb. where you may haue infi∣nite number that stoutly stood to the profession of Christ Iesus. The 5. daie IN Rome as on this day two solemne feastes were celebrated, the one amongest the Ro∣mane Uirgins called puellarum ferae, the other amongest the nurses and mothers that gaue sucke called nutricum lactantium feriae, on the which day among the Romanes the women sacrificed to Nundina the goddesse of infancie, and consulted touching the bringing vp of these infants, with their nourses,
prescribing lawes and orders of diet to the nurses that gaue sucke, lest by libertie of feeding the infant might miscarie, at what time they appointed vppon what day the infant should be named, which was among the old Romanes vpon the ninth day,Alex. lib. 2. cap. 25. and among the Grecians the fift day, the ceremonies and the sacrifices that are vsed by the nurses for the health of the in∣fant to the goddesse Nundina are manie in diuers countries according to their superstitious customs. As vpon this day a feast and solemne sacrifice in old time was appointed in Quirinus valley against the furie of fire de∣dicated to the goddesse Agatha with torches done in the night time. Octauius Caesar was now the third tiwe by consent of the Senators, Consuls, Magistrates and people saluted by the name of Augustus,Sueto. and also called Pater patriae, as the most fortunate and best beloued Emperour of anie that raigned af∣ter him in Rome. As vpon this day Iunius Pera at his being Consul of Rome with great pompe by the licēce of the senators triumphed ouer the Salentines, and also the Mesapians in such solemne sort as you read in the generall triumph. The yeare that this tri∣umph was solemnised fell vppon the time of Lustrum, which was appointed euery fift yeare, the state of the cittie should be examined per Censores,Liui. lib.  at what time a generall mustering was had at Rome, in the which were 360 and od thousands found of able men within the citie of Rome, 487. Clemens the fourth a frenchman was on this day chosen pope of Rome 1265. this pope called Carolus the French king his cosyn germane & went into Italie & fought against Man∣fredus and Conradinus two noble captaines of Germanie,Platina. whom Carolus that time vanquished, and was by pope Cle∣mens therefore crowned king of Sicilia, paying yeerely to the Pope 40000. crownes as a tribute to the church of Rome. The cittie of Millaine in Italie was taken by duke Francis∣cus surnamed Sfortia after long besieging of it, 1444.Pan. Ioui∣us.
The 6 Day. THis was a dismal day to the Romanes fore those causes before reheased, so the priestes of Memphis recorded this day vnfortunate, for as the Romanes obserued their vnluckie daies, by the name of Atridies, so the Grecians, the Egyptians and all nations haue recorded good and bad daies according to the first cause giuen, whether it were good or bad, though in truth none were more superstiti∣ous than the Romanes, neither had such cause offered to note these daies because their ouerthrowes were great, and their victories far greater. Manfredus the Sonne of Fredericus the second, and tutor to Conradinus his brothers sonne, was slaine in a battaile at Beneuentum on this day by Carolus the French king, 1126. Iohanna Borbania Queene of France, and the wife of Charles the fifth died on this day, 1378. and afeer within three daies hir daughter called Isabella died also,Pantal. lib. 2. which doubled the griefe of the king. Beorgor king of Alania was on this day slaine and found dead at the foote of Bergome a mountaine so called, 473. As vpon this day Pelagius the second of that name bishop of Rome died of the plague at Rome, after whom succeeded Gregorius surnamed the great, this was the last of 92 bishops that raigned in Rome, then followed the race of Popes from Bonifacius the third, which was the 63. bishop & the first pope of Rome vntill Gregorius which was the 13 Pope, 166. Eusebius a Greeke borne, bishop of Rome, was vpon this day,Volat. 310. made martire for Christ Iesus vnder Maxentius the Emperour.
The 7 Day.
The eight Day. The 9 Day.
The tenth Day.
The 11 Day..
a part of Africa in consideration of this peace, for  Rome with al hir pompe and dignitie became to decline, and the king∣domes in Germany began to florish, and within a short time af∣ter to challenge the Empire. Elizabeth wife to Henry the seauenth king of England di∣ed as on this day in London by childbirth, 1503.Lal. Gregorius the second, pope of Rome died on this day, 731. he defended Images,Platina. and extolled them to the highest honor in spite of Leo the Emperour, for then Popes made Emperors sometime without the leaue of the electors. The 12 Day. ANdronichus Palaeologus the Emperour died on this day,Pant. lib. 2 1330. Leo the ninth was elected pope in Rome being be∣fore the ,Sabel. and now sent to Rome by Henricus the third, then Emperour, 1049. to bee chosen pope. Iageslo duke of Liuania,Chroni. lib. 14. afterward called Vladislaus was crowned king of Poland on this day in Craconia the chiefest cittie in Polonia, 1386. Iane the daughter of the duke of Suffolke was maried to Gilford Dudley the duke of Northumberlands some.Sleid. 14. Io. Fox. & was named and pronounced Queene of England, and therefore on this day was beheaded in the tower at London, 1554. Religion was changed in Basil in Germanie by the perswa∣sion of Io. Occolampadius learned and a Godly deuine, 1529.Sled. In Italie on this day he ayres called Nundine nucerien∣ses are kept which endure for 15. dayesStella de Nun▪
Dionisia a maide of Alexandria was persecuted and be∣headed for the Gospel,Pant. lib. 2 as Eusebius saith. Also Sosanna and Eulalia two other  of Alexandria died martrs on this day,Lib. 6. 262. The 13 Daie. THe Romanes in times past vpon this day with great so∣lemnities verie deuoutlie sacrificed vnto their god Fau∣nus, to whom they dedicated their plaies Lupercalia, and also on this day they builded a temple vnto Iupiter hard by the riuer Tiber. Noe the third time did let a doue from the arke,Gen. 8. which re∣turned not to the arke againe. Upon this day the citie of Rome was by Camillus deliue∣red from the French men who tooke hir and possessed her for 7. moneths as Plutarch in Camillus life reporteth, though some attribute it to the third of . 300. Romane gentlemen of one name, and of one house, called Fabij, in the warres betweene the Romanes and the Ueintes by the riuer Allia, were slaine euerie one sauing one Fabius, from whom Fabius Maximus a most noble va∣liant Romane issued▪Pantal. lib. 2. this battail was, 276. yeares after the building of Rome: the  Camillus the Dictator appointed to graunt them ence to fight this battal▪ Some referr this ouerthrow of 300 Fabians to the 16. of Iu∣lie, as Plutarch affirmeth the like is read betweene 300. L∣cedempnians and 300 Arguis. Lu. Papyr. Cursor then Consull at Rome, triumphed ouer the , and as this Consul gaue diuers ouerthrowes to the gaue as many to the Ro∣manes during the time of 50. yeres. in the which time the Ro∣mans got 24. victories, and euerie victorie a triumph, 460. Carolus the third, king of Vgaria was on this day mur∣thered, with many other in the castle of Budensis, 1388, Bela,Bonf. dec. 2. lib. 6. the 2▪ king of Ugaria who was blind and much giuen to dronkennesse, died as on this day.
Balduinus king of Hierusalem died also as vpon this day,Guil. Tyr. 19. Cap. 34. hauing raigned 24. yeares. The Heluetians with an armie on this day marched to He∣gouia & ouerthrew 0. strong castles & holds and burned them 1499.Munst. The 14 Daie. AMong the Romans this day was counted a dismal day,Gel. lib. 3. for they beleeued that diuers kind of sprites walked abroad that night, and therefore they vsed as the papistes were wont to do, to sprinkle holie water about their houses. Much like to Leca∣nomantia a solemnitie of diuination among the old Airians by water put in a basen where after many superstitious words spoken certaine spirites entred into the basen, and thereby a whispering noise signified things to come. Henricus the 2. K. of Fraunce being deliuered from concluded peace with Charles the fifth emperour 1526.Frond. lib. 3. Henricus the 2. surnamed Claudius was created of Rome, as Aentinus saith, but Onophrius the, 26▪ of Aprill 1014. Gisela the empresse and wife to Conradus the Emperour,Cusp. and mother to Henricus the 3▪ Emperour lineally discending from Charles the great and first of that name died at Spire, 1043. In Seuia by atowne called  a great battaile where both Arnolphus and Hermannus prince of were lae by Albertus their vncle,Beuth. and Theobaldus his bro∣ther. 953. Peace was concluded betweene the Athenians and the La∣cedemoniansThucid. ▪ vpon this day for 30. yeares, called ricenal inducias, in the 8. yeare of the . The 15. daie THE Romanes were woonte to celebrate the feast
The 16 Day. IOuianus the 43 emperor of Rome, being in the East coun∣trie in the warres,Eutrop. 10 hist. trib. as hee tooke his voyage towards Illyria, he died suddenlie in the borders of Galacia, as vpon this daye: he was a very good prince, and a great fauourer of the Christi∣ans, and did much good, while hee raigned Emperour in the Empire. Fredericus the Emperour, with the consent of all the Elec∣tors of Germanie, made his sonne Maximilianus his fellow in the Empire at Frankeford. Phil. Melancthon a famous learned man,Pantal. lib. 2. and the verie or∣nament of all Germanie, was vpon this day borne, in a towne called Bretta, 1497. Upon this day fell such a terrible tempest in Frisland, that many townes and villages were ouerthrowne and drowned,Munst. 1230. The 17 Daie. AS vpon this daye, the feast called Parentalia in Rome was celebrated with great solemnitie. In this feast they vsed to bring beanes, pulses, wafers, and drye figges, and to lay them vpon a bare flint stone, at the graue of their dead parents, and vpon the graue to ffer sacrifice to the infernall gods with beanes:Cal. Rom. and after many ceremonies doone, they sit round about the graue of the dead, their banquet being laid vpon a flint stone, as I said, at what time they make their feast, much like to the sacrifice doone at the feast, which is solemnized in Maye called Lemu∣ralia. Also they vsed on this daye, to seale vp the court house, and seats of iudgement. Charles the fift, emperour, after he had ten moneths besie∣ged Rome, departed towards Naples, at what time the most part of his armie were lost,Frontsp. lib. 8. 1528. Charles duke of Burbone, a prince of haughtie courage,
was borne on this daie,Eberus. 1489. who after many victories woon was at the besieging of the citie of Rome slaine, 1527. The sixt synod vniuersall of 150 bishops, was had at Con∣stantinople against those that affirmed that our SauiourMar. scot. Christ had but vnam voluntatē & operationem, 676. The 18 Day. THe feast called Quirinalia on this daye was solemnly celebrated in Rome, in this feast it was lawfull for tum∣blers and gesters, to vse any game, plaie, or other pa∣stime, and lawfull for anye person to inuent and to vse scoffes or any other mirhe, and therefore it was called Festum stultorum, where the Poets might vse on the Theators, anie flouing rimes, or any kinde of scurlitie in their verses. The Romans also on this day celebrated a feast called For∣acalia, appointed by Numa Pomp. in the which feast the peo∣ple were taught to doo sacrifice to Fornax, with new cakes made onely of dried meale, salt, and water, like vnto the Greci∣ans sacrifice, which was of Barlie floure and honie, their cakes were called Liba, for during the whole time of Numa, which was 43 yeares,Cal. Rom. the Temple of Ianus was not once opened, they liued so in peace and quietnesse in Rome, that they studied nothing but far feasts, plaies, banquets, and sacrifices to their gods. The number of these feasts and sacrifices by Numa in∣stituted, are in Macrob. Plut. and others mentioned, for these 3 feasts, Fornacalia, Palilia & Laralia, were popular feasts. On this day in Rome triumphed many Romanes ouer for∣ren enemies for victories atchieued:Li. first Marcus Pompilius Consul of Rome, triumphed solemnly ouer the Frenchmen, af∣ter the building of Rome▪ 403. Lucius Fuluius surnamed Coruus, triumphed with great honour ouer the Samnits 431,Pantal. & Plut. and in the same selfe daye tri∣umped Q. Fab. Maximus ouer the Samnites & the Apulians. And in the yeare 477. Q. Fabius, surnamed Gurges, being the 2. time Consul in Rome, triumphed with pompe and solem∣nitie
ouer the Samnits, Lucanians, and the Britaines. These triumphes, you must vnderstand that the pompe and solemni∣tie of their triumphes were such, as it were large to describe them particularlie: how some had carried before them in their Ensignes painted, and set foorth in tables the names of the townes and citties which they subdued, with their proportion and forme. Some had the likenesse of those mountaines and of those riuers which were in the countries that they conque∣red, painted and set foorth in like order, and carried before them in the triumphe: so that all things which were subdued by the Conqueror, were carried most solemnelye before their trium∣phant charriot, for the setting foorth of the dignitie of the tri∣umph: and those things which could not bee remooued, as mountaines, hilles, riuers, townes, Citties, woods, and such like, they were painted as I said, and set foorth with all braue∣rie in the Ensignes of the Conquerour, in like forme and shape as they were builded and situated in those Countries where they stood. C. Claudius, surnamed Caninus, 2.Pantal. lib. 2. Consul of Rome, trium∣phed ouer the Samnits and the Lucanes, 480. Lu. Aniti. Gallus, on this day subdued Gentius king of Il∣lyria,Eutrop. and with great glorye triumphed ouer him and ouer the Illyrians, 586. Hierusalem was deliuered vp to Fredericus the second, em∣perour,Auent. by letters receiued of the Solda of Egipt, 1219. Martin Luther dyed at Islebia a towne where hee was borne,Vuil. Tyr. being 63 yeares of age, 1546. The 19 Daie. AMong the Romanes was a feast which they called Cha∣ristia festa, which was celebrated onely betweene fami∣lies and kindred of an house or stocke,Eber. one saluting an∣other with rewardes and presents, no stranger might be in this feast. Clodius Albinus, which made himselfe to bee proclaimed
emperour of Rome in France,Eutrop. 8. was by Septimius-Seuerus sub∣dued and taken, his armie ouerthrowne, and himselfe with all his family slain, as on this day, at Lugdunum which is Lions, 203. On this day were three kings bodies which had beene bu∣ried before most solemnly,Io. Naucl. brought to Colonia, and there bu∣ried againe, 1178. Franciscus Duke of Guise, was slaine on this day by Iohn Poltrotto at the siege of Aurelia, and therefore was drawne in peeces by Horsses at Paris: some say this fact was doone on the 18 of Februarie, 1563. Upon this day died Sabinianus the 62. and last Bishop of Rome, for after him next Bonifacius the third was made the first pope after 62. Bishops: at what time papacie began in Rome,Volat. Funct. together with the kingdome of the Sarazens, of popes heereafter I will make no mention, with this farewell, that from Gregorie the great, the last pope of Rome, being in num∣ber 62▪ vntill Gregorie the 13. raigned 166. popes. The 20 Daie. ON this day beginneth the moneth Adar, which with the Iewes is the twelfth moneth: on which moneth the Prophet Ezechiel cried out vpon the Iewes,Ezech. 32. and prophecied vnto them the calamitie and miserie following. Lu. Aemilius Regillus triumphed ouer Antiochus thePlutar. great king of Siria by sea, after the building of Rome, 564. Marcus Fuluius the nobler, proconsul of Rome, triumphed ouer the Aetolians, Ambrocians and the Cephalenians with great pompe, 566. C. Sulpitius Gallus consul at Rome, triumphed on this daye ouer the Ligurians,Gltz. though not solemnized as one of the greatest triumphes, yet with the companie and meeting of the Senators and the Patricians, and the cheefe magistrates of the Cittie of Rome at Bellonas Temple, from thense they brought him to the Capitoll being carried in a Charriot, and
his Souldiers crowned with lawrell: this kinde of triumph as by the law appointed to any conquerour, that reserued the decree of the Senators, in their edictes made de triumphis. Charles the 5. was crowned as on this day king of Lumbar∣die in Bononia,Iou. 1530. Edward the 2. sonne to the first Edward borne at Carnar∣on married Isabel the French kinges daughter at Bulleine and were both crowned at Westminster as vppon this day, 1308. Aurelius Quintilius the 32. Emperour of Rome was slaine as on this day, within 17. daies after he was by consent of the Senate created Augustus after his brother Flauius Claudi∣us who raigned before him Emperour for twoyeares almost. Of these Emperours few or none haue their imperial funeral,Eutrop. which among the Romanes excelled in solemnitie and state of funerall pomp, such was the slaughter and murthering of em∣perours after they had first allowed 2. Caesars and one Augu∣stus, then 3. Caesars, and at last 4. Caesars. These many Caesars could not agree in one Empire, for Nulla regni fides socio, e∣uerie Caesar would be Augustus, and some Augustus would be Antoninus, vntil their empire was taken frō Rome into Cō∣stantinaple, for of 89. Emperours that raigned in Rome from Iulius Caesar to Constantine the sixt, you shall not reade of ten that died in their beds. Elizabeth the wife of Philip king of Fraunce died on this day, 1189.Pantal. lib. 2. Iames Steward king of Scotland was slaine through trea∣son by his owne subiectes as on this day,Bal. 8436. The Heluetians vanquished in a great battaill an armie of Austria at Hardt,Stumph. lib. 10. 1400. The 21 Day. IN Rome with the auncient Romans a feast was solemnized in this day called Vinalia, at what time they vsed by old cus∣tomes to ast their newe wines,vinalia. and to drinke their first drinke vnto Iupiter as the first founder and benefactor of their do∣ings.
There was another feast called Uinalia celebrated by the priestes called Flamines, at what time they gathered their grapes and hallowed the vines, then they caused a lamb to be sacrificed vnto Iupiter,vinalia ruflica. and at what time the new wine was carried by the priestes flamines into the temple of Venus after large feastings and drinking of seruants, and also of strangers, and clownes of the countrie, and therefore called Rustica vi∣nalia. The sacrifice which they vsed at this feast was called Meditrinalia vnto the goddesse Meditrina, these superstitious ceremonies grew in Rome from Numas time, for Romulus vsed no wine in sacrifice but milke mingled with honie, so the old Grecians when Pythagoras and Vlisses vsed to do sacri∣fice to Vrania with water and honie mingled. Another feast called Terminalia was celebrated in like sort at Rome, but of some referred to the seauenth Calendes of March. On this day Bonifacius the third was elected the first pope 606. years after that 63. bishops had vsed the seat by the names of bishops since the time of the Apostles.Platina. Guido king of Italie a marshall man was by pope Stee∣uen the 5.Onoph. of that name, crowned emperour of Rome vppon this day, 890. On this day the Christians ouerthrew an innumerable com∣panie of the Saracens at the riuer Pharsura 1097.Pant. lib. 2 lib. 2. Carolus Pulcher the 48. king of Fraunce, and the last be∣fore the house of Valloys came to the crowne of Fraunce, was as on this day crowned king of Fraunce, 1321. The 22 daie THe feast Terminalia was in Rome celebrated vnto Terminus the god of Confines. The Romans had a tē∣ple ioyntlie consecrated and dedicated to Faith, and to tearme, vnto whom they do sacrifice both publickly and
priuatelie vpon the limites of inheritance, and vppon the Con∣fines of borders. In old time they did sacrifice vnto Terminus with out anie bloud by the law of Numa, as Lycurgus in like sort commaunded the Spartans to do no sacrifice to the Gods with bloud but with hearbs,Plut. in Numa. fruites, corne, honie, milke, wine, which continued in Greece for a time, therefore Numa insti∣tuted that in this feast Terminalia such sacrifice and oblations should be done to Terminus, with synceritie and vprightnesse, without bloud, or murthering of any thing that had life, as to him that was witnes of their limits, confines and bondes, and as a keeper of peace, and a Iudge of Iustice. On this day being with the Iewes the third day of their moneth Adar, the citie of Hierusalem being hetherto letted & hindered by the Samaritans, was with great ioy of the people after their captiuitie in Babilon for seauentie yeares,Ioseph. lib. 2. cap. 4 now a∣gaine by Zorobabell, Nehemias, and Esdras licenced with full authoritie of Darius king of Persea to be builded. Martin Luther as on this daye as Melancthon saith, was caried from Islebis to Whittenberge to be buried. Petrus Toletanus Uiceroy of Naples laying siege to Se∣na, died as on this day at Florentia a cittie of Italie. The 23 Daie. TArquinius Superbus, the seauenth and last king of the Romanes, was driuen out of Rome by Iu Bru∣tus, 220. yeares after the building of Rome, after which time, this day was named Regifugium. Plut. Bruto in Ouid pleasantlie noteth this day in these verses. Nunc mihi dicenda Regis fuga, &c. Iustinianus in the second yeare of his raigne beganne to reedifye the great Temple of Constantinople being throwen flat to the ground by an earthquake,Cedreun. 531.
Ladislaus surnamed Posthumus, the sonne of Albertus the second, emperour, was borne as vpon this day, 1440. and after was crowned king of Hungaria, and Bohemia. In the moneth Mechir, which is Februarie, in Egipt they vsed to celebrate the ceremonies of Isis, whose Image among the Egyptians is set foorth with a goulden cup in hir right hand, and in hir left a key: hir sacrifice sometime is pefourmed by young virgins in the night time, at what time Isis priestes were clothed in white linnen verie sad and mournful,The cere∣monies of Isis. wandring vp and downe the cittie before they solemnized the sacrifice of Isis, but all hir priestes after this mourning in the streets were verie iofull and glad to celebrate the sacrifice with pure deuo∣tions, and such ceremonies, as one doth come like a hunter with a hunting staffe in his hand, an other like a souldier cum balteo, another in a long gowne like a woman cum stola, others with white long roddes like officers going before the Idols, others of hir priestes with strange visers on their faces,Genial. lib. 6. cap. 8. and withdiuers kindes of strange garments were going solemnizing hir sacri∣fice. About the Idole were women apparrelled all white, some with glasses going before, and some with combes comming af∣ter the Idol, some with lampes and lights carried in most cere∣moniall sort, with songes and musicke according to the Egyp∣tians manners. The Grecans in like sort had in this moneth many ceremo∣nies in euerie citty of theirs, for there was no meeting of states, no consultation of warres, nor no councell taken, but where sacrifice were appointed first to be solemnized as in Ionia they meete in the temple of Pallas where all Boetia assembled, and after feasting and sacrifice celebrated, which was called Pam∣boetia sacra, they consulted of the state of their countrie. In Trozene euerie yeare the Iudges called Amphictions, which were the general iudges of all Greece meete in the temple of Nepune where 7. cittes assembled, Athens, Aegina, Nauplia, Epidaurus, and the rest, to consult and to conferre in councell and matter of states, but after solemne sacrifice to their gods, not omitting on iot of their ceremonies, in so much that in some sacrifice they thought the blood of beastes could not please the gods, and therefore they would often goe into a wood called
silua sacra, where a quicke man was solemnly slaine and sacri∣ficed. This kinde of cruell sacrifice was doone to Saturne, to Mars and to Bacchus, so often as they were by oracles war∣ned, so superstitious to their gods were the Heathens, that they spared not their owne liues to please their Idols. The 24 Day. THis day is Dies intercalaris, for the yeare which conameth 365 dayes and sixe houres, besides some odde : of these sixe houres, euery fourth yeare one naturall daye is heere intercalenderd: for in olde time with the Romaines, ten mo∣neths were counted for a whole yeare, vntill Numa Pompi∣lius the second king of Rome added these moneths, Ianuarie and Februarie, of these moneths I write more at large in other places. Lu. Cornelius Lentulus, surnamed Caudinus, Consul of Rome, as on this daye triumphed solemnlie ouer the Liguri∣ans, 516 yeares after Rome was builded, and was by Sena∣tors accompanied to the Capitoll, and was by the Magistrates presented with presents,Of the Atheniās. according to the custome and manner of some triumphes which was obserued in Greece among the Athenians, when any Generall or great Magistrate of Athens had vanquished the enemies, and had gotten victorie, at his re∣turne all the cheefe states of Athens in their seuerall degrees, being cloathed in theyr most sumptuous and riche garments, should meete the Conquerour out of the Cittie of Athens, car∣rying before them,Of the Grecians all their Idols and Images of their gods, with all other relikes and monuments of Athens, to set foorth the dignitie of the triumphe: for among the Gretians, the dig∣nitie of their triumphes were most in the  of Garlandes and Crownes, wherewith the Captaines and the Orators were most solemnlye crowned with all manner of solemnitie, vpon any great victorie gotten,Genia. lib. 4 cap. 8. they had their slatues and tro∣phes erected vp in Ceramicus a place hard by Athens, where the Images of their gods, and the statues of their cheefe Cap∣taines and magistrates were put vp.
C. Dulcius Nepos Consul of Rome, first triumphed by sea ouer the Sicilians,Liuius. and after he had a solemne triumphe gran∣ted him ouer the Carthaginans, 493. M. Claudius Marcellus, triumphed in the Cittie of Rome with great pompe ouer the Frenchmen, and ouer the Liguri∣ans, of whose diuerse triumphes mention is made often of the order and manner thereof. These daies being called Intercalares dies, when Marcellus triumphed, might be by the authors of these histories taken for the whole moneth, for that before that Iulius Caesar had redu∣ced vnto this order of intercalation the yeare, the Romanes fol∣lowed the Greekes in their intercalation. This triumph is with the greatest pompe solemnized, and the greatest glorie finished, that it was counted one of the roialest and greatest triumphes, which if I should set foorth the dignitie, with the solemnitie and pompe thereof, I should be tedious, howbeit I haue set diuerse triumphes downe in order and manner as they were solemni∣zed, by the which you may proportion these last triumphes, by the dignitie of the other triumphes so set foorth, and yet some triumphes farre exceeded others, according to the greatnesse of the victorie, as the victories of Claud. Marcellus excelled much L. Cornelius and Nepos triumphes. Carolus the fourth, emperour, dyed on this daye at Praga, in the 33. yeare of his raigne, 1379. Auent.Auent. referreth it to the 26. of Nouember. Carolus the sixt, was on this daye borne at Gandanum in Flaunders, at three of the clocke in the morning, 1500: which daye the Germaines for a long time celebrated as a fortunate day, following the Romans vse, who in the memorie of their Emperours natiuities, solemnized games and playes, as is mentioned vpon their dayes. Frances the second king of Fraunce, was by Charles the fift taken, and his army ouerthrowne, to the number of 20000 slaine,Fnct. and the king himselfe taken, at Ticinum, as Pau. Iouius affirmeth, yet Functius saith in his table, that he was at Pauia taken, 1525.
Ferdinandus archduke of Austria,Muste. 3. was crowned king of Bo∣hemia, as vpon this daye at Praga, 1527. Charles the fift was on the same daye that hee was borne created Emperour of Germanie in Bohemia,Paul. Ioui. by Clement the seauenth of that name, Pope of Rome, 1530. Charles the fift, after hee had resigned the Empire to his brother Ferdinandus, who by the consent of the Electors was most solemnly crowned Emperor at Frankeford,Lu. Sur. and receiued into the Empire with great pompe and roialty, by al the states of Germanie while yet Charles the fift liued, who shortlye af∣ter dyed, and was with great funeral pompe buried at Angu∣sta, by his brother Ferdinandus, 1559. The 25 Day. THe feasts called Bachanalia and Dionisia were so∣lmnly on this day at Rome celebrated, banqueting and feasting in houses of neighbours, dauncing and leaping in streetes, mirth and plaies euerie where, the one in the honour of Bacchus, the other in the honour of Appollo.Nouid. 2. Fast. The feast Bacchanalia is mencioned & set forth at large in diuers other places, for that this feast was euerye where solemnized. This daye was amongst the Egyptians, in the Booke of the Priests at Memphis recorded and named Aegiptiacus dies. Aurelius Antonius, was adopted by Adrianus the Empe∣rour, heire to the Empire,Pantal. lib. 2. and tooke presentlie on him the office of Tribunus militaris. Annius Verus, and Aelius Adrianus, bothe Emperours of Rome, were adopted by Antonius Pius, as heires to the Em∣pire. Geta being Caesar, was by his owne brother Antonius (af∣ter Emperor) on his mothers lappe slaine: Principatus nos admittit socios, Hrodian. 213.
The 26 Daie. _ The 27 Daie.
The 28. daie
stow it vpon the Romanes, I wil here promise and vow before your deuine maiesties to erect you vp altars, to build vp tem∣ples, to make you publicke games and plaies, with all wor∣ship honor and reuerence, which shall be celebrated with feasts and sacrifices, with all solemne pompe and glorie in Circoma∣ximo at Rome after victorie had, So likewise they vowed for the countrie, for the health and sauegard of the people, and for taking away any plague, , or any other extreme perill or danger,Macrob. lib. 3. cap. 4. they vowed and promised with all faith to perfourme these plaies called Votiur Iudi, and therefore great examinati∣ons and search was made of the bishops, by whom the licence and aucthority of these plaies were first graunted, least thinges extra vota should be found vnperfourmed, which the Romanes tooke to be a sacrilige, for of all other thinges they perfourmed their vowes to their gods, whether it were in feastes plaies, or sacrifice. Also in Rome as on this day were much vnseemly mirth with plaies and games most riotously feasting and banqueting called their Carnifex,Nond. 2. daies vsed in Uenice and in many other citties of Italie. On this day Iunius Brutus the first Consull of Rome after the kings were exiled fighting hand to hand in armes with A∣runtius Torquinius Superbus sonne, killed one another, at what time the Citisens and matrons of Rome mourned and lamented his death,Liui. at what time Torquine the proud with all his friends and aide of Hetruria had the last ouerthrow 246 Lu Scipio surnamed Asiaticus for his great victorie ouer Antiochus the great triumphed most solemnlie with great pompe in the cittie of Rome out of Asia, and therefore was na∣med Scipio Asiaticus,Orosius 4. cap. 20. as his brother was by subduing of Ha∣niball called Africanus, 564. Carolus the 7. of that name, king of Fraunce was borne on this day, 142. Heraclius the 75.Prosop. Pantal. Emperor of Rome (from Iulius Caesar) died at Constantinople as vpon this day, 638. Hildegardus the wife of Charles the great, and first of that name king of Fraunce, and also the first Emperour of Ger∣manie died on this day 783. but Melanc. saith the last of April.
Francicus the second of that name king of Fraunce was as on this day borne in Ambrosia, 1517. this was son to Hen∣rie the first who was father to the king of Fraunce. Fridericus the seacond had a great ouerthrow at Parma 1248. at what time the towne was also burned. The names of the noble Romanes which triumphed within this moneth of Februarie. M. Valer. Coruus, Tit. Coruncanus, Fab. Pictor, Q. Fab. maximus, L. Aemil Regulus, L. Cor. Dolabella Iunius Pera, L. Papyrius, M. Popil. Lenas, L. Ful. Coruus, Q. Fab. ax. Rullianus. Q. Fa. Max. Gurges. C. Claud. Caninus, L. Anicius Gallus. L. Aemyl. Regillus. M. Fuls nobilior, Ca. Sulp. Gallus, C. Duc. Nepos, L. Cornel. Lentulus, M. Claudius Marlus, Scipio Asiaticus. The names of the feastes and sacrifices done at Rome du∣ring this moneth Februarie called Scebat with the Iewes, with the Athenians Elaphoboleon, Elaphebelea, Lupercalia, Parentalla, Quirinalia, Fornacalia, Charistia, Terminalia, Vinalia, Bachanalia, Taurilia, Equiria. The names of the games and plaies which were at Rome, together with their triumphes and feastes solemnized. Ludi Gothici, Ludi Geniales, Ludi Apollinares, Ludi Votini. Mensis Februaij inis.
Of the moneth of March, which with the Iewes is called Adar the tenth moneth, with the Athenians called Munichion the 8. moneth, and with the Aegiptians Pharmnoth their 7. moneth. The 1. Day VPpon this day the Romanes began their yeare, euen from Romulus his time by the name of Annus Romuli, on which day the Senate had made a decree, that the altars in the temple of Vesta should bee consecra∣ted, new fire should be solemnlie set vp by Vestals virgins with greene Lawrell braunches, likewise in the howses of Flamines the priestes of Vesta, and in the house of the king called rex facroum, in the market place, and in the se∣nate house great solemnities of  ceremonies of fire,Macrob. 1 cap. 12. and of lawrell draunches with feastes and mirth, and especially the sacrifices of the priestes. Besides the Romanes kept a solemne feast called Consua∣lia in memorie of the 600. Sane virgins, who after they were violently rauished, by the councell of Romulus, war en∣sued, and they with one consent entred aked into the field be∣tweene the two armies, the one side being their fathers the o∣ther their husbands, and with tears entreated both parties and reconciled their husbands vnto their fathers, and their fathers vnto their husbands, this feast was called matronaa festa,Pantal. lib. 3. this day the women vsed to serue their seruants at supper, and the husbands presented their wiues with giftes, and therefore it is called of some  festa. This moneth in old time was first dedicated vnto Miner∣ua, & therefore they keepe a great feast called Quinquatria, at what time the Romanes kept the feast of Ancylia, when Salij
should daunce vp and downe the streetes of Rome,  in their hands small round Targats which fell from the aire in the time of Numa Pompilius,Plut. in Numa. singing and calling out vpon the end of euery verse, on the name of Mammuris, for it was he that had made that target Ancylia. This very day also, they vsed in Rome in the hill Exquili∣nus a solemne sacrifice vnto Iuno in hee owne Temple: vpon the which day, Iosephus saith that the  dedication of the tem∣ple at Ierusalem after the captiuitie of Babilon, was licenced and permitted by Daius. The Greekes held a solemne feast vnto Diana with great ceremonies and sacrifices called Munichia, on the which day it is supposed by some writers, that the third floud was in Achaa in Greece, which continued two moneths, and drowned all Helespont the next regions into Asia, when Ogyges gouerned Athens, and Bellochus in Ayria. On this daye diuers noble Romanes had their triumphes with great honour in Rome, as Pub. Valerius Publiola, the first Consul after the kings, who triumphed ouer Torquinius & his armie, and ouer the Vients, after the building of Rome 264. Also Lu. Cornelius Lentuus triumphed ouer the Samuits and Lucans with much solemnitie, after the building of Rome 476. So did Quintus Luctatius (being Consul) triumphe o∣uer the Phaliscans, 512. Lu. Silla, after he had subdued the most part of the Citties of Greece, he laid siege to Athens, tooke it,Plut. in Silla. and slue most cruel∣lie the cittizens on this day. Mar. Claudius Marcellus,Pantal. lib. 3. Consul of Rome, triumphed with great glorie on this day ouer the Germanes and French∣men, after Rome was builded, 537. Cai. Plautius Decianus, and Lu. Aemilius Mamertinus both Consuls of Rome, who had a solemne triumphe graun∣ted them by the Senators ouer the Prinernates, after the buil∣ding of Rome, 424. Lodowick the ninth of that name king of Fraunce, with his three sonnes, and with a great armie saled from Massilia into Affrica, against the Sarazens, ouer whom he had a great victo∣rie,
in the yeare of Christ▪ 1270. On this day Valerius Maximianus, was by Dioclesian the Emperour made Caesar, who for a time gouerned the em∣pire ioyntly, 290. Basilius Emperour of Constantinople died on this day, he was a poore man in the beginning, and after hee came to be a Chamberlaine to the emperour Michael,Onoph. whom this Basilius slew and after gouerned the Empire, 889. As on this day Franiscus Guisius sue in Vasseio a towne of France 200 Frenchmen for religion,Pant. lib. 3 in the church as they serued God, 1562. The 2 Day. AMongst the Romans the second day of March was counted a dismall day, which they called Ater dies, for the Romans as you heard, recorded their fortu∣nate dayes, according to the euents of fortune, and the actions of time. On this day a great battell was fought in Saxonia, at what time Albertus the Marquesse of Bandnburge was taken, and his armie vanquished by Iohn Fridercus one of the em∣pire,Sleid. 1547. The 3 Daie. AS on this day, the olde Romanes examined the numbers of the Snators, placing and displacing by the consent of the two Consuls, and the two  of the Souldiers, and of the people, where by they might haue Seatus legittimus. Carolus duke of Brgundie with all his armie, was ouer∣throwne in a great battell at Grasen by the Heluetians, on this day,umof. 8. 1476. Iohannes Fridericus Elector of Saxone, died 1554, and Leo the tenth of that name, a Florentine borne, was elected pope of Rme 1513, against this Pope Martin Luther began
to write and to set open the Church Rme to all men. Lycost. writes, that on this daye, little children came in to our Saiour Christ to bee touched, at what time hee rebuked the Desciples for the keeping backe of them. The 4 Daie. THis day among the Iewes was heauie and vnfortunate, for Hamon had gotten from the King Assuerus licence,13. of the moneth Adar. to kill all the Iewes within his dominions and prouinces, at what time Hester fasted for the Iewes, and great sorrow was made by Hester and her nephue Mardocheus, this  ste Iudeo∣rum festum, but this sad daye was turned into a yfull day, as you shall reade in another place. Iudas Machabeus also made this day among the Iewes to be recorded most fortunate, for he slew the great armie of Antiochus, and the great blasphmer Nicanor Antochus generall, and hanged vp both his wicked hands which he held vp against the Temple, and also his blasphemous  on the walles of Hierusalem before the Temple of Salomon: reade this historie in the second booke and last Chapter of the Ma∣chabes. Au Manlius Torquatus surnamed Aticus, at what time he was Consul at Rome, triumphed with great honour ouer the Phalisses after the building of Rome. 512.Plutar. As on this day Iehoakin King of Iuda, after he had beene carried capte with diuers of his nobles, among whome Da∣niel and his fellowes were also brought to Bailon he was de∣liuered out of prison by Euilmedorach king of Babilon after Nabuchodonosors death,Stumpf. and was princely entertained with roiall garments, and sitting at the Kings table all the dayes of his life. Some thinke that vpon this day was the resurrection of our Sauiour Christ Iesus. The 5 Day. AS on this day the Iewes held a ioyfull feast called Festum sortium, appointed by Mardocheus in memory of the suddē
alteration of their sadnesse and sorrowe, being all then appoin∣ted for the sworde by the meanes of Hamon, and now conuer∣ted into ioye and solace, for the escaping of their present dan∣ger, at what time the Iewes slew 75000 Pagans and Hea∣thens, which were apointed in armes to destroie the Iews, were woont to feast vpon this day in their church, and when they heard of Hamons name, Scamna pugnis & malleis pul∣sant Reade the historie of Hester. 9. Likewise vpon this day in the Cittie of Rome, the old Ro∣manes celebrated with great solemnitie sacrifice to the God∣desse Isis,Cal. Rom. in memorie of their often prosperous sayling, called Nauigium Lu. Papyrius, at what time he was dictator of Rome, trium∣phed ouer the Samnits with great pompe and glorie into Rome, 429.Pantal. lib. 3. And after him Caius Papyrius maso Consul of Rome, most solemnlye triumphed from mount Albanus into Rome, ouer the people called Corses, 522. C. Fabricius Luscinius being Consul at Rome, had a tri∣umphe graunted him by the Senators, with much pompe and honor ouer the Lucanes, Brutianes, and also ouer the Sam∣nits, at one time, 471 yeares after the building of Rome. Of this great triumph Liui speaketh of. Likewise on this daye triumphed Lucius Aemilius Papus (then Consul of Rome) ouer the Frenchmen, 528 years after the building of the Cittie of Rome. And Cmanlius being then Poconsul of Rome, triumphed ouer the Frenchmen in Asia, so that vpo this day, at sundrie seuerall times, fiue so∣lemne great triumphes were kept and solemnized in the Cittie of Rome. A great oer throw was giuen vpon this daye to the Sara∣zns,Pantal. lib. 3. at the one called Nicea by the Christians, 1097. Odoacer who made himselfe king of Italie, after the Em∣pire fell from Rome,Pantal. lib. 3. was vanquished and slaine in his owne house, by Theodoricus King of the Gotes, at Rauena, 492. Fredericus the first of that name, was as vpon this daye elected Emperour of Germanie, and crowned at Frankeforde, 1152.
Heleonora sister to Charles the fifth,Pant. lb. 3 left window after the death of the king of Lusitania, was mared to Francis of Va∣loyes the 57. king of Faunce, and was crowned Queene of Fraunce in the church of Saint Denis at Paris 1531. Georgius the third of that name was made Pope of Rome vpon this day, 731. This Pope entised the Frenchmen to warre vppon the Greekes and Longobardes for abolishing of Idoles.Onoph. The 6. Day THe old auncient Greekes do celebrate a great solemne feast in memorie of Theseus, who imbarked on this day from Athens into Creet with the tribute of 7. yong men and seauen yong virgins, according to the lawe of king Minoes alotted to the tribute money,Eutrop. lib. 7. he offered vp a sacrifice called Hiceteria in the temple called Delphinion vpon the 6. of March which was an oliue bough hallowed and wreathed a∣bout with white wooll, at what day the Greekes were wont to send their young girles to the same temple where Theseus of∣fered Hicetaria, to make their praiers and petitions to the goddesse Venus to bee their guide, to whom they sacrificed a goat. Antonius surnamed Pius for his lenitie and curtisie beeing Emperour of Rome died of a feuer vpon this day at a Manor place of his owne called Lorium 12, miles distant from Rome when he had liued 73. yeares, yet Mar. Scotus referreth it to the 31. of October, but he erreth often both in the daies and yeares. The Iewes do celebrate on this day a great solemne feast called Purim in memorie of their victorie had against the hea∣thens,Hester 9. and for ioy of their deliuerance from the conspiracie of Hamon. Augustus Caesar vppon this day in the fifteenth yeare of his raigne tooke vpon him the office of the high bishop called Pon∣tifex Maximus.
The 7 Daie. THe starre called Corona falleth in the west in the morning, and the starre Pegasus riseth. In Rome with the auncient Romanes great solemnicie of ceremonis and sacrifices were had vppon this day, and cele∣brated in the honor of Iuno,Pantal. lib. 3. whose statelie feast was called of the Matrons of Rome Iunonalia festa, at what time they vsed to do sacrifice in the temple of Iupiter. Sordisci a people in Thracia were went in the moneth of Marchoill those souldiers whom they tooke in the warres, and to make sacrifice of their flesh to god Mars, and to make a drinking cuppe of the sculles of their heads, whereinto the Tiacians powred the bloud of the souldiers,Sexi. Ruf. Ept. and made ther∣of an oblation of sacrifice vnto their gods with the one halfe, the other they dranch it mingled with water. Upon this day in the 28 of his raigne died that noble empe∣rour Traiane at Seleucia a towne of Isauria of the flix, as he returned from Persides, whose bones were set vnder a sump∣tuous piller which was of a 144.Eutrop. 8. foot high. All the Deuines, and all the Phisitions of Rome did vse as vppon this day to meet together in the Temple of Minerua where a solemne oration was made in memorie of Thomas A∣quinas, this is called in Nouidius the fourth booke Docto∣rum feriae. Phocas Liuetenant ouer the armies of Constantinus the 9. of that name did vpon this day wine the strongest cittie of Creete named Caudax.Cedr. This Phocas was elected after Em∣perour of Greece, 950. The 8 daie THis was also a dismall day compted among the Romanes. The Sea birds bigin on this day to appeare, according to the Rules of Ptolom.
Fridericus the 3. of that name entred into the citie of Rome with pompe and great honor as vpon this day to bee crowned Emperour,Cusp. and to bee married with Heleonora daughter to the king of Lusiania, 1452. Philippus Barbarossa was elected king of the Romanes against Otto, who was before preferred by his friendes, and now against his friends and against his owne force this Philip was chosen king, 1199. Upon this day Gualtherus Sensaueir a noble captaine pas∣sed with a great armie of Christians and entred into Constan∣tinople,Tyr. lib. 1. cap. 21. and from thence tooke his armie towards Ierusalem, to deliuer the cittie from the tirannie of the Saracens, which then were strong in all Asia and Africa, 1696. The 9 Daie. VPon this day they were wont in Rome in old time to bring in Uiolets & all sweet flowers, at what time the Senators gaue to euerie one are warde, and then a great feast was made called Pub. eulum in the temples of S. Franciscus, where a so∣lemneNouid. 4. oration was made in the praise of this Saint, and the cu∣stome of that time, much like to the rewards which the old Gre∣cians were wont to giue to their Generall or Lieutenant, who hauing obtained the battaile, and put the enemie to flight, was rewarded with a monument either in brasse or in marble, with the title of his prowesse & marshall feats called Tropheū. Likewise the feast called Ancylia in memorie of Mamurius a most cunning workean, which wrought the like targets in Rome as the target of the Nimph Aegeria, which was giuen to Numa. This east was dedicated vnto Mamrius, to whom songs and odes were made,Plt. in Numa. and with great melodie and mith they were by Numas lawes to bee song in this feast, often re∣hearsing the name of Mamurius. Fortie gallant knights stoutly professed christianity vpon this day, who left both kinges, and emperours, wiues and children, and stood with the church of Christ, & were willingly vnder Zicinyus, 320, at what time Cyrillus the bishop bare thē companie at Sebasta.
Celestinus the second of that name, pope of Rome died as vpon this day, 1144. vnder this emperour florished Baliar∣dus a philosopher, who much withstood the christians with his subtill argumentes, and did much harme in the Church of God. The 10. daie THe Carthaginians were discomfited by sea at Lilibeum a cittie of Sicilia by Caius Luctatius then Consull at Rome, at which time fourteene thousand Africans were slaine, and 32. thousand taken prisoners, 518. yeare af∣ter the building of Rome, and as both EutropiusEutrop. 2. and Liuie affirme, the suncke 125. shippes, and tooke 73. shippes, to the great praise of Caius Luctaius and Aulius Posthumius both then Consuls at Rome. Titus Manlius Torquatus a noble Romane triumphed vp∣pon this day with great honour ouer the Sardes, for by this time the magnificence and dignitie of triumphes grew to bee such that it excelled in pompe and brauerie, for a long time af∣ter the building of Rome during the time of their kinges, when the Romanes force were not such as it grewe shortlie after in the Consuls time, for in the first triumphs of kinges they v∣sed to goe on foote into the Cittie, the second time to ride on horsebacke, the third time carried in a chariot with two horses and after with four. After Camillus time the dignitie of a tri∣umph became such as it was not graunted to any, though the victorie deserued triumph, vnlesse hee had bin either Questor, Consull or Dictator, and also vnlesse he had vanquished the e∣nemie in the field and slaine 5000. of the enemies, vnlesse hee had deliuered his office into the handes of the Senators, and quieted the prouince of the enemies, for as the victories of the Romanes grew great, so the triumphes grew famous. On this day also Caius Flamineus Nepos with leaue and licence of the Senators had his triumph with pompe and so∣lemnitie to enter into the Cittie of Rome, and to passe with his
great spoile and treasures of the enemies carried in triumphe before him through the cittie into the Capitoll, where he solem∣nized Triumphale Epulum. Antoninus Heliogabulus, a wicked and a most cruell em∣perour of Rome, for his ouermuch tyrannie and bealinesse vsed in Rome towards all men, was slaine vpon this day with great reproche and shame, as bothe Plut. Pantal▪ and others affirme, 123. Ferdinandus the last Emperour of that name, was borne vpon this day in Medina,Pantal. lib. 3. a towne in the kingdome of Castilia, whose natiuitie was solemnized yearelie with those games and plaies called Ludi natility. Vladislaus King of Polonia,Chron. 11. dyed as on this day, 1333. Brixia a famous towne, was vpon this day yeelded to the state of Uenice, 1428, The 11 Day. THis day the Sunne entering into Aries, is taken to be the equinoctiall of the spring. The olde Greekes were woonte vpon this daye after Sunne setting, to vse certaine sacrifice to their gods for the preseruations of their citties, which after the Ro∣manes vsed to do the like: so both Greece and Rome were so superstitious to their gods, that none might contrary thē with∣out death, as Socrates and diuers other Philosophers dyd, as you may read in Plutarch. That to prophane the holie myste∣ries of the gods, was a sacriledge among all the Grecians, for so Alcibiades was accused that hee had offended against the goddesse Ceres and Proserpina, for that hee counterfetted in mockerie their holy misteries,Alcidia∣des accu∣sed. apparrelling himselfe in vesti∣ments and copes as the Priests of Ceres were woont to doe, with his torche bearer and verger before him, his fellow scor∣ners with him, all in long robes like religious priests, and sa∣cred ministers, in manifest contempt and derision of the holye ceremonies and mysteries of Emolpides, Alcibiades was for his contempt heerein condemned, and his goods confiscated,
beside a decree made, that all the religious priests and should in their temple before Proserpina banne and cursse Al∣cibiades. Heraclius the Emperour, in the 31. yeare of his gouerne∣ment died of the dropsie: this succeeded Phocas being thē Pre∣tor in Affrike for the Romanes, for when Phocas was slaine, the Souldiers made Heraclius Emperor: this restored Siria, Egipt, and Hierusalem to his Empire, 643. Scot. referreth this to the 28.Mar. scot. of Februarie. Lotharius the Saxon Emperour, waged battell vpon the Bohemians,Pant. lib. 3 at what time great slaughter was without victo∣rie to neither of them. Lu. Cornelius Scipio, then Consul at Rome, triumphed ouer the Sardinians and the Corsicanes,Plutar. at what time hee brought an exceeding riche spoile to Rome, 494. Albertus which was surnamed for his valiant acts of armes and great strength Achilles Germanicus, a singular Soul∣dier, being Marquesse of Brandenburge, died as vpon this day at Frankford.Pros. lib. 2. The 12 Day. AS vpon this day, in Rome they celebrated the my∣steries of Christ and his passion,Noid. with much deuoti∣on and great ceremonies, and withall they remem∣ber the holie lande in their feast. C. Flaminius, and Pub. Furius, both then Consuls at Rome, after much good seruice and victories woone, they tri∣umphed most solemnly ouer the Frenchmen & the Lugurians in Rome with great honour,Liuius. Plutar. after the building of Rome 530 yeares. Gregorius the last of that name, a little before the comming of the Pope yet in, was elected Bishop of Rome, a man of rare vertues, and of great learning, in so much that our Elders be∣gan to send their Children to schoole as vpon this daye where∣in he was consecrated Bishop of Rome, hee suffered death for Christ Iesus vnder Phocas, 604.
The 13 Daie. THe Romanes vsed great sacrifice and ceremonies vnto Iu∣piter the founder ad patron of their Capitol, for they vsed diuerse kindes of seruice at sundrie times to Iupiter, yeelding also to him diuerse surnames, as Staore, and Iupiter Olim∣pian, Iupiter Ammonius, &c. according to the place where he is most honoured. Also in Rome by the riuer Tiber, is the feast Equiria kept as before in Mars his field, for the Romans celebrate this feast in two places, in Mars his field, and at Tiber: but if the riuer Tiber be vp and ouerflowne,Nouid. i fast. then is Equiria kept in mounte Caelio. Mahomet the great Prophet of the Sarazens, died vpon this day, after he had for ten yeares poisoned with false doctrine all Arabia, and many places of Asia, who is to this time hono∣red amongst the Arabians and Sarazens as a great prophet, with solemne obsequies and sacrifice certaine daies of the yeare vpon his graue: whose principall feast was vpon euerye good friday, in contempt of the passion and death of our Sauiour Christ, he vseth all the pompe and glory that he can deuise vpon that day,Cael. lib. 1. de Sarace. though vpon euery friday, though the yeare he holdeth a solemne feast in memorie of his natiuitie, which was vpon a Friday, yet nothing in comparison of his other vpon good Fri∣day, the charges of that one feast surmounted all the other 52. feasts, 637. Alexander the sixt of that name Pope of Rome dranke of that cuppe which hee had prouided for an other, by the negli∣gence of his cup bearer, and so by this meanes dranke his owne poison, and died of it, after that he had beene pope for eleauen yeares. Rodolphus Duke of Sueuia,Gerard. Me. was nominated Emperour by diuers princes and Bishops of Germanie, against Henrie the fift of that name, who after raigned Emperour for twentie yeares, 1076.
The 14. Daie. AS vpon this daye appeareth the Stare called Aqua∣rius. On this day likewise Henricus surnamed Heintz, Sonne to Fredericke the Emperour, being King of Sardinia, and appointed Lieutenant ouer all Italie, dyed at Bononia, 1271. The 15 Daie. THis was called Mercatorum festum, the Marchants feasts, at what time in Rome all the Marchants did vse to meete in one place, euery man with some deuise of mirth, vsing often the name of Bacchus, and crying out of this world, Quinquatrus minuscula, which was the name that they gaue vnto this feast.Cal. Rom. Againe vpon this day another feast was celebrated at Rome which was called Geniale festum. This day the parents and their children carried their wine with their delicacies into the fields and therewith all kinde of mirthe and musicke, they ban∣queted and kept a solemne feast in the honour of Hymaenaeus the God of Mariage.Nouid. 3. C. Iulius Caesar the first Emperour and perpetuall Dic∣tator of Rome, vpon this daye, at their session houlden in their councell house, was slaine by Brutus and Cassius before the Senators, and also by some of them, where he 23 had deadly wounds, as Suetonius saith, there were 60 that conspired his death, and therefore this daye was in Rome called after Par∣ricidium: for after Iulius Caesar and Augustus time, such ambition grew dayly in Rome, that from ambition it grewe vnto tyrannie, that the emperor which was made to day should be marthred the net day, for so ye Romans vsed to chose their emperors, sometime at Rome by the Senators, sometime in
the field by the souldiers, but generallie by the sworde both in Rome and in the field. It was not so among the old Persians, for before Cyrus time none should be K. in Persea but one of the stocke of Achiminides, which name was common to all the kinges of Persea, for the kinges of Persea were all named Acheminides, as the Emperours of Rome were called Caesars. Marcus Valerius Corus did solemnlie triumph in Rome ouer the Calenes, and after that hee was created Consull for 24. yeares, for that he slew a French man that chalenged any of the Romane armie to a combate, whereby the Romanes got then the victorie, when Lu. Furius was generall of the Roman armie. Of this you shall read more in Eutrop. Manlius surnamed Valso a valiant Romane, entred into the citie of Rome,Liui. with great triumph ouer the Ueients after the building of Rome 279. Rome at this time had no warres far from the cittie, for that the Sabines, the Latens, the Fede∣nates, Thuscanes, Ueients, with manie other nations of their neighbours held the Romanes tacke. Uppon this day Valentinianus the Emperour was stran∣gled to death at Uienna through the treason of Arbogastus,Beuth. 391. Mizaus the second of that name king of Polande died vpon this day, as Functius affirmeth after he had raigned 10. years 1304. Calendaria festa which the old Lates vsed as on this day long after they were subdued by Tul. Hostilius, and made subiect vnto the Romanes, yet they reserued the lawes and customes of their countries and their old religiō to their coun∣trie gods, for in mount Alba they met in the temple of Iupiter to the number of 67. so manie at one time might celebrate the feast and offer sacrifice, for it was among the old Lates once euerie moneth, and therefore called Calendaria festa to this temple some brought cheese, some brought milke, some lambs, some brought honey, and the most part brought cakes, called Mola made of meale & salt, in this feast they sacrificed a bull vnto Iupiter, with the ceremonies thereunto belonging: after sacrifice and the feast done, they deuided this sacrificed bull be∣tweene
them and sent a pee of the fleash to euerie cittie and towne about them. The 10. daie AS on this day was celebrated the great and famous victory of the Greeks ouer the Persians nauie by sea at Salamina, at what time armed men were seene which did reach out their hands from the Ile of Egina towards the Grecian gallies al∣so songes were hard in the aire in the praise of Iacchus, and flames of fire were seene in the element, with many oe won∣ders which appeared towards the cittie Eleusin, of which Plu∣tarch menioneth,Plut. in Lsandro. this was one of the most glorious victories that euer the Greekes had chiefly gotten by the pollicie and cunning of Themistocles the Athenian. Upon the selfe same day, 77 yeares after this victorie, at Salamina by that noble Greeke▪ Themistocles the Cittie ofPant. lib. 3 & Plut. Athens was ouerthrowne and taken by Lisander the Spartan after he had scattered their Nauies at the riuer of Goes called Aegos Potamos. Tiberius Caesar the third, emperor of Rome, in the 23 yeare of his raigne, disceased in Campania with great reioysing of the Romanes vpon this daie, yet some saie that he died about Naples,Suet. in a village called Lucullana, in the 39. yeares of Christ. Lotarius Caesar, sonne to Lodowicke surnamed Pius, and emperour of Germanie,Funct. after his fathers death was made em∣perour, against whome Pipinus and Lodowike his brethre conspired, and gaue him vpon this day such a terrible battaile▪ that on both parties such slaughter was made, that all Fraunc was long weakened thereby. Upon this daye 1185,Hist. el. ac. dyed Baldinus the fourth of tha name King of Hierusalem, for verie greefe of the ciuill sediti¦on of that time within the cittie. Mar. Pomponius Mato, Consul then at Rome, triumphe ouer the Sardeis, and was solemnlie with great ioye receiue into Rome, 520 yeares after the building of the cittie, as
and others affirme vpon this daye. The cittie of Rome was taken now the fourth time by the Gothes,Pantal. lib. 3. at what time Iustinianus was emperour of Rome after the building thereof 1300. Pope Ioan the 14. of that name died, and Bonifacius the seuenth succeded him Pope of Rome vpon the same day,Volat. this Bonifacius was a cruell sacrilegious priest, for he robbed all the churches of Rome of all their gold and siluer, and fled with great abundance of treasure to Constantinople, 985. Uppon this day was Euripides the Greeke poet borne, and Vatablus & Tussanus 2,Beut. famous learned men, the one a rea∣der of the Hebrue tongue, the other of the greek tongue, died at Paris, 1547. This day was amongest the Romanes accompted a dismal day, woonder not that the Romanes had so manie vnfortunat and vnhappie daies, for they recorded all those daies to bee vnhappie, wherein they susteined great losses, by warres, or any harm, shame, or otherwise, and accompted those daies fe∣stiuals when any victorie was gotten, or any Countrie ouer∣throwen, at what time they vsed to triumph. The 17 Daie. AN vnhappie day this was accompted among the Romanes,Alex, li. 4 for they came to the temple of Berecynthia, the mother of the Gods, and there with eares, waing and weeping they sought to please their goddesse, and for to haue aid in their enterprises. Likewise in Rome vppon this day the youthes of the cittie, when they were 14. yeares of age kept solemnly their feast cal∣led Liberala, at what time those youngmen that were most wise and discreet should weare vppon them this day a gown as a gouernment of grauitie in token they should in time become graue and discreet Consuls to gouerne the Cittie, this feast Varro called Agonia.
Uppon this day M. Valerius Messala being then Consult at Rome brought his triumph most honourable from Africke to Rome, and with great pomp and honor triumphed ouer the A∣fricans and ouer Hiero king of Sicile, who in respect to bee pardoned,Entrop. 2. hee with the rest of his nobilitie gaue to the Ro∣manes 200. talents of siluer, and yeelding himselfe to Valeri∣us, and concluded peace with the Romanes 490. Mar. Aurelius Antonius the 24. Emperour of Rome after hee had raigned two yeares and 8.Eutrop. 8. moneths was slaine with his mother Semiamira in an vprore which the souldiers made. This was Antoninus Carocalla his sonne, as some supposed, 224. Euen so vppon this day Valentinianus Iunior the Em∣perour 3 of that name was slaine by secret treason of his friendes he was the sooner kild,Pantal. lib. 3. as Iustine saieth by one Maxi∣mus for his wife who is a passing faire woman 455. Solymanus Emperour of the Turke was horne vpon this day, 150, and died in Ungaria when he had raigned 48. yeares. Ferdinandus had the Empire resigned to him from his brother Charles the 5. who departed into Spaine with both his systers, Marie and Leonara, where he died in a monasrie, leauing the empire vnto his brother Ferdinandus, who vppon this day was crowned at Frankford as both Sabel and Fun. do affirme 1558. Fredericke the third of that name, with great solemnitie and pompe was crowned Emperour of Rome. 1451. The 18. Day THe sarre called Miluus appeareth vpon this day in the morning. Uppon the 18. of this moneth Munichyon, which is March, is the feast Adonia celebrated, in the which feast the women and yong Uirgins of Greece did set vp in diueers
places of their citties, in euery streete, in euery temple, images like dead corses, which they were woont to carrie at burials, there they presented their mournings and lamentations made at the funerals of the dead, with shriking and crying, and bea∣ting themselues with blubbering eyes,The east Adonia. and haling their heires in token of the sorrowe and greefe that the goddesse Venus made for the death of hir friend Adonis. Great sacrifice with ceremonies and solemnities were vpon this day in Rome to Gabriell the Archangell, as Nouidius saith, at which day the temple of Iunpiter Palatinus was bur∣ned with the bookes of Sibilla, which were by the commande∣ment of Numa Pompilius the second king of Rome, kepte with great care in the temple aforesaid of Iupiter. Euilmedorach king of Babilon, and sonne to Nabucho∣donozar, aduaunced Ioachim king of Iude, for that he by the Ieremie yeelded himselfe with all his court to him, and now in the 37.Masse. yeare of the aptiuitle of Babilon, he was set at libertie out of prison, and sat at he kings table with great fauour and honour all the dayes of oa∣chims life: some appileth this day to be the 27. of the twelfth moneth Opilius Macrinus emperour of Rome, was slame with his some named Dadimenus by the same selfe Souldiors,Mar▪ Sco. & Iustin. that created them both emperurs, after they raigned both one yeare and two monthes. Alexander Seurus whom the Romans named Caesar, and the whole Senate created Augustus, being but twelue yeares prince that fououred all good men, and emperor that fauoured the Christians, was slaine in Fraunce in a tumult that grew among the Souldiers vpon this day, yet Melancthon referreth it to the 28 of Iune, and Scotus to the 17 of December. Upon this day appeared a horible Comet with a long taile, which indured as Lycosthenes saith 8. weekes,Lycosth. after the which infinite were the number that died in euery part of Europe, by sicknesse which fell at that time. 1400.
The 19 Daie. IN ld auncient time by the Romans, a temple was builded on mount Coelio, and vpon this day dedicated vnto Miner∣ua, where they were woont once euery yeare, to celebrate a so∣lemne feast called Quinquatria which continued fiue daies in memory of the birth or Minerua,The feast Quin∣quatria. in this feast it was not lawfull for any man to drawe his sweard out of the sheath, in so much the Fencers called Gladiatores might by no meanes playe on the stage vpon this daye. Againe the children at Rome vpon this day kept their feast called Minerualia, not vnlike▪ to the feast Panathenea, which the Athenians were woont to cele∣brate to Menerua. In Rome likewise vpon this day was kept a great solemne∣tie among the Smithes and Carpenters,Nouid. 4. and other artificers, called Fabrorum erie. In Athens the feasts of Knights, at what time the yoong Knights of all Achia, should meete vpon this daye at Athens, and with great pompe and glorie they marched from the castl of Minerua into the temple of Iupiter, most solelie through the streetes,Cal. Vet. and there in the temple vsed sacrifice and returned to keepe their feast in the castle of Minerua. Upon this day Ioseph the sonne of Iacob after he was sold of his brethren into Egipt, where after much imprisonment he opend the dreame of king Pharao,Genes. 41. of the seauen fat  and of the seauen leane kine that did deuoure the fat kine, therefore aduaunced to be head gouernour and ruler once all Egipt. Phocion a noble Greeke, captaine of Athens, the sonne of Miltiades the worthy and glorious conquero of the famous battell at Marathon, this Phocion no lesse famous for diuerse victories then his father, after great seruice doone to his coun∣trie, was by his countrymen condemned to die, to gratifi Cassander king of Macedonia, who saught by all meaes the destruction of Phocion, he to auoide the vniust sentence of his
untriemen, and the furie and rage of Cassander, poisoned himselfe: but some say that hee was by others poisoned,Plutar. in Phon. but it was in Athens a reward appointed to any that resisted the re∣ligion of their gods. Gaudentius and Ioius friends and companions of Ho∣orius the emperour,Aug. lib. 18 De ciuita∣te Dei. ouerthrew all the supersticious temples at Charthage in Affrica, and burned their idols as vpon this day, 398. The great councell called Lateranense,Pantal. proso. where three hun∣dred Bishoppes gathered together, began vpon this daye, 1182. The 20 Daie. THe most glorious triumph of our sauiour Christ Iesus into Hierusalem, was as vpon this day, which triumph though it seemed contemptious to the Iewes, for that he was borne poore, and supposed to be a Carpenters sonne, and that he rode vpon an Asse,The glo∣rious tri∣umphe of Ch. Iesus into Ieru∣salem. a simple silie beast, with∣out any pompe or triumphe which the Iewes expected to haue in their king that should be, but these vaine people were much deceiued, for this triumph onely excelled farre all the vaine so∣lemnities and regall pompe, either of Xerxes triumph into Greece, or of Alexander the great into Babilon, for as the victorie of this triumphant king did much exceed all their vic∣tories being made one, so his triumph surmounted all the tri∣umphes of the worlde were they all in one triumphe: in this triumphe they spread their raiment vpon the way, and cut bran∣ches of Palmes, and sang Hosanna in excelsis, which song con∣tained in it selfe more maiestie and glorie, then all the trium∣phant pompe of the world could deuise. Some of the Iewes Rabbies affirme this daye to bee the first daye that was created, for the latter Iewes referreth the creation of the worlde to the time of Autumne, for then the Iubilers began, and the yeare was plentifull of all kinde of things.
This was the second festiuall day in mount Coelio in memo∣rie of Mineruas birth,Cal, Rom. called Quhquaria, for this feast as you heard endured for fiue daies, on the which daye Ouid the poet was borne, and Cicero in that yeae was slaine, when Pausa was Consul at Rome 40. yeares before Christes birthe. The dedication of the crosse was in Rome vpon this daye,Nouidi. 4. where women onely vsed great ceremonies and solemnities, at what time it was not lawfull for any man to sacrifice amongst women, or to enter once into their church vpon this day. Carolus Martellus a famous prince of Fraunce, among many worthie renowned and great victories, as well ouer the Heathens and Sarazens, as ouer diuers parts of France, and speciallie the great victorie which he had vpon this day ouer Chilpericus the second of that name, and 19 king of Fraunce at a place called Camericus in the 718. yeare of Christs birth. Henrie the fourth king of England,Lili. vpon this day, after hee had beene deliuered from many hard chaunces, and had diuers good haps in ciuill warres, languished in sicknesse, and died vpon the 20 of March, and was buried at Canterburie. One sacrifice the Scythians haue in this manner, in the mo∣neth Nisan which is March, when one dieth in Scythia of any great state his friends and his neighbours carie all his beasts, and kill them for a feast to solemnize the funerall of the dead, as the Romans and the Gretians doe celebrate a feast for the honour of Emperours and Princes birthe. The sonne of this Scythian dead man, causeth his fathers head being filled with all sweete odors,Herodt. lib. 4. to be guilted ouer, and to be set as a monu∣ment of his father, where once euery yeare vpon the very daye that his father died, he keepeth a solemne feast, wher his friends and his neighbours doe yearely at this feast offer sacrifice with ceremonies therevnto belonging vnto this gilded head, abhor∣ring the rites and sacrifices of any countries beside their owne as you heard, what they did to Anachares, and Siales, for the ministring of the sacrifice and ceremonies of the Greti∣ans.
The 21 Day. MAximus the Emperour, or rather tirant, after hee had raigned in the empire 77. daies, and had in that short time slaine Gratianus, at Lugdunum after he came from Brittain, and had driuen Valentinianus from his empire in the west, was vppon this day, as Mar. Sco∣tus affirmeth cut in peeces by the souldiers of the Emperour Valentinianus, yet Functius saieth that he was beheaded not farre from Aquilea, 430. Also on this day,Eutrop. 9. 269. Galienus the emperur who raigned 15. yeares, 7. with his father, and eight yeares he gouerned the empire after his fathers death, as Eutrop▪ saith, but he was slaine with his brother Valerianus both Emperours at Mil∣laine, and that vpon this day some varie in his saying, that Va∣lerianus was brother to Galienus, but I let such controuer∣sies passe. After that Carolomaunus the sonne of Lodowicke the se∣cond of that name, and brother to Lodowick the third, who raigned both kinges of France, had recouered Italie and setled himselfe quiet hee died vppon this day of a sicknesse called A∣poplexia 880.Melanct. chrou. 4. Maximilian the Emperour son to Frederick the third was borne vppon this day in the new cittie of Austria, 1459. Rodolphus Sueuus was crowned king of the Romanes byStumpf. lib. 4. the bishop Sigisfridus against Henry of Magntia who stood against him in the election to be king, 1077. The 22. Day THe Iewes whose fiue daies of intercalation do now begin after the moneth Adar, which is the twelft moneth with the Iewes and the Egyptians, do vse this kinde of intercalation, as the Romans do with Iulius Caesar who brought from Egypt to Rome a cunning Mathematician, and made the Romane
yeare to agree with Egyptians by adding euerie foure yeare a day. Henrie the fourth being before elected Caesar, returned vp∣pon this day from Campaniao Rome in triumphant sort withAuent. great honor ouer the Normans 1084. The English men had an ouerthrow by the French men and the Scots in the territorie of Anioy, as vpon this day, 1421. Hennibal the scourge of Rome beeing called from Italie into Africk to resist Scipio, being made a new Consul,Hannibal and sent from Rome as generall ouer the Romanes Hannibal before he returned from Italie caused a triumphant arch to be set vp by the temple of uno Lucina, in the which hee caused to bee engrauen his exploits and noble victories, and the name of all the Consuls, Dictators, and gallant Romane captaines, which he vanquished and slue at three great battels Tebeia, Trasy∣mene, and Cannes, which were set in Greek and Punicke let∣ters for a memoriall of his being in Italie as a Trophie and a monument of his feats and victories against the Romanes. The 17 Daie. POlomie counted this day to be the equinoctiall of the spring being the fourth day of the creation of the world, on the which day the Sunne, the Moone,Gen. 1. and the starres were crea∣ted. This was the fifth and the last day of Quinquatria festa, which was consecrated to Minerua in mount Caelio, vpon the which day all the Trompeters should come to the said mount, and there begin to sound, & from thence through all the streets of Rome sounding the Trompets vntill they came to the Ca∣pitol, which was warning to the Senators, the Cousuls and magistrates of Rome to come to the Capitol to finish the sa∣crifice of Quiquatria into Minerua, and to make an ende of the feast, which is called Tubilusthium. Of this day Ouid saith,
Summa dies  quinque tuba lustrare canora, &c. Cornel. Scipio then Proconsuld in Africk in most solemne sort within a triumphant chariot came victor into Rome ouer the Africanes. The same Scipio might be wel compared vnto Sesostris, who for his victories and conquestes was called the Hercules of Egypt. This Sesostris exceeded for his pro∣nesse and valure. These lef more trophes, and monuments of his triumphes behind him in Egipt, in Ethiopia, in Asia, and in Sithia then either Alexander, or Cirus, such Archers,  pillers of brasse, copp, and of Iuorie, according to the custome of Egypt. This Sesostris carried kings captiues bound to his chariot from place in place, whose monumentes after his death were by the priestes of Egypt, so kept and defended, that they would not permit Darius to haue his statue exected, before Sesostris though Egypt was at that time,  The courage of this Scipio in Car∣thage, Sardima, and in all Africa seemed no lesse, but that among a number of Romane Hercules, which in Scipios daies florished in Rome, he might chalenge ouer them all. Selymus the Turke,Cael. de bel, Milet. and second of that name satled from his  of Constantinople towards the Ile of Melitea with a great and huge number of shippes, and he bestowed there a whole Winters warre without anie conquest done at all. In the warres which chaunced betweene the Romanes and the , after much slaughter on both sides, they agreed that there should bee three men vppon the Romans side,Dion. lib. 3 and three also vppon the  ide which should end this strife, and finish this warre betweene them. Three Ro∣manes came into the ielde which were both horne at one birth beeing Brethren, and called Horatij, and the other three Sabines called Curiatij, these were likewise bretheren in like sort borne  one  called rigemini fratres & cousin germanes to the Romanes, they fought it so valiantly that two of the Romanes
other Romans which liued who perceiuing their eagernes, the Romane made as though he would flee, and the Sabine that was not hurt followed him hard at the heeles, the other being sore wounded came halting behind, the Romane turned ppon the soden and fought with the Sabine, and in fight slue him and then he easilie slue the other two, being maimed before and not able to follow in fight, ouer these Sabines M. Horatius was so receaued with such a triumph into Rome with al pomp and mirth, his triumph was such that the Romanes long after vsed vpon this day a great feast in memorie of Horatius vic∣torie. The 24 daie THis was named amongest the Romanes Aegyptiacus dies either in memorie of some great victorie had ouer them▪ by the Egyptians orels an ouerthrow. The 5. day of the creation of the world wherein were foules▪ fishes, and other dumbe bastes made by the Almightie, vppon the which day our Sauiour Christ was taken by the Iewes,Math. 20. and held his last supper. As vppon this day Aurelius Quintilius was by the whole consent of the souldiers nominated Emperor, and by the as∣sent of the Senate hee was made Augustus a man of singular sobrietie of great patience and gentlenes, hee succeeded his good brother Au. Claudius a worthie man, and a noble empe∣rour who for the worthie seruice hee did to his countrey had by the Senate appointed him a goulden sheeld to hang in the councell house and a goulden Image in the Capitoll, for a per∣petuall memorie of his worthines, this good Quintilius raigned but 17. daies emperour after his brother and was slain as vpon this day. The 25 daie▪ CHrist Iesus the sonne of God tooke flesh of the virgin Ma∣rie vpon this day, on the which day the Angell Gabriel ∣luted
the Uirgine. The feast of the mother of the gods called Hylaria festa, was solemnely celebrated in Rome vpon this day, for that the daye began to be longer, for in the time of Iulius Caesar and Octauius Augustus,Macrob.  this day was counted the equinoctiall of the springe, at what time the women of Rome sacrificed vnto Venus with great obsequies. Theodosius the third of that name Emperour, who was compelled by his Souldiers to take the name of an Emperor, and within two yeares after was constrained vpon this daye to forsake the empire, and to liue a priuate life in a monasterie, he was so persecuted by eo the third surnamed Iconoma∣chus, so called for that hee defended Images, who succeeded Theodosius, 717. Frederike the second,Auent. being Emperour was crowned king of Hierusalem, and within 23. yeares after, Conradinus the sonne of Conradus the Emperour, was borne vpon this daye, who died afterward at Naples, 1252. Nicephorus surnamed Botoniates, was elected Emperor of Constantinople vpon this daye, who by Alexus was driuen out of his Empire into a monasterie, where he died, three years after he was chosen Emperor, 1077. Iames the firste Bishop of Ierusalem after Christ,Mar. scot. lib. 2. and bro∣ther to him according to the manner of the Iewes which called them brethren that were cosins, was stoned to death, in wit∣nesse of his faith, as some writers suppose, 64. Clemens the third Pope of Rome dyed, 1191, by whose perswasion the Emperour Fredericke the first tooke a voyage into Italie, besieged Mellaine, Cremona, Dertona, and ma∣nye other Townes and Citties which reuolted from him, he brought euen to the groude. This Frederike was surna∣med Aenobardus a Bononian borne, and sonne to that Fre∣derike, which was Sonne to Conradus the Emperour.
The 26 Day. THis was the seauenth day after the creation called the sab∣both day. The Rabbies of the Iewes, more curious then wise in their fabulous bookes of Talmudists or Drash, presume to know all things and let nothing passe,Pant. lib. 3 they say that vpon this day Laza∣rus was raised from his graue, (being dead for foure dayes) by Christ Iesus. Conradus the second of that name, a Frenchman, after he had laide long siege to Melaine, returned to Rome, and was crowned Emperour of Rome by Pope Iohn the twentith of that name,Onoph. Iustin. he reuenged vpon those that dwelt in Pannonia, for that they aided the Italians, he made his some Caesar during his abode at Rome, 1017. Romanus Argyropilus Emperour of Constantinople, by the meanes of his wife a lewde vitious woman named Zoes was strangled by Mychael Paphlago who succeeded him in the Empire,Gdr. and married his wife whome she also vsed as an instrument of hir wicked life for a long time, but shee died of a miserable disease, fit for such a beast, 1033. Two Uirgines of Hypborea venturing as farre as Delos to performe certaine sacrifice vowed to the goddesse Lucina,Hyper∣boreans virgins. for safe deliuerance at childe birthe, they dying at Delos in this iourney, are so honoured of the yoong maides at Delos, that they doo offer vpon the graue of these Hyperborean Uirgins the long haires of their heads, and after three dayes they hang their haire vpon a long pole ouer their tombe: and the young men in like sorte binding theyr haires with certaine sweete hearbes in a kinde of sacrifice vnto Argis and Vpis graue. A∣gaine in the Countrey of Iouia,Herod. other ceremonies were vsed by a number of yongewomen, singing hymnes of Lycaeus worke, to further the celebration of the ceremonies, naming often in theyr Songes the two Hyperborean Uirgins by the
name of Argis and Opis, with solemne musicke vpon their graue: in the meane while the Priests sprinkeled their Ases which were kept in a pot ouer the graue of these Uirgins vpon a company of sicke persons, who sat vpon the graue of the Hi∣porean Uirgins: this became a Scythian sacrifice, and from Scythia, as Herodot, dooth reporte into Thracia, called Sara triticea. The 27 Daie. NIsan or Abib the first moneth of the Iewes, for on this daye their yeare began,Rab. Elea. imitating the Egipti∣ans for the first daye of the newe moone after the equinoctiall of the springe, according to the oulde Iewes order & custome: but the latter Iewes begin their yeare after the moone in the equinoctiall autumne, hauing respect to the best season of the yeare, at what time the Iubileis of Mo∣ses began, vpon the which day Noah vncouered the Arke, and sawe the waters decreased and earth appeared, yet staied in the Arke 56 daies expecting the word of the Lord. The 2. yeare after the Isralits departed out of Egipt,Exod. vult in the first day of ye first moneth Nisan, Moses reared the tabernacle whom the Maiestie of the Lord in the sight of all men, coue∣red all daye with thicke cloudes, and all night with shining flames of fire. Likewise Ezechias king of Iuda,2. Chro. 29. began as vpon this daye to repaire the Temple of Salomon at Ierusalem, and caused the Priests and the Leuites to sanctifie the house of the Lord with sacrifices and thankes giuing,The sa∣crifice of Ezechias. at what time were dedica∣ted 600 Oxen, and 3000 sheepe. The Rabbies affirme that vpon this daye Abraham the Patriarke was about to sacrifice vppe to GOD his sonneGenes. 22. Isaac.
Upon this daye the olde auncient Romanes sacrificed with great solemnity to the mother of the gods Berecynthia, which yearely the Romans vsed with great pompe, carrieng most sumptuouslie the image of Berecynthia to bee washt in the ri∣uer of Almono,Cal. Rom. the sacred ceremonies were called Megalesia sacra. This Berecynthia was called Pessinuntia, to whome M. Iunius Brutus builded a temple, & dedicated those games and plaies called Megalenses ludi, which should bee plaide in the spring time before the Idol of Pessinuntia, by the finest and gallentest yongmen within Rome,Alex. li 6. cap. 19. piched and chosen out by the Alcidebes, the matrons of the cittie were cheefe in those plaies, in their most sumptuous apparrell, for in these playes were moddest, shamefast, chaste and honest actions vsed gesture. Phocas the Emperour, by the conspiracie of certaine that sought the Empire,Gerard. Merc. was slaine, and vpon the same day Hera∣clius was elected in his roome Emperour, yet Scotus refer∣reth this murther vnto the nineteenth of Aprill, in the yeare 611. Iohn Valesius the 50 king of Fraunce, and father to Charles the fift,Pantal. lib. 3. surnamed the wise, dyed as vpon this daye at London in England, 1364. Lu. Posthumius Megellus, the second time that hee was Consul at Rome, with great pompe and glorie triumphed ouer the Samnits and ouer the Hetruscans by the appointment of the Senators,Liuius. 459 yeares after the building of Rome: vpon the which selfe same daye 734. triumphed Lu. Cornelius Balbus ouer the Affricans, in the beginning of the raigne of Augustus Caesar, for the triumphe of those Consuls in those dayes were much obscured, for the dignitie of the Con∣suls was defaced through the glorie of the Emperours, who tooke from the Consuls all pompe and glory, to set foorth their owne triumphes. Upon this day 169. Lu. Septimius Seuerus was borne in a Towne called Lepus, which was in Tripolinata a Pro∣uince of Affricke: This Emperour willed all men to call
him Pertinax for the great zeale and goodwill which hee bare vnto him, which Pertinax was slaine by Iulianus. This Se∣uerus the Emperour by his victories ouer the Parthians and Arabians, was surnamed both Parthicus and Arabicus. Gregorie the eleuenth Pope of Rome died as vppon this day,Sabel. vnder this Pope all the Townes of Italie which were in subiection to the Pope reuolted, and therefore this bishop re∣moued his seat from Fraunce into Rome againe. The 8. daie FOr the space of thirtie daies the Israelites lamented much the death of Moses in the plaine of Noab vppon this day, for after that God shewed all the land of Canaan,Deut. of the last chapter. hee went to the plaine of Moab to the top of mount Nebo where hee died, and no man knoweth his graue to this day. In Rome as vppon this day great solemnities of ceremo∣nies and sacrifices were had and celebrated vnto Ianus in the temple of Concord, in the temple of Health, in the temple of Peace and in the temple of Ceres, by all the women and ma∣trons of the Cittie of Rome. Aelius Pertinax the 26. Emperour of Rome when hee had raigned but 80, daies, being a verie aged man, was slaine in an vprore which fell among the gard through the reason of Iulianus who succeded him in the Empire: notwithstanding some saie otherwise, 194. Mar. Atil. Regulus triumphed ouer the Samnites, and o∣uer the Uolscanes, I do not meane the great triumph which Regulus got ouer the Africanes when he sue 18 thousand e∣nemies, and tooke prisoners 5000. men when hee had receiued vnder his obeisance 73.Plutar. cities and tooke 8. elephantes, and sent them to Rome, this was vpon an other day of which I shall speake of in an other place, 459. Albertus marques of Brabenburge, the scourge of Ger∣manie with long warres manie yeares, was borne vppon this day, 1520, at which time died Henrie Glareanus & poet Lau∣retus
in Friburge a towne in Germanie, 1563. Aron and his two sonnes Madan and Abiliu remained at the dore of the taberacle seauen daies and seauen nights, and perfourmed that which Moses commaunded him from the spi∣rit of God,Leuit. 8 2455. yeares after the creation of the world. The 29 Day. VPon this day Iosua the second Iudge of Israell that succee∣ded Moses sent out of Sichim two men to view Iericho, and to spy the land,Iosua. at what time Rahab the harlot acknowledged the God of Israel and lodged the two Israelites and hid them from the king of Iericho, who sought to kill them. C. Claudius the 5.Erop. 7. Emperour of Rome sonne to Drusus which was brother to Tiberius and vncle by the fathers syde to Caligula after he had raigned 13. yeares and 9. moneths, hee was poisoned by his owne wife in the yeare of our Lord▪ 41. Lectisternium a feast among the Panims in the honour of Iupiter, Iuno,The feast lectister∣nium. and Minerua, at what time sumptuous & ritch beddes were spred in the Temples, in the which their Images and Idols dect with all kindes of chaines of gould, crownes & garlands beset with Iewels and pearles were first laied in most magnificent and roiall manner with all ceremonies and solem∣nities in these gorgeous beds, and a great feast celebrated with musick and mirth before them. And after in the residue of the beds which were made within the temple, as many as might¦lie and eate and bare companie with their gods, thinking them∣selues happie that they in this feast in their temples accompani∣ing their Idols had the fruition of so sacred a feast. The Rabbies do affirme that as at this time our Sauiour Iesus Christ came to raise vp Lazarus from death, at what time he came to Iericho, and by the way gaue sight to the blind man, and lodged in Zachaeus the publicans house. The 30. Day THe French chronicles affirme that vppon this day the great
and bloody victorie of Edward duke of Yorke fell, which af∣terward was called Edward the fourth king of England. Frederick the third being archuke of Austria was crow∣ned emperour and raigned almost 54. yeares, he was also vpon this day elected and crowned king of the Romans as Naucle∣rus saith, but Cuspinianus who best knew ye state of Austria re∣ferreth this to the first day of Ianuarie. It is not much to bee maruelled that writers contend for daies syth they in greatest causes varie much in yeares, vetustas erroris plena, and there∣ore I repeat sometime histories that I wrot before. The 31 Daie. THe old Romans vppon thes day vsed solemne sacrifice and oblation to the moone vpon mount Auentie with such rites and ceremonies as the Augurers and high bishops had obser∣ued, for all ceremonies and sacrifice were by Numa Pomp. from the nimph Aegiria, and also after Numa in the time of Torquine the prowd, the booke of Sibill, which were kept by the 3. magistrates called triumveri were full of these supersti∣cious vaine ceremonies and sacrifices which the Romanes much honowred. Ti. Pomp. Atticus died vpon this day 12. yeares after his frend M. Cicero was slaine by Hierenius, and Popilius by y• procurement of M. Antonius,Volat. who likewise was ouerthrowen with his frend Cleopatra queene of Egipt by Oct. Augustus in this yeare that Pomp. Atticus died, at what time ended the wars in Rome, after the building of the citie of Rome, 722. Henrie the first of that name King of Fraunce, died of a wounde that he got with running at Tilt on this day,Sleid. after hee had raigned 12 yeares, after whom succeeded his sonne Fran∣ciscus the second of that name. Pantaleon affirmeth that Franciscus the first raigned 32. yeares, 1557. Alphonsus king of Spaine, 1259, was by the Princesse of Grmanie elected to the empire, which he refused, for then the empire had bin void of an emperour 17. yeares which was the time of interegnum, at what time Richard the Duke of
Cornewall sonne to the king of England was crowned king of Rome,Onoph. of this time, and of the certeintie thereof as Functi∣us saieth, writers do much varie. Henricus the fourth of that name Emperour of Germanie was vpon this day, being then the feast of Aester by Pope Cle∣ment the third,Pantal. lib. 3. as Functius saieth by Pope Steeuen the ninth crowned emperour who ranged 50. yeares whose wife named Bertha vsed the gouerment at her pleasure, for she was the empresse, and emperour. Melancthon saieth in his chronicles that saint Ierom died on this day 420, at Betheme, yet Volateranus affirmeth it 30. of September in the yeare of our Lord, 442. Nehemias came vppon this day with letters from Artax∣erxes to Hierusalem for the repairing of the Temple,2 Esd. 2. and al∣so for the building vp of the walles of Hierusalem againe. In the moneth Munychion among the Egiptians called Pharme, Menede K. of Egypt ended his great and won∣derous, tombe, which for the rarenesse thereof was called a Labyrinth, the patterne whereof Dedalus brought with him from Egipt vnto Creet, where he builded the like to king Mi∣nos. It was hard for any that entred into this Labyrinth to come out thence without a guide. This LabyrinthLabyrinth was made a place of buriall for the kinges of Egyptlineallie descending from the bodie of Menedes and not for others, in so much that the kinges of Egypt afterwardes contended who should excell in these woorkes,Herodot. lib. 2. some in Labyrinthes, some in building of Pi∣ramides, and some in building of monsterous great Temples for their burials, as the priestrs of Vulcan affirme in their sa∣cred bookes at Memphis, that 43. of the most ancient kings of Egypt were buried in these Pyramides, of the which num∣ber 17. remained vntill the time of Ptolomi the sonne of agi, one of the souldiers of the great Alexāder. This was the first king of the Ptolomeis after the name of Pharaos, for the first kinges of Egypt from Menas time vntil the time of 52. kings, we haue as litle to write of, as we haue of the first anciēt kings of Assiria.
The names of the Triumphes solemnized in Rome within the moneth of March, and by whome. 1 P. Valer. Publicola, 2 L. Aemil. Mamertimus, 3 L. Cornel. Lentulus, 4 Q. Luctatius Cerco, 5 M. Claud. Marcellus, 6 A. Manl. Torqua. Atticus 7 L. Papyrius, 8 C. Fabricius Luscinius, 9 C. Papyr. Maso, 10 L. Aemil. Papus. 11 Cn. Manl. Volso. 12 T. Manl. Torquatus. 13 L. Aemil. Papus, 14 C. Flamineus Nepos, 15 L. Conel. Scipio, 16 C. Flamineus, 17 Pub. Furius. 18 Manlius Volso, 19 M. Valerius Coruus, 20 M. Pomp. Matho. 21 M. Valer. Maximus. 22 C. Conelius Scipio. 23 L. Posthumi. Megells 24 L. Conel. Balbus. 25 M. Atil. Regulus. The names of the solemne feasts and sacrifices within the moneth of Marche. Munichia, Matronalia, Quinquatria, Bachanalia, Iunonalia, Equiria, Liberalia, Quinquaria, Minerualia, Hylaria, Megalesia. These games and plaies called triumphant plaies & vowed games, must of necesitie bee celebrated and solemnized after any great triumphe, together with the feast Trimphale Epu∣lum, which is also a feast appointed in the Capitoll belonging alwaies vnto any great triumphe. Ludi Votiui, Ludi Triumphales, Ludi Natalitij. Finis mensis Martij.
Of the moneth of Aprill, which with the Iewes is called Nisan their first moneth, with the Athe∣nians called Thargelion their eleauenth moneth, and With the Aegiptians Pharmute their eight moneth. The first Daie. THis moneth of April is called of the Iewes▪ Nisan, which is the first moneth with the Hebrues,Vernalia. for the Iewes beginneth their yeare in this moneth: in the old time this moneth was of the Romans consecra∣ted vnto Venus, at what time they celebrated a feast called Vernalia, where the Romanes vsed sacrifice and solemine ce∣remonies vnto Venus, bedeckt with garlands made of diuers flowres on their heads,Cal. Rom. and mirtle branches in their handes. Likewise the women and matrones of Rome, washed and ba∣thed themselues in sweete water, and with garlands of mirtle crowned, came vpon this day to the temple of Fortune, and of∣fered oblations and sacrifice with Frankencense and other sweete odors, for their husbandes good successe and euents in warres. In like order the auncient Greekes had vpon this day two great solemne feasts, the one called Thargelia festa, celebrated with many ceremonies vnto Apollo and vnto Diana,Suidas. accord∣ing to the manner of the Gretians, the other feast called Apa∣turia, solemnized with diuers kinde of sacrifices vnto the god∣desse Venus. In Rome vpon this day, Sempronius Blesus when he was Consul at Rome triumphed ouer the Affricans, at what time woone many cities,utrop. 2. and though hee suffered shipwracke in his returne from Affrike to Rome with great riches and spoile, yet the Senators graunted him to come with a triumphe into the Cittie of Rome, 500 yeares after the bulding of the Cittie.
Q. Martius Philippus Consul of Rome, made a braue en∣trie into Rome with great pompe and honor, triumphing ouer the Hetruscans a people of Italy, before the first warres of the Romans against the Carthaginians eight yeares,Eutrop. 2. for at this time the Romanes had enough to doe at home, by meanes of the warres, of the Tarentines, Samnits, Latens, and of other nations about them. Also on this day Ser. Caruilius Max. being Consul then at Rome,Pant. lib. 4. triumphed most solemnely ouer the Sardintans, 519. Tacitus the 34. Emperor of Rome, after he had raigned but sixe moneths, dyed by an vprore among the Souldiers, the most common death that then happened to the Emperours of Rome, one preuenting an other by treason, that in 277 yeares 34 Emperours raigned in Rome, as Onoph. affirmeth, but Iustine saith, that Tacitus died of a feauer at Tarsus, but I leaue contention. Valens was by his brother Valentinianus made Empe∣rour of Constantinople, to gouerne ioyntlie the Empire vpon this daye, 367. This was a cruell persecutor of the Christians, for he commaunded that 80. Christians should be drowned, that were sent to him frō the other Christians,Read the 30. book of Amia∣nus. to entreat for mercie and fauour, but Valeus being most worthyly afterward woun∣by the Gothes, and flyeng from the battell so wounded to a little cottage in a podre village, was burned most misera∣blie by the Gothes in his cottage where hee hid himselfe. His brother Valentinianus had no better end, for both were cruell Emperours. Iustinus Thrax a base man borne, who was first a Swine∣heard, and then a heardman, and afterward became to bee a Souldiour, who after by manye euents of warres,Suet. in vita Cae∣sarum. was made by the Souldiers (after he had ranne through all kinde of preferment in the field) Emperour, 517, who as vpon this daye did adopt to the Empire his sisters sonne named Iustini∣anus, in the ninth yeare of his raige, and dyed within foure moneth after, he was a good Christian, and rooted out the he∣resie or the Arians and Netorians.
Conradus the third of that name, king of Bonaria, borne in Sueia, nephew to Henrie the fourth, being his daughters sonne, was by the consent of all Princes of Germanie, elected Eperour vpon this day 1139. he made a voiage into Asia a∣gainst the Sarazes,Onoph. & Instin. but returned without any thing doone, by meanes of treason at home, by a wicked man named Ma∣nuell, who succeeded after him by treason in the Empire, as Onoph. and Iustine affirmeth. As vpon this day 1081. Alectius surnamed Comnenus, was elected to succeed Nicephorus the Emperour,Pantal. lib. 4. who after he had ended many battailes, he erected an Hospitall for pre fatherlesse children, and also a free schoole to be there instructed and brought vp after they were able to come from the Hspitall, Clephis king of the Longobardes was slaine in Papia by the Italians,Gerard. Merc. 568. or before this time they had determined with Albonius there to inuade Italie foure yeares before this king Clephis was slaine. Maunt Aena in Sicilia, was so shaken with an earthquake, that the fire that flamed therewith out of this hill,Lycosth. de prodig. destroyed and burned many places, at what time the monasterie of S. Leo was vtterlye spoiled and consumed, as vpon this daye, 1536. Rome was taken vpon this daye by Alaricus king of the Gotes,Sabel. 7. Enned. 6. after he had continued his siege two yeares, 414 after Christ as Pau. Aemilius in his first booke setteth downe at large. Sigismundus king of Polonia,Mart. Chrom. in orati ineb. died when hee had raigned 42. yeares, 1548. after whome succeeded also his sonne Sigismundus. Some also hold opinion that our Sauiour Christ came vp∣on this day to Bethania, and called Lazarus from his graue, where he had beene foure dayes dead and buried, and he liued after as Mar. Scotus affirmeth 24 yeares, but he borroweth of the Rabbies all this vncertaine coniecture of the time, for the Iewes will be ignorant in nothing.
The 2 daie VPon this day the old Romanes celebrated a solemne feast with great ceremonies in memorie of Quirinus, who was borne vpon this day, at what time the Romanes kept the feast Lupercalia with great solemnitie. Christ after hee raised Lazarus from the graue would not enter to Ierusalem, which was 15 furlonges distant from Be∣thania, for the Iewes hearing of these miracles tooke councell how they might kill him, and therefore Iesus went to Ephra∣im a Cittie fiue miles distant from Bethanie. Iane the wife of Philip surnamed pulcher king of Fraunce the 45 king in number died vpon this day, 1304. This queene was the onelie daughter of Henrie King of Nauarre. Honorius the fourth of that name was elected Pope of Rome as vpon this day at Perusium, this pope builded many houses vpon the mount Auentine, and assigned to manie poore men certaine Gownes and clothes called Album amictum: It is written that a Iew being baptized vpon this day against his will presentlie put fire in his owne house,Stumpf. 5▪ tooke his wife and his children out, and ran vp and downe in the streets saying alowd and crying out, I am a Iewe, I am a Iew, and no chri∣stian, his house being burned and 40 houses more in Constan∣tia by the meanes of this his furie, 1349. The 3 daie VPon fridaie before the feast of Aester Christ Iesus our saui∣our suffred his passion as vppon this daie, by whose death death was swallowed vp, and the power of Sathan ouer∣throwen. Henricus the second king of Fraunce and Philip which is now king of Spaine after many years of warre, at length con∣cluded
peace vpon this day, 1559.Aemil. Eulalius in a schisme against Bonifacius then Bishop of Rome was elected bishop, and Bonifacius rebelled as on this day.Volat. This Bonifacius while yet he was ishop, which was 3. yeares and foure monethes ordained that none should bee allowed a priest before he were 30 yeares of age. Pub. Posthumius Tubertus Consul then at Rome triumphed ouer the Sabines, 250. after the building of Rome. This was one of the first triumphes in Rome after the kinges were ba∣nished,Panal. 4. at what time in their triumphes they vsed no such so∣lemnitie and pompe as they did after as to bee drawen in cha∣riots so sumptuouslie with four elephantes, or with four white Steedes, or with such pompe and roiall solemnitie or in wea∣ring purple robes and triumphant garments neither yet crow∣ned with garlands, nor with any great magnificence, which was after among them practised. The godly Ezechias king of Iuda as some write, repaired the temple as vppon this day, and therein prepared oblations and sacrifices to please the Lord,2 Paral. 29 at what time hee continued therein 8. daies instructing the people▪ and sanctifying of the temple. The 4. Day AGrippa Menenius surnamed Lanatns, fellow Consull to Posthumius Tubertus in the selfe same yeare, 250. af∣ter the building of Rome, triumphed ouer the Sabines, and made also his triumph the next day after Tubertus his fel∣low,Liui. ouer the Sabines Liuie said that they both had their tri∣umphs graunted by the senators in one day ouer the Sabines, they rode not in chariots, but were brought with serieants and officers before them, and with such pompe as was vsed in those daies, for then they triumphed but within Italie. The greatnes of the Romanes triumph grew by the warres of Africa, which was the first after they had conquered Italie.
The 5 Daie. PLaies and games called Megalesia,Megale∣sia. were celebrated as vp∣pon this day in the honour of Cibeles the mother of the goddes, the sacrifices and solemnities done to this goddesse in the the temple at Rome were vsed in the 27. of March, as you before haue read, yet some referre these plaies to the last of March but plaies are vsedmanie times as occasion serueth. The Israelits vpon this day with their captaine Iosua pas∣sed through the flood Iordane at what tyme the water dried before them as the red sea did in the time of Moses and Aaron and Iordane stood still vntil the priests had brought the Arke through the riuer vnto the other side,Ios. 3. & 4. at which time the waters came againe together. The Iues as on this day yearly prouided a male lamb of a yeare old without anie spot or blemish on him, for the feast of Easter, which they kept on y• 14. daie of their moneth, Nisan, & then they kill him, and take part of his blood and strike it on the two side poastes, and vppon the vpper dore post of the howse where this lambe should bee eaten.Exod. 12. God ordained this sacri∣fice as a token and a pledge of their deliuerance. Lotarius sonne to Lodowick surnamed Pius the 24. king of Fraunce and the second emperour of Rome of a French man being then king of Italie by his father thither sent,Onoph. was vppon this day elected and created emperour of Rome after his fa∣thers death, where he raigned 15. yeares: hee made his sonne Lodowick the second of that name his fellowe to gouerne with him in the empire. Lodowick the 9.Hist. Sa∣racen. lib. cap. 7. king of Frace sailed as vpon this day from thence into Asia with a verie great armie to ease the christians being much vexed and afflicted by the Saracens, and after∣ward returned safe and sound into Fraunce againe, as Functi∣us saith, but others said, that he was taken by the Saracens in Damiata, 1250▪
Charles the fourth of that name and sonne to Iohn king of Bohemia was as on this day crowned emperour of Germany which Lodowick Bauarus being aliue & had raigned Empe∣rour 32. yeares tooke it so greeuouslie that Charles should be emperour during his life,Pantal. lib. 4. that falling downe from his house on hunting died more for sorrow of the empire, then for the fall, 135. Upon this day Charles the 5. entred into the citie of Rome, accompanied with pope Iulie the 3. who with great triumphe was receiued of the citizens where for a time hee remained to consult with the Pope of all estates of Christendome, in mat∣ters of state and religion.Nouid. lib 4. Philip king of Spaine that now is proclaimed peace vppon this day at Bridges betweene Henrie the second of that name king of Fraunce and himselfe,Pant lib. 4 1559. The 6. daie AS vpon this day the magistrats of Athens did examine and visit the whole citie in that sort that the Romans afterward vsed in their Lustrum euerie fift yeare, with the Greeks called penrerides. In Greece they celebrated a feast in memorie of Dianas birth which fel vpon this day, in which feast no sacrifice might be offred of blood, but the feast was solemnized with wafers fine cakes and wine, & they sacrificed frākinsence, sweet odors and spices, besydes they should honor this feast with all kind of delicate sweete flowers,Alex. lib. 2. cap. 22. and adorne their Idols with all gar∣lands, for in this feast all ioyes and mirth was solemnized with musicke, dauncing and feasting, but no killing of anie liuing beast vppon this day, and therefore it is called Hylaria festa. Some also hold opinion that the birth day of Alexander the great,Alex. lib. 4. cap. 20. and his death was vppon this day, but better referred vnto the 8. of Iune. Likewise that learned Philosopher Socrates the Athenian died vpon this day as Plutarch supposeth.
The second circumcision was by Iosua performed by the commaundement of God in Gilgar, for now they had left off 40 yeares after the first circumcision, and Iosua made him sharpe kniues as the Lord commaunded him, and circumcised all those which were borne in the wildernesse, after they came out of Egipt, for all their olde Captaines, and the Isralits that came out of Egipt were circumcised in the wildernesse, and for their disobedience to God they died euery one sauing Ca∣leb and Iosua they rebelled against God, and contemned Mo∣ses,Iosua. for they remained 40. yeares in the wildernesse. Our Sauiour Christ returning into Hierusalem, curssed the Figge tree for his barrennesse, at what time he entred into the temple and taught there, and stope the mouth of the Sadu∣ces and Phariseis, and returning to mount Oliuer, tooke occa∣sion by beholding of the Temple,Math. 21. to prophesie the destruction both of the cittie and of the world. M. Aurelius Antonius Bassianius, which is also named Caracalla, died on this daye at Edessa, when he had raigned sixe yeares and two months, Pantaleon saith that he was both borne and dead as vpon one day,Eutrop. 8. 218. The 7 Daie. THe Athenians vsed vpon this daye to celebrate the feast of Thargelia, in the honour and memorie of Apollo▪ also the feast called Carnia was also solemnized in Cirena to Phoebus which is called Apollo, and taken for the Sunne, for the Sun was worshipped by so many names, that almost in no countrie the Sunne escapeth without feasts and sacrifices, with all kind of solemne worship doone vnto him, for he is worshipped with the Greekes by the name of Phoebus, with the Latins by the name of Apollo, with the Egiptians by the name of Serapis: with the Persians by the name of Onamasdris, &c. Christ our Sauiour being in Bethania in the house of Si∣mon the lepor,Math. 26 at what time the woman powred vpon his head a box full of pretious ointment, where Iudas he  was angrie for the waste thereof.
Zeno surnamed Isauricus a deformed man and base borne was by Leo Iunior his owne father made Emperour,120000 bookes burned. 490. who vsed the Empire more liker a tyrant then a Emperour, in whose time Constantinople was set on fire, and the most part thereof burned, at what time 120 thousands bookes were quite burned to ashes,Iustin in Isaurico. amongst which bookes Homers poems were, being written with goulden letters, In testino draconis of 120 foote long, he died very poore, as Iustine & others affirme. Charles the eight of that name, king of Fraunce, died sud∣denlie vpon this day at Ambrose, 1497. leauing no lawfull heires behinde him to succeed, and therefore Lewes the 12. of that name succeeded the 59 king of Fraunce, this king was called Pater populi, & the last king before the stocke of Valoyes became to be king of Fraunce.Iustin. Anastasius the 40 Bishop of Rome, after the Apostles was elected vpon this day, who instituted, that no lame, impotent or maimed person, should be admitted to minister in the Church, and this Bishop also commaunded, that men should stand vp at the reading of the Gospell,Volat. 398. The 8 Daie. VPon this daye the Romanes vsed a great triumphe with pompe and solemnitie,uet. and with plaies, in memorie of Iuba king of Numidia by Augustus Caesar then conquered and brought to triumphe 45. A disall day and vnfortunate among the Iewes, for that vpon this day the K. Assuerus otherwise called Darius His∣daspis king of Persea made a lawe and a decree by his cheefe counceller Haman that all the Iewes being euery where scat∣tered in these his kingdomes, which were a 127 prouinces should be destroyed and slaine both man,Ester. 13. woman, and childe, and therefore this day was among the Iewes named Luctuo∣sus Iudeorm dies. In the temple at Ierusalem, about nine of the clock at night shined such a light so bright about the cheefe altar,Eeb. 3. that it see∣med to be day: the brasen gates of the temple of their owne accord opened, and many woonders seene.
The 9 Daie. THe charge and manner of eating the Passeouer, which was to be kept in the 14 daye of the first mo∣neth which is Nisan at euen, the first day of the feast of vnleauened bread, for this feast continued with the Iewes seauen dayes, this was celebrated in memorie of their deliuerance, at that night when all the first borne of Egipt man and beast were slaine by the Angell of the Lord,Exod. 12. and in the re∣membrance of the bloud of the lambe which the Iewes sprink∣led vpon the doores, as a warning to the Angell to spare the Iewes of this feast of Passeouer, the first was in Egipt vnder Pharao, the second in Ierusalem, vnder king Ezechias the 3. and last vnder our Sauiour Christ at his death. Againe in the second yeare after the Israelits came out of Egipt,Num. 9. Leuit. 23. vpon the selfe same day in the wildernesse of Sinay, the people of Israell celebrated the feast of the Passeouer, by the commaundement of the Lord vnto Moses, at euen of the 14. day of the moneth. In Rome vpon this day Cerelia festa were most solemnlye with great ceremonies after their auncient custome, celebrated in the honor of their goddesse Ceres,Cerealia festa. vpon that day also the old Romans appointed with pompe and state, great plaies called Circenses ludi, to the same selfe goddess. In this feast the most statelie & magnificent shewes of all other solemne games were plaid in the great roome called Circus Maximus, this was se foorth cheefely by the triumphant emperors dedicated to Iupi∣ter for their victories, and before the Emperors by the Csuls and Dictators, for before they went into the battell they would go into the Capitoll, and after sacrifice and due ceremonies done vnto Iupiter, they vowed if the gods would graunt them victorie, to celebrate publike plaies in this place Circo Maxi∣mo, which contained in length three furlongs, & of breadth one furlong, mad and enlarged by Caesar the Dictator, the build∣ings and seates which were made for the people to sit and to behold the games, amounted to the number of 200060. seates.
The 10 Day. THe Isralits departed from Rameses a citie in the land of Gosan the 15. daye of the first moneth, which the Iewes call Nisan, on the morrow after the passeouer, vnder the conducting of Moses and Aaron, after that God had plagued the Egiptians, and had smitten the first borne within all Egipt,Exod. 13. and God spared not the cheefe ru∣lers, and in remembrance of this their deliuerance and going out of Egipt, and from the tyramite of Pharao, God com∣maunded to sanctifie the first borne vnto him aswell of men as of beasts, the number that came out of Egipt were 600000, beside women and children: this was doone 2. Die Azino∣rum. God gaue the citie of Iericho vnto Iosua, and Iericho was taken after Iosua had gone about the citie sixe dayes, as the Lord had commaunded him, and the seauenth day Iosua com∣passed Iericho seuentimes,Iosua. 6. and the seauen priests that bare the Arke should sound their seauenth trumpet of Rams hornes a long blast, and all the people shall shoute, and then the walles of Iericho shall fall, 2494. Christ Iesus our Sauiour, by all probable reason of some of the best Astronomers, did offer vp himselfe vpon the crosse to God his father vpon this day, for our sinnes and transgressi∣on. Some also of the Fathers holde opinion that Adam was created vpon this daie,Cedr. Au∣gust. and that our Sauiour Christ tooke flesh of the Uirgin Marie, vpon the same daye that he dyed. Upon this daye Septinius Seuerus the 21 Emperour of Rome, was borne in a Towne called Lepos in a Prouince of Affricke, 195.Herod. 2. Also Theodosius Iunior, the sonne of Arcadius the Em∣perour, was borne vpon this day,Sex. Aur. Victor. de Caes. epit. 401, in the declining state of the empire there were three: Theodosij the first of them was a noble Emperour, out of the house and progenie of Traiane, to whome he was most like in manners and conditions, and all his life was resembled to Traianas life, his victories were such that he merited to be called Theodosius the great.
Lewis surnamed Balbus the 26. king of Fraunce after hee had raigned 2 yeares died as on this day,Beuth. 879. Rossana a cittie of Assiria with all the villages and townes within thirtie miles about were by a great earthquake shaken downe to the ground, also the great temple called Sophia at Constantinople with manie townes and buildinges of the cit∣tie were ouerthrowen vpon this day by that earthquake, 1556. Lodowick Duke of Millaine was taken by the French men and brought to Fraunce captiue vnto Lewis the 12. king of Fraunce,Volat. 1500. Eight yeares before this died Laurenti∣us Medices duke of Florence as vppon the same day, 1492. The 11. daie THis was the third day of the feast of the vnleuened bread and the second day after the Israelites had departed out of Egypt, at what day the Israelites remoued from Sucoth to the desart of Ethan in the edge of the wildernes not far from the red sea. In the 16. of Nisan, which is the eleuenth of April Ezechia king of Iuda sanctifyed the house of the Lord in the eight day and made an ende in the sixteenth, in the which day Ezechias the king brought seuen Oxen▪ seuen ams, seuen sheep,2. Paral. 29. and se∣uen goats to be a sinne offering for the kingdome, for the sanc∣tuarie, and for Iuda, and their blood were sprinckled vpon the Altar, and the Leuites with Cymbals, Psalteries, and harps, and all instruments of Dauid: and the Priestes held the trom∣pets, and the sonnes of Aaron were commaunded to offer these on the Altar of the Lord. As vppon this day the noble Roman Milo was condemned to  at Rome for the killing of Claudius,Appia. lib. 2. at what time Cice∣ro pronounced an eloquent orationin the behalfe of Milo, fifteen yeares before the birth of Christ. Selymus the ninth Emperour of the Turkes began his em∣pire vpon this day, at what time his father Baiazeth was poi∣soned by a Iewish phisition, 1512. fyue yeares after hee had
subdued Siria, and conquered Egypt, looke Alcairon which is called Meniphis the chiefest cittie of Egypt, and tooke also their king Soldanus and haled him through the streetes of Al∣cairon by a rope, & after he commaunded him that he shouldPan. Iou. be hanged in the chiefest gate of the cittie. Iulius the second pope of Rome was vanquished by Lewis the eleuenth king of Fraunce at Rauenna, where the pope lost 16. thousand souldiers, and at that battaile Leo the tenth which was elected Pope, would vppon that day be crowned pope to chaunge the vnfortunate day to bee fortunate, some referre this day to be the 27. of March. As on this day Lewis of Burbonie prince of Condie coner∣red with the peeres of France at Aurelia about religion which was in question 30. yeares before at Ratisbone by Charles the fifth,Pantal. 4. at what time they consulted to take a voiage against the Turke, and this continued the space of a whole yeare, and en∣ded as vppon this day, 1542. As vppon this day three sonnes and two Rainbowes were seene in the skies at Uenice.Sleid. The 13 daie THis was the fourth day of the vnleuened bread, & the third day after the Israelites had gone out of Egypt, and the 4. day Pharo made readie to march after them, for Moses had brought the bones of Ieseph out of Egipt, for so Ioseph willed and made the children to sweare that they should take his bones away with them, and the Lord went before them by daie in a piller of a cloud, and by night in a piller of fire. The Iewes held another feast called festum manipuli spi∣carum,Fest. spi∣carum. they should bring vnto the Priest a sheae of the first fruites of their haruest, and hee should waue the sheafe before the Lord to be accepted for their sinnes, and this should be done the morrow after the Sabaoth day, for the Iewes had these manie feastes by the Lord commaunded to be kept.
1 The feast of the Passeouer. 2 The feast of vnleuened bread. 3 The feast of the first fruites. 4 The feast of blowing of trompets. 5 The feases of Tabernacles. Of these in their places orderly as they fall▪ I shall hereafter plainie declare. In Rome were certaine plaies and games called Ludi ce∣reales which endured eight daies, and were celebrated with the most solemne chear that might bee with the most pompe and sumptuous sghtes in the honor of Ceres, these were often pla∣ced by the names of Cereales, Circenses, also Ludi magni, & sometimes by the names of Ludi votiui, which were placed in Circo Maximo after any great triumph or victorie had. Ludi Cereales were diuerslie in diuers countries solemni∣sed. Among the Grecians they vsed this sacrifice with torch∣light, in the which they imitated the Siracusas in the sacrifice to Proserpina, at what time they offered vp the best wheat and chiefest corne being winnowed and through picked and clensed the women, came to the altar of Ceres crowned with garlands made of wheat straw, being decked and set foorth with al sweet flowers in Rome. Their priestes held torches to this sacrifice, and none might come but Priestes and women,Alex. li. 6. cap. 19. and then it should be solemized a little after Sonne setting. Among the Romans, they vsed these sacrifices and the plaies like vnto the plaies called Circenses, which of all the regall shewes is with most pompe and magnificence plaid in Circo maximo, at what time the Dictators, Consuls and magistrates of Rome, with all the Idols of their Goddes bedeck with ewels and chaines are set iniuorie and golden chairs aboue the triumphant states of the Consuls and Emperours to behold these games and plaies. The Christians seperating themselues from the Iewes do kepe still a solemne feast the eight day after the resurrection.
of Christ in memory of his glorious resurrection instituted vp∣ponPant lib. 4 this daie by Higinus bishop of Rome, 146. after Christ. Uppon this daie by Doclesian the Emperour were great persecutions done vpon the Christians, and spoiled their chur∣ches to the number of 305. vpon the which daie the head of An∣drewNouid. 4. the apostle was at Rome presented. Henrie the fifth of that name after hee had kepe wares in Flanders and against the Hungarians, went to Rome to bee crowded, and was resisted by the Pope, but peace being con∣cluded, he was with great solemnitie crowned Emperour of Germanie, and returning home from Rome, and buried his father Henrie the fourth at Spire,Exod. 14. which had bin vnburied ine yeares, such was the desire of men for an Empire, and the con∣tempt of an Emperour. The 29▪ Day. THis is the first day of the feast of vnleuened bread, and the fourth day after the Israelites going out of Egypt, at what time Pharo pursued after them with all the peeres of Egypt, and at that time the Lord commaunded Moses to pitch their pauilions betweene Migdol and the red sea in hard and daun∣gerous places, for that God might haue the more glorie: their care was such of Pharo, and of his force following, that they cryed vnto the Lord and he heard them and deliuered them frō the tirannie of Pharo. As vppon this day Romulus the first king and founder ofDionis. Rome tooke the Cittie of Fidena, and brought it vnder obei∣sance of the cittie of Rome in the yeare, 14. Caius Aurelius Cotta then Consull at Rome with great pompe and solemnitie ouer the Africans and ouer the Sicilians, 50. I neede not to set forth euerie triumph with the pompe and solemnitie thereof, for that I haue set some out by the which you may thinke so of the other. Mecenas a great man in honor with Augustus Caesar, and defender of all learned men was borne as pen this
daye, whose memorie was in Rome solemnlie kept, with a feast solemnized by the learned patrons and fauoures of students, he liued together with Horace in the time of Augustus 2. Em∣peror of Rome,Plut. with whome he was greatlie exteemed: this Macenas name is much honoured among learned men, for his fauour to learning. The goddesse Pessinūtia was by Cornelius Scipio brought to Rome called Mater magna or Dea magna, the great mo∣ther or the great goddesse, vnto whome in Phrigia the feast Orgia was celebrated in the honour of this goddesse,Cal. Ro. to whom at the riuer Gallus her priests were gelded and called Galli, according to the riuer, this image was found in the field ofHerod. lib. 1. Phrigia called Pessinuntinam, and the Phrigians therefore called hir Pessinuntia. The 14 Day. THe 6. feast of the vnleuened bread, being as on this day the Israelits pitched their tents before Baal, Sephon, Pharo, & the Egiptians followed after, & the Israelits cried vnto the Lorde, and the Angell of God came be∣tweene the tents of Israell and the tents of Pharao in a pillerPharo. of cloud by day, and in a piller of fire by night, and Moses stretched out his hand ouer the sea as God had commaunded him, and the sea went backe and gaue place for the Israelits to passe drie through the midst of the sea, and Pharao followed after them, and was with his power, and all the Princes of Egipt with all his peeres and all his pompe, drowned in the red Sea, and Moses and the Israelits gaue thanks vnto GodExod. 14. with a song of triumphe, the victorie was so great, and the tri∣umphe was such, that neither Salmanaser, Senaherib, Nabuchadonazar, Cirus, nor Alexander the great, had the like in any triumphe or great victorie of theirs, as Moses had ouer Pharao. Pompeius the great vpon this daye tooke Ierusalem, and entred into Sanctum sanctorum, spoiled the Temple, and wasted the cittie 15. yeares before he was slaine in Egipt by
Septimius and Photinus, at what time he fled from Caesar at Pharsalia for succour to young Pharao, whose father Pompei restored to his kingdome, but his head was sent to Caesar for his good will,Melnch. 2. chron. that was the welcome that Pompey had in E∣gipt with Ptholomey. Octauius Caesar vanquished M. Antonius in the great battell at Mutina vpon this day, where two noble Consuls at Rome named Hircius and Pansa, at that time were slaine in the field, for it was for an empire, and therefore they fought Iustilie, for Cleopatra Queene of Egipt would faine be em∣presse of Rome,Flor. lib. 4 also Antonius seeking to please hir, little ex∣teemed his wife Octauia which was Augustus sister, hence proceeded the cause of these ciuill warres, vntill Antonius was with his louer Cleopatra vanquished. The cittie of Ierusalem was vpon this day besieged by Ti∣tus emperour of Rome, at what time great multitudes of peo∣ple came from euery coast to the feast of the vnleauened bread, which at that time with great solemnitie was according to the commaundement kept at Ierusalem: of the often inuation, spoile & destruction of Ierusalem, you shall many times heere,Ioseph. 6. for it was destroyed fiue times, first by the Egiptians, they by the Chaldeans, and after by the Romans. &c. The Frenchmen after many harde conflicts by the Ger∣mans, and the Germans by the Frenchmen, as vpon this day through the aid of the Hluetians vanquished and ouerthrew the imperiall armie of Charles the fift in Pedemontana at what time the Frenchmen got such a victory yet to their smart, insomuch that Charles the Emperour and Frances Valoys the French king,Pau. Iou. were both contented to conclude a peace, 1544. Leo the fourth Emperor of Rome, in the fift and last yeare of his raigne, at the earnest sute and request of his Nobles, and also of the people, elected and made his sonne Constantine the seauenth of that name his fellow Emperour,Onoph. & Funct. to gouerne with him in the empite, which was the onely sure way to staye him∣selfe in the empire, being matcht with his sonne, as it was the costome and manner of the Romane Emperours to do. 776. Philip a verye yong man, in the 20. yeare of Lodowike
urnamed Crasus was crowned king of Fraunce vpon the sixteene kalend of Maye,Funct. which is the foureteene day of Aprill, 1128. The 15 Daie. THis was the seauenth day and last of the feast called vnleauened after the Israelits passed through the red sea, and had giuen thankes to God for their de∣liuerance, they came to the wildernesse of Sin, which is betweene Elim and Sinai,Exod. 15. where they wandred three dayes, murmering against God and Moises, who tooke them from the flesh pots of Egipt, at what time Quales couered their tents, and Manna couered the ground, so GOD pleased then their humors, and yet were these people not pleased. Numa Pompilius the second king of Rome, instituted a feast to appease the goddes, at what time the plague fell vpon their cattell, this feast was called Fordicidia, in which feast it was not lawful for the priests to offer no sacrifice but pregnan∣tem bouem,Fordicidi at what time the Idols of their housholde gods which were called Lares, had vpon them a long robe made of Dogges skins, and crowned with a Garland made of sweete flowers, to whome sacrifice was offered with corne and Fran∣kencense, for their Idols were kept in their houses and in theyr gardens, to driue sprites away, and to watch their houses from any harme or danger that might happen in the night time. Pipinus sonne to Charles the great king of Fraunce, and Emperour of Rome, was crowned king of Italy by his father,Onoph. and Lodouicus surnamed Pius his other sonne, who succee∣ded him both in the Empire and in the kingdome of Fraunce, was made king of Aquitania, 781. Romanus Argyropylus Emperour of Constantinople,Cedr. when he had raigned fiue yeares and sixe moneths, died vpon this daye, Iustine saith, that he was through treason drowned, where he hathed himselfe, 1033.
Henrie the sixt of that name, was crowned Emperour of Rome by Pope Celestinus with great pompe and solemnitie, this was sonne to Fredericke surnamed Barbarossa, who raigned 38 yeares Emperour,Ooph. during which time this Hen∣rie was crowned king of Rome. 1191. Balduinus first Earle of Flaunders,Funct. and after was elected Emperour of Constantinople, after he had raigned scant one yeare,Iustin. leauing the Empire to his brother Henrie, who succee∣ded him and raigned after him sixe yeares, 1205. I find in some Chronicle, that Charles the seauenth king of Fraunce, as vpon this daye gaue a great ouerthrowe to the Englishmen in Normandy, but it was well requited, for Hen∣rie the sixte king of England,on. Til. in the tenth of this Charles his raigne, was crowned king of France in their cheefe Church at Paris, Functius could say no lesse with wounds and calamities enough to requite the first ouerthrowe, so that Victor became Victus, 1450. The 16 Daie. I Finde not much that were doone vpon this daye worth the writing,Functius. sauing of the death and election of some Bishops of Rome, amongst whom Anicetus the tenth bishop of Rome suf∣fered death vnder the emperour Seuerus, this Bishop instituted that no priest should haue a beard, nor let his hatre to growe long, 160. Lodowicke Countie of Helsfenstein was most cruellye murthered and slaine in an vprore of the Countrie men in Sue∣uia,Sleid. but after they were like sheepe slaine in manye places of Germanie for the same, 1525. I reade that in Scythia they were wont to celebrate a feast once a yeare, in the moneth Thargelion, to worship and to ho∣nour Mars his sworde, in the which beside the sacrificing of a horse, they vsed this ceremonie, to lay the sword of Mars called Acinax, as Mercuries sword was called Harpen, vpon a pile of wood, vnto the which the Scithians did more reue∣rence then to anye of their other gods, and did sacrifice vnto
this sword of euerie 100, prisoner one, as the beastes were sa∣ficed, but in this maner, first they powred wine vpon the heads of the prisoners that should be slain in sacrifice after they tooke them into a certaine great vessell, where they were slaine, and from thence caried to the place where Mars his sword was put vp, and taking the bloud of the sacrificed men, they powred it vpon the sword of Mars for among the Scythians the chiefe seruice is to drincke of the blood of the first man that they kil of their enemies, and to bring his head to the king, of whose scull if hee be a great man the king doth drinke of. The 17 Day. VPon this daie the Iewes were wont to celebrate a feast in memorie of their Passouer which they vsed for a long time after the departing of the Israelites out of Egipt: this was called Festum vincite in remembrance of the noble victorie and glorious triumph they had ouer Pharo with all his peers, nobles, and al the force and power of Egipt, at what time the read sea was appointed by God to make an end of Pharos ty∣rannie, and to giue his people victorie. Felicianus with his naked sword in his hand most cruelly wounded Carolus king of Hungarie beeing at meat, at one ta∣ble with him, and had then slaine him had hee not bin saued by the companie which were with him conuersant at the Table. 1330. Martin Luther being as on this day before Charles the 5. and all the states of Germanie,Munst. lib 3. shewed and opened the falshod the abhominations and wickendes of the Romane religion, of their indulgences, and defended most syncerely this religion. It is written that as vpon this day the sea brake into Flan∣ders, and drowned an hundred thousand people beside the losse of Cattels infinit number, the like hath not bin seene before, as Munster affirmeth.
he 18 Daie. THe feast Equiria was celebrated with great solemnitie at Rome as vpon this day in Circo maximo with other pas∣times and plaies called Circenses ludi, which were alwaies appointed to perfourme some vowes made for victorie obtai∣ned.Cal. Rom. In this feast Equiria the Romanes vsed after the race and running of horses or mules, to tie flaxe to Foxes tailes, and then to fire it, and to let them runne and plaie their partes among the people with much mirth and sport, which they call Vulpium combustio, the burning of the Foxe. Gregorie the fift of that name pope of Rome, who iointly with Otto the second of that name Emperour, appointed and ordeined first the electors of Germanie that should make choise of their Emperour so that by Otto the second and Gregorie the fift this order of election was made, 1001. Mar. Scotus affirmeth that at the feast of Easter Ierusalem was taken and destroied by Titus the emperour, at what time two hundred thousand Iewes perished by sword and famine an hundred thousand sould,Mar. scot. and nintie thousand dispersed into all partes of the world. Uppon the 14. Calend of Maie the old Druydes vsed their sacrifice which was vnder an oke whereon grew Messelden, there they caused diuers and sundrie kindes of meat for their feast and two white bulles to be brought forth bound, the priest being the sacrificer all clad in white should clime vp to the treeThe sacri∣fice of the Druides. with a bill, or an axe in his hand to cut off the Messelden from the tree, then offered they their sacrifice to the Goddes vppon an altar which they made, and laying their handes vpon the al∣tar according to their custome offered Messelden, supposing it to bee a sure remedie for all kinde of poison, and also a present cause in their beasts being barrē to becom, fruitful. Ater sacri∣fice done they sate vnder the oke, and held their feast with their ceremones according to the custome and Lawes of the olde Druydes, which were of all people most superstitious, for in all
Countries their chiefe and greattest men of honour in old time were religious men as among the Persians Magi, among the Ethiopians Gymnosophistae, among the Scythians Agrip∣pei, these were honored as goddes in their countrie, for with∣out the councell and aduise of these men no man in their coun∣treies would presume to take anie thing in hand, these were of such great credite and of such honour as you haue heard before of the aucthorities of the Priestes in Egypt, of Augu∣rers in Rome, and of the old Philosophers in Greece, they appointed their feastes, and they instituted their Sacrifice, and all other Ceremonies belonging vnto their Goddes. The 19 daie ONe of the three daies in which the Israelites were in the wildernesse of Sur, and found no water that they might drinke for it was so bitter,Exod. 15 vntil the Lord shewed vnto Moses a tree which hee com∣maunded to bee cast into the water, and so the waters were made sweete. Uppon the 24. day of the moneth called Nisan, which is the ninteenth of Aprill, at the great Hidekill which is Ti∣gris in prophane histories appeared to Daniel at euen, a man clothed in linnen, whose loines were girded vp with fine gold of Uphaz, his body like vnto the Turkis stoane, his face was like lightning, his eies were like vnto flames of fire, his arms and his feet were like in coloure to pollished brasse, and his voice was like vnto the voice of a great multitude, he instruc∣ted Daniel concerning the kinges of Persea, of Greece, of E∣gypt and of Syria, their continuance and ende, their warres and gouernment, &c. read Daniel who is the verie grounde and center of all true chronicles concerning the three last mo∣narchies of the world. Otto the eight Emperoure of Rome after hee had slaine Galba, and inuaded the Empire, was by Vitellius at that
verie instant made Emperour, who by the armies of the Ger∣manes, was discomfited in a light skirmish at Hebriacus for verie sorrow and greefe smote himselfe into the hart with his owne dagger as vppon this day when hee had raigned but 86.Eutrop. 7. yeares and 15. daies, Phocas who sue and succeeded Mauritius the good Empe∣rour, betweene these two Emperours was great difference, the one gouerned the empire discreetlie and most happie, the other brought the empire by his slouthfulnes and lecherie into such weaknesse and infamie that nothing remained sound, but the naked name of an Emperour, and therfore was burned by Heraclius in a village not far from Constantinople, but Ge∣rardus mercator referreth it to the 27. of March, whereof also I remember to make mention. Philip surnamed Pulcher the 45. king of Fraunce enised Guide the Earle of Flaunders to send his daughter to Paris and willed 30 Noble men and 30 gentlewomen to accompanie her thether, promising to marrie hir, whom hee welcomed in this sort, he drowned the Earles daughter with hir thirtie gen∣tlewomen and hanged 30. noble men,Cron. reg. Franc. and within a while after the Earle of Flaunders him selfe was taken by deceipte of Carolus phillips brother, and had the like entertanment, hereby grew great and terrible warres, in so much that philip was iustlie depriued out of his kingdome. This day among the Egyptians was recorded in the bokes of their prieses at Memphs called of the Romanes Egyptia∣cus dies. The 20 daie THe Senators were wont to meete altogether as vpon this day in the Capitoll,Romulus and there both dined and supped that night, feasting and banquetting in the honour of Romulus their first founder and first King. Uppon this day it was not lawfull to kill any beast for sacrifice, they kept it so solemne and so religious, for Romulus was so fauoured among the olde Romanes, that long after his death they named him Quirinus
and sacrificed vnto him vnder that name. Constantinus the fift surnamed Capronimus so called or that he defiled his crisme at the font when he was baptised sig∣num impietatis futurae, as Iustine saith, this was the sonne of Leo Isaurius,Pant lib. 4 Iustin. who abolished Idols and Images, this Capro∣nimus as vpon this day, was by his father created Emperour with him to gouerne, 720. Mauritius Emperour of Constantinople a Cappadocian borne, of a poore Notarie became Emperour, vanquished the Persians, and the Armenians, he repressed the Longobards in Italie,Iustin. & Scotus. and with many moe victories gouerned the empire with both courage and wisdome, but for his extreame auarice, not paying vnto the souldiers their wages, he with his two sonnes Theodosius and Tiberius were slaine by Phocas that succee∣ded him, as vpon this day, of this he was admonished in sleepe by a dreame, as Iustine and Scotus affirmeth, 603. Heraclius the sonne of Heracleona, Emperour of Con∣stantinople, vpon this daye got a triumphant victorie ouer the Persians, with fire and sworde both in Persia and in Medea, he let lose Romane captiues and prisoners 50 thousand, hee persecuted their king Cosroes into Media, burning & killing: this Heraclis was the only scourge of Persea,Diac. lib. 2 Functius. during whose time Cosroes could neuer gouerne his kingdome, neither stay in Persea, but from place to place persecuted by Heraclius, vntil Cosroes was slaine by his owne sonne Hormisda, to get his kingdome. The 21 Day. PLutarche in the life of Romulus affirmeth, that the build∣ing of Rome began vpon this day,Plut. Solin. cap. 2. and that Romulus pro∣portioned and measured the compasse of the wals, and setled downe the plot of the citie, which was in the beginning but a little thing, and vpon that very daye that Romulus began to build Rome, Numa Pomp. the second king that suceeded him, was borne in Cures a towne of the Sabines. Palilia festa in the honour of the goddesse Pales was cele∣brated
of the Shepheards before the building of Rome by Ro∣mulus▪ The Shepheards vsed in the dawning of this daye, to decke and to adorne the sheepefolde with greene bowes and branches, and with greene turffes, with diuers kind of floures. Likewise they cast squibbes and such other pretie deises, with fire, with much sport and pastime, which feast of Shepheardes according to their custome was kept, and solemnly celebrated vpon the same day that Rome was builded, in the which feast it was not by the law of Numa Pomp. lawfull to offer any sa∣crifice of blod vnto Pales the goddesse of Shepheards that day, for in those feasts that either a great citie was builded or a great prince borne, no beast might be kilde, no bloud might be sacrificed,Plin. lib. 18. cap. 26. neither lawfull once to name the peculiar god of that place, altogether like to the feast of Natalitia, which is the feast of Natiuities, and also like to the feast Terminalia, which is celebrated to the God of Confines. The sacrifice in this feast among the Shepheards, were wafers, garlike, and new wine boiled. This was first instituted by Romulus, by the name of Natalitia, and Pallilia was celebrated by the Shep∣heards before Rome was builded. In the 1000. yeare after the building of Rome, Philippus the first Christian Emperour of Rome, together with his sonne Philip began their raigne, in the second of their Empire some say they made great preparations and great solemnities of games and shewes at Rome, with such pompe and magnifi∣cence, as the like had not beene seene since the Consuls time, he celebrated the games called Seculares ludi,Eutrop. lib. 9. which were the onelie plaies of pompe and magnificence, and were with great solemitie plaide, and it was the last time that Ludi se∣culares were plaide in Rome, for those plaies were but sil∣dome plaide. Probus the 36. Emperour of Rome, after he had raigned sixe yeares and three moneths, a stoute and a iust Emperour, expert in warfare and courteous in behauiour, he was the last Emperour that triumphed in Rome, afterward he was slaine at Syrmiu in an vprore which grew among the Souldiers in
an Iron tower, as Scotus affirmeth:Iust. de vit. Cs. but Onophrius refer∣reth it to the 2. of December. The renowned prince king Henrie the seauenth, after long sickenesse deceased at Richmond, as vpon this day, but of some referred to the 22. of Aprill after he had raigned 23. yeares and eight moneths, and on the ninth of Maye he was brought to Paules with many Nobles, Knights, and Gentlemen, and a thousand torches burning before him: & on the morrow was buried at Westminster on the eleuenth of Maye, in the new chappell which he had caused to be builded, 1508. The 22 Daie. HOnorius the sonne of Theodosius raigned Emperour of Rome, in the same sele yeare that Arcadius raigned Em∣perour in Constantinople, and dyed as vpon this day, after he had raigned with Arcadius thirteene yeares, and with Theo∣dosius lunior which was Arcadius sonne sixteene yeares,Plat. Scot. Onoph. in this Emperors time the booke which the Iewes call Talmud, was made by two Rabbines of the Iewes, as Platina and Scotus affirmeth, but Onophrius referreth it to the fifteene of August, 414. As vpon this daye in the Cittie of Florence in Italie, be∣ing vpon the Sabbaoth day, a company of factious Cittizens called Pactiana, entred into the Church at masse time, ran vp∣on the house and familie of Medeces,  Iulianus, and woun∣ded a Nobleman called Laurentius and many others, among whome Laurentius escaped and made away with his weapon, and hauing some aide by his good freends, presently fought with them,Volat. lib. 5. tooke them and hanged a number of them to the ve¦rie windowe of the towne court. As Volat in his fit booke af∣meth, 1478.
The 23 Daie. THe feast called Vinalia priora, was celebrated & solem∣nized in Rome vpon this day to Iupiter and to Venus, in this feast the Romanes vsed to take the first taste of their wine, and to consecrate certaine vessels in sacrifice for Iupiter against the feast daye of Vinalia:Plin. lib. cap. 29. of this feast I shall speake more in an other place. Mahomet the false prophet of the Saracens, was borne vp∣on this day being then vpon Friday, 593. and therefore the Arabians and the Sarazens obserue fridaye for their chiefest feast,Herod. 3. and they honour that daye as the Christians honour the Sabaoth which is Sunday, & they begin to acount their years from that day, as we doe from the yeare of our Lord and Sa∣uiour, which they call Hegyra which is to them peculiar, as to the Spaniards Aera, or as indictions were now last the ac∣count of the Romans, after their Lustrum or Consulatus. Michael the fourth of that name, Emperour of Constanti∣nople, sonne to Andronicus Senior surnamed Palaeologus, was slaine vpon this daye, 867. The 24 Daie. AS vpon this daye,Plutar. in Camillo. Troye a most famous cittie in Asia, was taken, after ten yeares terrible warres betweene the Greekes and the Troians, in this warre died the most part of the famous men that then flourished in all Greece and Asia,Volat. 4 lib. . and that for one lewd woman named Hele∣na. The historie is so well knowne, that I neede not much to speake of it, yet others referre it to another day, which I in an other place haue layde downe more at large, Anno mundi. 783.
The Romans vsed as vppon this daye to celebrate an an∣cient feast called Lustria festa, this feast had diuers kindes of vses, and was celebrated of all kind of persons, the captaines and the souldiers solemized this feaste in this sort.Lustria festa. They sounded their trompets most pleasantly at euerie chiefe place in the cittie, at what time they did view their armories, muniti∣ons, engins, and other preparations for warres, and then came to the Temple of Mars,Cal. Rom. and with great ioy feasted and after they vsed sacrifice vnto Mars. Another kind of this viewing called Lustrum was vsed at the funerall of the dead emperors great generalles that died in the warres, they would with great funerall pompe three times compasse the pile of woode being armed, and with speares in their hands and shaking them with frowning lookes at the pile of wood, as it were vppon an enemie of the countrie, for it was appointed to burie the bodie of those Emperours, kinges, and princes, they going processi∣on like about the hearse, wailing and lamenting the death of the Emperour, do sing most tragicall verses in mournful man∣ners, shaking still their swords and speares, and stamping the ground with their feet vntil the bodie be laid vpon the pile, then they threw all sweet flowers, spices and odors vpon the body, and after the burying, they take his ashes into seuerall pottes and keepe it, diuers kindes of feastes bee called Lustrum, of which I shal more at large shewe as occasion serueth. The Carthaginians were vanquished in Sicilia by Timo∣leon the Corinthian in a great battaile,Plnt. ouer whome hee tri∣umphed at Rome as vppon this day. The first king of Fraunce called Pharamundus was elec∣ted as vppon this day, 419. at what time the Frenchmen were called Sicambri from the 86. of Olympiad vntill Francus time, which was in the, 104. Olympiad, of this Francus they were named Frenchmen.Triteuis. The 25 Day. PLyntria festa which properlie in Athens is solemnised vnto
Minerua vppon the 25. of September, but sometime in Apr and sometime in Iulie but the ceremonie is a like at all times, for the priestes of Minerua called Praxiergides do take from the image of this goddesse al hir raiment and iewels, & keep the image close couered ouer, at what time certaine secret sacrifice with hidden ceremonies thereunto belonging were celebrated vnto Minerua, in bathing and in washing y• image with sweete rose water, with decking of it againe with diuers kinde of flo∣wers,Plut. with spices and delicate odors, for so it is named among the Athenians the weshing feast, & compted vnfortunate to do any thing, for that Minerua as vppon that daye is not to bee seene. Also by Numa Pompilius the second king of Rome Rubi∣galia festa was instituted in Rome, and vppon this day cele∣brated in the second yeare of Numas raigne, for that time the corne should be weeded, which feast is celebrated out of the cittie of Rome in the fields by Iupiters priests called Flamen Quirinalis,Plin. 18. the sacrifice that should be offered in this feast to Pales for Corne and for cattell, was wine and frankensence powred vpon the entraels of a dogge, with verses song vnto the goddesse Pales to prosper the corne and the cattell, and to pre∣ferre the fruites of the fields. Alcibiades after hee had bin banished from Athens, for his carelesse and negligent seruice at Siracasa, hee went to Sparta,Plut. anno mundi 3549. and conferred with the Lacedemonians against his countreymen the Athenians, yet by meanes of Thrasybulus, Alcybiades was receiued againe into Athens with great ioie. The famous cittie of Tripolis was by the Souldane,Pantal. 4. and the Saracens vpon this day subdued & ouerthrowen, at what time all the Christians were slaine that dwell there or were at that warre. The 26 Daie. MOses and Aaron were commaunded to number the Isra∣lites in the wildernes the number wherof came to 603550.
that were about twentie yeares of age, and beside the Leuites which were 22000. died all in the wildernesse for their diso∣bedience and their vnthankfulnesse towardes God onelie, Iosua and Caleb excepted The Temple at Ierusalem was begon as vpon this daie to be built by Zorobabel. Nehemias and other infinite number of the Iewes that returned from the captiuitie of Fabilon, at what time they laid the foundation of the house of God in the new moone of the second moneth and in the second yeare theyChap. 1. were come to Iurie and to Ierusalem of their vowes and sacri∣fices read the third of Esdras. Marius Antonius surnamed the Philosopher was borne asEutrop. 8. vpon this day in his time onelie the Romanes were gouerned by two emperours at one time, who with indifferent authoritie gouerned the empire, in whose time on part of England recei∣ued the faith. Conradus the second of that name, a French man borne, was by Pope Iohn the second of that name, 1027. with great solemnitie and pompe at Rome crowned Emperour, and his brother Gebardus for that he rebelled against the Emperour his brother, was compelled to bee a Muncke. Conradus cre∣ated then his owne sonne king of Rome in the second yeare of his raigne. The 27 daie OT to the fourth of that name was crowned Emperour by y• consent of al the princes of Germanie by pope Innocenti∣us the fourth in contempt of Philip the sonne of Fredericke Barbarossa brother to Henrie the sixte, who then gouerned the Empire.Onoph. This Otto maried Philip daughter, and raigned foure yeares, inuaded Sicilia, and did much iniurie vnto the church, wherefore Pope Honorius excommunicated him. I can find no great thing written vpon this daie. The 28 daie THe feast called Floralia was at Rome vpon this day cele∣brated,
this feast was commaunded by the bookes of Sibilla, with great honor and solemnitie to bee kept, at what time the Romanes were wont to sacrifice vnto their goddesse Flora all kind of flowers and fruits that the earth yeelded most deuout∣lie and religiouslie crauing Flora to prosper and to encrease all thinges in their fields and elswhere abrode,Pantal. lib. 4. 516▪ after the buil∣ding of Rome. Likewise the old Romanes celebrated great games and so∣lemne shewes called Ludi celebres, these plaies endured vntil the fourteeuth of May, for these plaies which the Ediles vsed vppon the Theaters when it pleased them, for all other plaies sauing the plaies of Ludi celebres, and Ludi Liberales had their daies and times appointed by the law of the high bishop, and by the Priestes flamines. Syuius Otto was borne as vppon this day in the 34. yeare after Christ as Functius noted in his tables of the Emperour of Rome, at what time Aruntius Camillus & Domitius Ae∣nobardus were Consuls at Rome, this after inuaded by kil∣ling of Galba the seuenth Emperoure of Rome,Eutrop. 7. when that Galba had raigned but seauen moneths, and euen so Otto was by Vitellius in like sort vanquished within 95. daies of his raigne, at what time Otto as you heard of his death, in ano∣ther place, thrust himselfe into the hart with his owne dag∣ger, As vppon this day, 518. Fla. Valerius Emperour of Con∣stantinople, surnamed by the Grecians Dicoros, for that he had one blacke eie, and the other graie, was stricken by a thunder∣bolt and died after hee had raigned 27▪ yeares, this Emperour was by the perswasion of his wife much addicted to the mon∣struous heresie of Eutichianus,Mar. scot. some say this emperour died the tenth of Iulie. The 29 daie A Great ceremonie according to the custome of the Romans were celebrated as vppon this day to the goddesse Vesta in mount Palatine, where sometime Romulus the founder and
first king of Rome dwelt.Noid. in fast. Decius the 29 emperor of Rome borne at Bubalia in Hun∣garia, in whose time the 8. persecution began, he persecuted the christians so extreamlie, that he made an act that all that worshipped Christ should be slaine, but he and his sonne called also Decius in the warres against the Gothes were slaine, some wrote that he was drowned in Thracia in the riuer A∣bricium, some wrote that he was swallowed into the earth by an earthquake,Eutrop. 6. Funct. and some say that he suncke in bogs and ma∣rish ground, his bodie could neuer bee found, hee raigned two yeares. The 30 Daie. ARcadius Emperor of Constantinople deuiding the Empire betweene Honorius, who then was made Emperour and himselfe: this Arcadius fol∣lowing his wife Eudoxias councell, fell into such hatred that his owne Tutor Rufinus conspired his death with Alaricus king of the Gothes, but Rufinus treason was found, and therefore he was slaine, Caianus attempted the like trea∣son, and was likewise slaine: this Arcadius banished that god∣lie and learned man Iohn Chrisostome Bishop of Constanti∣nople, and after he had raigned thirteene yeares died vpon this daye, leauing behind him Theodosius Iunior his sonne to suc∣ceede him. A great terrible earthquake was in Italie vpon this daye, at what time Charles the great the first Emperour and king of that name,Lycosth. de prodij. was at Spoletum, this earthquake did much harme not onely in Italie, but also in Fraunce and Ger∣manie. 802.
The names of those Consuls and Captaines that had their triumphes graunted them by the Senators at Rome, within the moneth of Aprill, are these that followe. 1 Q. Martius Phillippus. 2 M. Valerius Max. 3 C. Sempronius Blesus. 4 S. Caruilius Max. 5 P. Posthumis Tubertus. 6 Agrippa Menenius Lanatus. 7 C. Aurelius Cotta. The names of the feasts and sacrifices celebrated with great solemnitie in Rome within this moneth of April. Thargelia. Vernalia. Carnia. Fordicidia. Vincite. Equiria. Quirinalia. Agonia. Palilia. Vinalia. Lustria. Plyntiria. Robigalia. Floralia. The solemne games and plaies in Rome within Aprill are thus named. Megalenses Ludi. Ludus Magnus. Ludi Cereales. Ludi Hastiles. Ludi Celebres. Finis Aprilis mensis.
Of the moneth of Maie with the Hebrewes called lair, their second moneth: with the Atheniaus called Scyrophorion their last moneth: and with the Aegiptians called Pachon their ninth moneth. The first Daie. THis moneth of Maie is called with the Iewes Iair, and the first daie of Maie is the 6 of Iair, and with the Athenians named Scyrophorion,Nouid. lib. 5. this moneth in old time was consecrated vnto Maia the mother of Mercurius, for as vpon this day in old Rome a temple was both consecrated and dedicated vnto Maia vnder the name of Bona dea:Mar. scot▪ lib. 12. in this temple one of Vulcans priests called Fla∣men Vulcanalis, should offer a Sowe farrowing to Mercu∣rie and to this mother Maia. The Romanes vsed to sacrifice on this day, and with much solemnitie they were woont to offer vpon the altars of their goddesses euery goddesse in hir owne temple, and vpon hir own altar, diuerse kindes of oblations and sundrie orders of sacrifi∣ces to their cheefe Idol, which they called Bona dea, another to Fauna, another to Saturnus wife called Ops, and another to the goddesse Fatua, of these Macrobius in his first booke,Macrob. lib. 1. and Nouidius in his fift booke maketh mention. Likewise they sacrificed to their houshould gods called Lares, the order and discription of their ceremonies in these sacrifices I haue ex∣pounded them in their places, the Athenians also held a feast called Scyreum festum, in this feast none might be but the Senators and cheefe men of the cittie of Athens, resem∣bling much the Iewes feast called Palmarum festum,Vmbra∣cula. at what time they vsed to make them boothes of greene branches, of palmes, and of Oken boughes: in like sort as the Romans kept the feast called Vmbracula, so the Athenians kept theyr feast called Scyrea.
Put. Valerius Publicola (the first Consul of Rome after their kings,) vpon this day triumphed ouer the Sabines, and ouer the Uients, he was the first that entred into Rome, trium∣phing vpon a chariot drawne with foure horses, the victories of this noble Romane were many,Liis. Plutarch. for he had beene foure times Consul, a very discreet wiseman, he did in his time set vp some solemne games and feasts, & appointed sacrifices vnto Pluto, for he found in some of Sibils books that the oracles of Apollo were not fully kept, who euer commaunded feasts and sacrifi∣ces to be doone to the goddes, as Liuius and Plutarch affir∣meth, 278. In like order triumphed Quintus Publius Philo being then Poconsul of Rome ouer the Samnits, and ouer the Palepo∣litans with great honour and solemnitie at Rome, and by the full consent of the Senators, for none might enter with a tri∣umph into Rome without the Senators had licenced the same,The tri∣umph of Q. pub. so great was the authoritie of the Senate: this triumph was in the 427 yeare after the building of Rome. Leo, the sonne of Constantinus the fift, surnamed Capro∣nimus, Emperour of Constantinople, after he had raigned fiue yeares, and had made his sonne Constantinus the fixt of that name with the consent of the people emperour, to gouerne ioyntlie with him in the Empire, dyed as vpon this day, 790. Pipinus surnamed the short, was created king of Fraunce vpon this day, 751: This was sonne to Charles the great, and brother to Lewes called Pius. This Charles in his life time had made Lotarius his eldest sonne king of Italie, and made this Pipinus his second Sonne king of Aquitania,Functius. and made his third sonne called Lewes king of the Noricans, as Functius affirmeth, yet others varrie in this. Bela the third, and 14 king of Hungarie, died vpon this day, after he had raigned 23 yeares 1199. The second Day. THis day was taken for an vnfortunate daye among the olde Romans, and so recorded, that no man might marrie vpon
this daie, for among the Romanes certaine daies were prohi∣bited to marrie, called dies non npiales, as Macrobius maketh mention. M. Claudius Marcellus consull at Rome, in the which of∣fice hee had bene seauen seuerall times,Plut. and for his courage and prowes, the Romanes called him ensem Romanum the sweard of Rome, of whom Hanniball was woont to say, nec victorem nec victum quietum habeo Marcellum, and also named him the Romane Hanniball as vppon this day trium∣phed ouer the Insubrians and ouer the people of Comenses, 557. This day was the birthday of Frederick marques of Bran∣denburge the sonne of Albertus surnamed the Achilles Ger∣manicus, vpon the which day the Saracens were ouerthrowenNouidi. 5. by the Greekes in Thracia by sea. The 3 Day. THe Romans recorded this day diem Egyptiacum in their calenders, on the which day the women of Rome might not lawfullie goe into the Chappell of the holie crosse, for the E∣gyptians had two vnfortunate dayes, in the which the priestes of Egypt had commaunded, that nothing should be attempted on those daies, the Romanes being as superstitious as they, obserued these two daies with like reuerence as the Egyptians did, as Nouidius affirmeth. Mahomet the second of that name, and the sixt Emperour of the Turkes as vppon this day sent three seuerall armies,Paul. Io. the first to Italie, the second to Rhodes, and the third to Egypt, in which armie he was present himselfe, this Emperour affec∣ted the whole world, and therefore began in Greece with the empire of Constantinople, which he besieged and subdued, and after died at Bythinia of the Colicke, 1481. The cittie of Constantia was most lamentablie burned as vpon this day, 1314. vppon the which time also happened such an earthquake in Polonia that manie townes fell,Chron. 7. and much cattel lost not without the distruction of manie people, 1200.
The 4 daie VPon this day in the cittie of Rome were great games and solemne shewes which continued 6. daies, either in remem∣brance of anie great victorie had ouer the enemie, or in memo∣ry of some kingdom gottē to the Empire of Rome, or for some great fortune past.Cal. Rom. The Romans were wont vpon those daies to celebrate with great pomp and solemnitie games or plaies called Ludi magni, as these games Circences, Cereales, Se∣culares, and yet counted one of the vnfortunate daies among the Romanes. Aulus Manlius being then consul of Rome, when he had wa∣ged battail against Phalisa a wealthie citie in Italie,Liui. he wan it within 9. daies siege, where he slue 15. thousand, the residue hee graunted life vnto, ouer whom he had a triumph graunted by the Senate, 512. Anacletus the third bishop of Rome, the successor of Linus who succeeded Peter the Apostle (if at anie time Peter was bishop of Rome) this Anacletus raigned Bishop 12. yearesOnoph. and two moneths, hee ordained that a Bishop should be conse∣crated by the three Bishops, and a priest should be made by one Bishop. Carolus the second of that name king of Neaples after he had raigned 25. years died, after whom succeeded Robertus, 1308. The 5 daie VPon this day Noah had warning to make the arke as God commaunded him saying, make thee an arke of Pine tree, pitch it within and without, the length thereof shall bee 300. Cubites, the breadth 50. and the height of the arcke shall bee thirtie, &c. a windowe of a cubite length, and two dores in the syde of the arke,Genes. 6 and three loftes one aboue another. Carolus the great, and first of that name king of Frannce, and after emperour of Germanie, was intreated by Pope Ha∣drian the first of that name, and the 29. pope to come vnto I∣talie
against the Longobards, who much molested the Romane state, at what time Charles ouerthrew their army and banished Desiderius their king, who after yeelded himselfe to Charles, and so finished the kingdome of the Longobards, which conti∣nued in Italie 204 yeares,Pantal. 6. and brought them subiect to the crowne of Fraunce. Cazimirus king of Polonia in the 25. yeare of his raigne was by treason poisoned, and on this day died, 1194. This Ca∣zimirus had four prouinces within Russia hee vanquished the Prussians and brought the Russians subiect to Polonia,Funct. as Functius saieth. Augustinus first a great philosopher and then a great here∣tick being the reader of the rhetoricke lector in Millaine, by of∣ten hearing of Ambros his sermons then Bishop of Millaine, and by often conferring was conuerted vpon this daie as Vin∣centius affirmeth vnto Gods church, and became the onely doctor of the Latine church, at what time raigned in Rome Gratianus and Valentianus emperours, 373. Vincentius saith that hee was after disciple to Ambrose, and was made bishop of Hipponia in Africk. The 6 Daie. VPon this day Pau. Iouius affirmeth that the citie of Rome togither with pope Clement the 7. of that name was takenPau. Iou. and spoiled by the imperiall armie of Germanie by the Spa∣niards aide, at what time Charles duke of Burbonie, was shot through and laine at that assault. The 7 daie Ides of May are consecrated lari¦de. to the houshold Gods, at what time they vsed solemne with such  and ceremonies as vppon this day the bakers of Rome did vse, to crowne their Asses with
bread made of dough, and made garlandes likewise of Oken boughes about their Asses neckes, and in the which feast the bakers of Rome were wont to sacrifice vnto their domesticall Idols called Lares, new bread and fine flower, this was a great festiual day among the bakers and with great solem∣nitie in Rome obserued. Cais Sulpitius Petitus hauing bin three seuerall times consull at Rome and after made dictator who in his office of Dictatorship did triumph ouer the Gaules being afterward called Frenchmen. Likewise Q. Fabius Vibulanus an excellent Romane of that time before ten Commissioners called Decemuiri were created seauen yeares, and within 50 yeares of the last ouer∣throwPlutar. of Torquinus Superbus the seauenth and last king of Rome triumphed ouer the people called Aqui, 294. yeares after the building of Rome. Titus the sonne of Vespasian the emperour a man worthy of admiration, and full of good vertues called homini delici being with his father at the assaulting of Ierusalem, shot 12. arrowes and lue with euerie arrow one of the Iewes, he was wont to saie that day was lost in the which hee gaue nothing, for hee would say that no man ought to depart from an empe∣rour sad or sorrowful, vpon this day through his great agillite and courage,Iosephus. first woon the walles, for Ierusalem was strong∣lie walled by reason of so long warres, for it was fiue times conquered. Otto the second sonne to Otto the first Emperour of Ger∣manie was elected king at Vuormatia, and was crowned Em∣perour at Rome, and raigned with his father 6, yeares and af∣ter his fathers death 10. years he maried Theophania daugh∣ter to Io. Zimisces Emperour of the Grecians for the empe∣rour of Constantinople was so called, he subdued Henrie duke of Bauaria, and had good successe against the Greekes and also against the Saracens, hee wasted and spoiled the most part of Bohemia he brought his arme against Lotarius the 33. king of Fraunce, hee burned and destroied vnto the verie cittie of Paris, and also burned the suburbes of Paris, he died at Rome, poisoned by the Italians for his too much seueritie
gouernment as is thought, 984. Likewise Ladislaus the third, and sonne to Emericus the 16. king of Hungaria, after he had raigned scant one yeare, died as Functius saith the seauenth Calend of September, Bonfinus affirmeth that he raigned 16. yeares, who in this is before Functius to be beleeued,Bonf. lib.  for his decades do entreat on∣ly of Germany. The 8 Daie. THis day was an vnfortunate day among the Romans, for the first day of euery moneth after the Nones,Gel. lib. 5. is re∣corded vnluckie, for some great ouerthrowe which the Romans vpon this day sustained. The Uirgins of Rome as vpon this daye, in the temple of S. Michael, vsed in old time to be married, for that the Ro∣mans suppose that Michaell the Archangell appeared in thatNouid. 5. place where they then builded and dedicated a temple in me∣mory thereof in the suburbes of Rome, and therefore all the maides of Rome made choise of this day to marrie. Henrie sonne to Frederike the second of that name, Em∣perour of Germanie, being yet but a boye in Colonia, was by his father the emperor caused to be crowned king of Rome,Ger. Mer. and after sent him to Calabria to see good order and peace kept, 1222. As vpon this day Letters came from Artaxerxes king of Persia, vnto Themistocles at Magnesia, to leauie souldiers, to assemble Captaines, and charging him straightly to haue an eye to the Grecians armie, according to his promise made vn∣to Artaxerxes when he was banished from Athens, at what time he was taken into such fauour with the king of Persia, as he graunted vnto Themistocles the reuenues of three great citties of Asia, for his allowance of bread, wine, & vittels, these three citties were Myontia, Lampsacus & Magnesia, where Themistocles was when these letters came from the king, but after Themistocles had wayed the charge of Artaxerxes, he resolued with himselfe in this sort. After secret sacrifice vnto the gods, and solemne feast made vnto his friends, first to keep
promise with the king of Persia, to whome he promised his ser∣uice during his life against the Gretians,Themis∣tocles dieth. and therefore he re∣solued to die like a true Grecian, for his promise was but du∣ring life, for he manfully dranke Bu bloud mingled with poiso, and dyed least he might seeme to saine the glory of the Athenians, or hinder Cimon of his victories and triumphes which he was like to haue ouer the Persians at that time. The 9 Day. AS vpon this daye at night the Romans vsed great sacrifices and ceremonies for three seuerall nights one after another,Nouid. lib. 5. to purge and to cleanse theyr houses from sprites that walked in the night time called Lemures, and therefore they solemnized and dedicated feasts to those sprits called Lemuria octurna, to driue those sprites from their houses, supposing by their sacrifices to ap∣peace them. As on this day being the 14. of the second moneth air, they which were defiled by a dead man or any other way vnclean should keepe the passeouer vnto the Lord, for they were defer∣red for their vncleannesse from the 14. day of the first moneth, vntill the 14 of the second moneth, and they should eate it with vnleauened bread and sower hearbes as the Lord had com∣maunded,Deut. 9. also they should leaue none of it vntill the morning, nor breake any bone of it. After that Ezechias had proclaimed throughout all Israell from Beerseba to Dan, that they should come and ould the feast of the passeouer at Ierusalem the 14. daye of the second moneth,2. Chro. 30 the Leuits slue the passeouer the same day, and brought in the burnt offerings vnto the house of the Lord, in this feast Eechias king of Iuda gaue 1000 yong Oxen, and seuen thousand sheepe to the congregation, and his Lords gaue also 1000 Oxen and 1000 sheepe, and so in this feast a great number of the Priests and of the Lets were sanctified,  there was great gladnesse and ioye in Ierusa∣lem.
The 10 Daie. AS vpon this day, Clau. Tiberius Nero the third Em∣perour of Rome, sonne to Liuia Augustus wife by hir first husband, triumphed ouer the Germans the Illyri∣ans, the Dalmatians and ouer the Pannonians, & af∣ter this great triumphe fell to all kinde of lasciuiousnesse,Funct. Eutrop. 7. in so much that he became in such contempt with the people that in∣steed of Tiberius Nero they called him Biberius Mero, and he commaunded that the cheefe cittie of Cappadocia called Mazaca should be called Caesarea after him. Tiberius Claudius sonne to Drusus and vncle to Cali∣gula the fift Emperour of Rome, was borne vpon this day,Funct. chron. on the which day Camillus a Romane was proclaimed empe∣rour in Dalmatia by the Soudliors, and vpon the fift day after he was slaine by the same selfe Souldiors. The 11 Daie COnstantinople before time called Byzantium, a noble cit∣tie in Thracia, was as vpon this day after her second buil∣ding, finished in the 20 yeare of the raigne of Constantine the great, and in all points made equall to Rome, and by some cal∣led Noua Roma,Cedr. Funct. but he named it Constantinople after his owne name, he rebuilded a new the cittie Drepana in Betha∣nya, and named it Helenopolis after his mothers name which was named Helena. Lotarius sonne to Lewis surnamed Pius the 24 king of Fraunce, and the second Emperour of Rome of a French∣man, after that his father Lewis the godlie dyed, Lotarius succeeded him in the Empire, but his two brethren rebelled against him Lewis and Charles surnamed Caluus, a battell was fought betweene them at Fononiacus, where after the shedding of much blood they concluded a peace,Pant. lib. 3 Lotarius should hould Italie, and the empire, Charles should be king of Fraunce, and Lewes should gouerne Germany and Hun∣geria, 824.
The 12 Daie. IN the 600 yeares of Noach life, and in the 17. day of the second moneth, entred Noah with his three sonnes, Sem, Cham, and Iaphet, and their three wiues into the arke: Come thou and all thy house (said the Lord to Noah) to the arke, for thee haue I seene righteous in this generation, and take of e∣uery cleane beasts seauen and seauen, the male and his female, but of the vncleane cattell take two, the male and the female, of fowles of the ayre seuen, and seuen the male and the female, to keepe seed a liue on earth,enes. 7. and they came two and two, male and female, into the arke as God had commaunded them. In Athens as vpon this daye, a great feast was solemnlie kept and celebrated in the memorie of the most famous and glorious victorie at Mantinaea the cheefe cittie of Arcadia, the glorie thereof fell to the Thebans,Plut. through the prowisse and courage of Epamondas their generall. Lu. Cornelius Maluginenses, then Consul at Rome, tri∣umphed ouer the Volicans and the Antiates,Cal. Rom. after which tri∣umphe the triumphant banquet was celebrated with great pompe and solemnity from Bellonas temple vnto the Capitol, in the 294. yeare after the building of Rome. Charles king of Fraunce, hauing subdued the Neopoli∣tans, entered into the Cittie of Naples with a most solemne triumphe,Functius. with great pompe and honour most sumptuous and riche in his imperiall robes, but he was troubled by the Vene∣tians and by the power of Millaine in his returne from Nea∣poles to Fraunce, this Charles had married a Duches of England, espoused before to Maxilian the Emperor. The 13 daie. THis was the third and last daye of the feast Lemuria, at what time the men and the women celebrated a feast with great pompe and solemnitie, according to the old & auncient
rites and ceremonies of the Romans for feastes and sacrifices were the onelie meanes they vsed to appease their gods, for e∣uery victory or triumph they had they celebrated a feast in me∣morie of that day, and for euerie ouerthrow they receaued they recorded that to be a most vnfortunate day. The Romans began their games and plaies as vppon this day, which were called Persici udi, which continued for the space of fiue daies in memorie of the victories which the Ro∣manes obtained against the Persians,Cal. Pet. ouer whom triumphed T. Flaminius with great pompe, and after him againe trium∣phed P. Aemilius with woonderfull great regall solemnitie. The temple of Pantheon was as on this day consecrated at Rome with great solemnitie,Nouid. 5. vppon whose alter cherries and beanes were offered in sacrifice, &c. Also the Iewes do celebrate a solemne feast in memorie of the great plague, in the which died 3000. learned Iewes: as v∣pon this day ended this feast which was kept by the Iewes 30. daies after their feast called Manupulorum festum. The 14. Day LEwis the eleuenth king of Fraunce ouerthrew thePantal. 5. Uenetians as vpon this day in a great and terri∣ble battaile at Bondinum, where 8000. Ita∣lians were slaine. Cleomenes king of Sparta being taken of Ptolomi king of Egipt in the wars was put in prison, but Cleomenes brake the prison in Alexandria, but when he saw he could not escape the handes of the king (after much slaughter within the towne) exhorted his companie which were but thirtie in number to die like men by their own handes and not by the enemie saying, let not Fortune triumph ouer fortitude, which being perfourmed, and the newes brought to Ptolomie, hee caused the bodie of king Cleomenes to be hanged vp vpon a Crosse and commaū∣ded also his bodie their to bee kept and watcht, the watch at length espied a serpent wreathed about his head, and coueres
all his face, in so much that no raning fowle durst come neere him, the king fell to so supericious a feare that hee had of∣fended the Goddes, that hereupon he with his nobles and all the Ladies of the court began to make manie sacrifices of pu∣rification,Plutar. making also their praiers and supplications vnto Cleomenes as vnto ademie God, calling him the sonne of the Gods, with sacrifising of diuers oblations in the verie place, of execution so supersticious and blinde, were those Egyptians in religion towards their gods. The 15. daie FRom the desarts of Sinay the children of Israell departed vpon the twenteeth daie of the second moneth, and rested in the wildernes of Pharan, at what time the Lord commaunded Moses to make two trompets of syluer to call the congregation together when y• campe should iourney: these trompets should bee sounded also on their feast daies in the beginning of their moneths,Num 10. they were likewise commaunded by the Lord to sound these trompets ouer their burnt sacrifices and peace offeringes. The Romanes vsed sacrifice after their heathenish custome vppon this daie to Iupiter feretrum, and vpon the which daie they were wont to make Images of rushes, called scyrpea si∣mulacra to offer vppon the Altar of their Idols, when none might celebrate sacrifice, or approch nigh to any of the sacred altars before he had sprinckled his bodie with cleane water, and had vppon his head a crowne of lawrell consecrated by Iupiters Priest called Flamen dialis,Flamen. to whom the sacrifice was solem∣nised: besides he should be instructed in the secrete misteries of the hidden ceremonies belonging to the sacrifice. Uppon this day God Mercurie was born, to whom the Ro∣manes builded a Temple in a place called Circus maximus there they celebrated a great solemne feast,Liuius. and vsed sacrifice, and appointed sundrie games and plaies, and all kind of exer∣cise both on horsebacke and on foot, and at that verie feast they kept mercatorum ferias, the Marchants feastes, where they
offered oblations and sacrifices in the honor of God Mercurie. The ten magistrates of Rome called Decemuiti vpon this daie after they were first created and the lawes of the twelue tables brought from Athns to Rome, came with great pompe and glory to the market place of Rome hauing an 120. sariants bearing maces, and  before them as though they were ten kinges, thereby grew sedition in the cittie for their pride,Liui. dec. 1. lib. 3. ust, rape, and other wicked dealings which were intollerable, they were put downe after they had by force gouerned 3. years more like to ten tirants or ten Torquins then to ten ciuil magi∣strates. C. Plautius proculus Consull at Rome, triumphed ouer the Hernices, with whom Marcus Fabius Ambustus was made Consull, at which time the Torquinians (so called for that they held with Torquinius the prowde) offered 307. Ro∣mane souldiers being taken prisoners,Liui. in the waie of sacrifice, I meane killed them most cruellie and offered their blood vp insacrifice to the furies called Eumenides, but they were well requited, for so manie Torquinians were at an other time slaine and sacrifised in the maket place at Rome. Valentinianus Iunior the third of that name as Iustine af∣firmeth, which was by the souldiers proclaimed emperour be∣ing but a boie, after his fathers death was by Maximus, that then was made emperour of Brittaine by the souldiers driuen out of the empire to Theodosius,Functius & after a while through the treason of Eugenius was slaine, but herein writers do much varie. On this day Rodulphus surnamed Burgundus died being the 31. king of France after he had raigned two yeares by him∣selfe, then Lodowick with his mother returning from En∣gland whither before they fled for succour, is restored to his kingdom againe. Funct. affirmeth that he died the first callends of Iune. Also the Christians besieged Nicea a citie of Stria for this time the Saracens had scattered themselues not onely in Asia and Affrick▪ but also vnto Europe but they were met withal in all places by the Christian Princesse and fought
with all with manie ouerthrowes geuen vnto them,uil. Tyr. 1097. The 16 Day. THis is one of the daies that Titus the Emperour besieged and wan the inner part of the wall called of the Iewes A∣cran, where the Romanes set vp their ensignes and aduaun∣ced themselues vppon the walles, at what time a great slaugh∣ter was made in Ierusalem by Titus. Vratislaus The first king of Bohemia was crowned as vpon this day beeing the 17. kalend of Iune by the bishop of Treui∣ra called Eugelbertus in the chiefe church of Praga, who died by a fall from his horse within few daies after the coronation, after whom succeeded his brother Conradus,Chron. pol. 3. who raigned king of Bohemia for the space of seuen moneths. Conradus the second of that name and sonne to Henrie the fourth emperour of Germanie, was vppon this day being then the feast of Pentecost crowned king of the Romanes at Aquis∣graue by Hermanus archbishop of Collen. The 17 Daie. AGaine the Israelites offended the Lord and the fire of the Lord burnt amongest them and consumed them that were vttermost of the host, and Moses praied for the people and the fire staied, they loathed Manna, which the Lord raigned vnto them from heauen, they desired the flesh of Egypt, the Cu∣cumbers, Melons, Leekes, Onions, and Garlike, and Moses was wearie with the crie of the people,. 11. and hee praied vnto the Lord for them and for himselfe, and the Lord eased Moses of his chardge and caused him to bring 70. of the elders of Israell to the tabernacle that they might haue the spirit of Moses to go∣uerne the congregation with Moses. The 18. Day. THe Romans record in their old Calēders that Iupiter Am∣mon
their god, as borne vpon this day,Cal. Rom. and therefore in memo∣rie of his birth they held a feast and vsed solemne sacrifice. Alexander the great was made to beleeue by the priests of Ammon that hee was this Iupirers sonne, and therefore he commaunded that he should be so called. Upon the 23 day of the second moneth, Simon the brother of Iudas Machabeus succeeded after his brother Ionathan, wonne the castle of Ierusalem, and entred into it with thankes giuing, with branches of palme trees in their hāds, with harps, Cloudes, Cymbals, and Flutes, with Psalmes and songs vn∣to the Lord,1. Mac. 13 that they thus vanquished the power of Antio∣chus and Simon commaunded that this day for euer should be celebrated and kept with feasts and sacrifices in memorie of this successe. The noble Romane Titus surnamed Torquatus, for that he in a combate betweene a Frenchman (who chalenged any of the Romane armie) and himselfe slew the Frenchmen hand to hand in the sight of both the armies, and tooke his chaine all bloudie from the Frenchmans necke, and put it about his owne: he triumphed after (being Consul of Rome) ouer the Latens, ouer the Campanians, ouer the Arrunces,Liuius. and ouer the Sidotians, with great pompe and glorie at Rome, 413 yeares after Rome was builded. Solimane the tenth king of the Turkes, sent 250 sailes, & with them 40000 Souldiers, vnder the conduction of two great Captaines, Bassa Mustapha and Bassa Pyalis into the Ile Melita,Pau. Iou. where the armie of Rhodians horsemen defended it most valiantly, and gaue at that time a great repulse to the Turkes, 1565. Franciscus the firste of that name, surnamed Valesius, was after many battels had with Charles the fift, sometimes Uictor and sometimes vanquished,Sabe. Plat. and at last taken at Papia by the Emperour Charles, and after this peace concluded, and Elenora the Emperors daughter married to Frauncis Valoys King of Fraunce, others say that he married Claudia, Lewis the 11 his daughter, the most writers affirme that the king of Fraunce was taken vpon the 24 of Februarie, by the armie of Charles the fift, 1523.
Clemens the sixt of that nae, and the 198 pope, was e∣lected on this day, and raigned pope ten yeares, this pope re∣duced the Iubiley into 50 yeares according to the account of yeares,Sab. Plat. for euery seuen yeare was the sabboth yeare with the Iewes, and euery seuen sabboth yeare was the yeare of the Iubiley according to Moses lawe, this Clemens was a iollie pope he crowned Charles the fourth Emperor of Germanie, 1342. The 19 Day. AT Athens vpon this day the feast called Bendidia, was most solemnely kept and celebrated in the ha∣en of Pyraea in the memorie of many great prises brought into that hauen, by Orators and noble great captaines, as Themistocles, Phocion, Pericles and o∣thers, for in sea victories Athens excelled all the Citties in Greece: on the which day the Romans also celebrated a festi∣uallNoid. lib. 5. day for their aduocates and pleaders in lawe called eri aduocatorum. The Iewes this time do offer vnto the Lord two new loues, for haruest in Iudea is sooner then with vs, for we are further from the Pole, almost twentie degrees then Ierusalem is, but they being rebellious people, still forsooke the Lorde though they receiued all blessings at his hande, yet were their mindes of the flesh of Egip, crying for their bellie, but while the flesh was yet betweene their teeth, the wrath of God was kindled, and smote them with an exceeding great plague, and the place was called where they were buried the Graue of lust,Num. 11. for they so murmured for meate, that God sent them Quailes till they all lothed it as they did Manna. Mahomet the 2. of that name, and the sxt emperour of the Turks, tooke Calcides a great towne of the ile of Nigropon∣tus through treason, & most cruelly slue and killed the inhabi∣tants thereof, hee inuaded Siria tooke Eubaea and banished Stephanus king of Mysia out of his kingdome, and vsed him before he banished him as Cambises vsed the iudge in Persea,
left his skin behinde,Pant. lib. 5 Functius this was a most cruel Turke, but he was requited with like measure by Scanderberge, who then raig∣ned king in Epirus, who curbed this Trke, and subdued him with many great victories. The 20 daie. AFter the Israelits had departed from the graues of Lust vnto Hazeroth, where also Aaron and his sister Miria grudged against Moises their brother,Num. 12. for the which Mria was stricken with leprosie, and was at the prayer of Moises healed, after she was shut out of the hoast for seauen dayes, and then remooued the Israelits, and pitched in the wildernesse of Pharan. The feastiuall dayes called Agonalia were on this daye celebrated at Rome,Agonalia. in this feast the Romane youthes conten∣ded about masterie, at what time they vsed al kinds of exercise for triall of agilitie, courage and strength, hauing therevnto many kindes of Garlandes appointed for rewardes vnto the victors, imitating the order and manners of warres, in scaling of walles, and assaulting of Fortes, in fighting of battels, and such other militarie discipline, that some were crowned with Lawrell, some with Pine, some with Oken boughes,Cal. Rom. euerie Uictor bearing in his hande a branche of Palme in token of victorie. Fredericke the second of that name Emperour of Germa∣nie, after that pope Gregorie the ninth had excommunicated Frederike for no cause, manye conflicts and great warres grewe betweene the Pope and the emperour, the Archbishops of Collen and Maguntia, draue this Frederick from his em∣pire, and vpon this day elected Henie Prince of Thuringia in his place as Emperor, but Frederike came in by the sword, and tooke both the Cardinals and imprisoned them, and agreed with the pope.
The 21 Daie. THe ould Romans kept a festiuall day called Tubi∣ustria, in the which feasts the Magistrats met at the Capitoll, and celebrated a solemne sacrifice vn∣to Vulcane, and after went about the cittie with sounding of trumpets at euery sacrifice they did, for then they offered in three seuerall places, in the first a sheepe, in the se∣cond a sowe,Nouid. and in the third a Bull, to purge the Cittie of Rome of their greeuous offences, and thus they went about these sacrifices to please their gods,Iosep. lib. 7 vppon the which day also the Iewes in Ierusalem were by Titus the Emperour, so straightlie shut in, that they lookt but for the sword and fire. Upon this day Lewis surnamed Pius king of Fraunce, and some to Charles the great, after he had raigned 26 yeares, died,Prosob. and was buried at Metis, 840. on the which day Phillip king of ispaine that now is, and sonne to Charles the fift was borne, 1527. A firie Dragon was seene at Lucerna a towne in Helutia 1471,Lycosth. de podigijs. flyeng vp and downe in the ayre about the riuer Russus, after the which sight ensued great warres called Bellum Sueuicum. Christ Iesus our Sauiour ascended vp to heauen vpon this daye,Merc. being the 40. daye after his glorious resurrection, be∣ing at that time the last of May. The fift wonder that was seene before the destruction of Ierusalem was vpon this day, which seemed to be an hoast of men armed, running on horsebacke and in chariots aboue the cittie of Hierusalem in the skies, a little before sunne setting. The 22 daie. THe 27 daye of the second moneth Noach came out of the arke, and his three sonnes,Gen 9. Sem, Cham, and Iaphet, and God blessed Noach and made a couenant with Noach neuer to destroy the world againe with water, in token heereof he setteth his bowe in the clowdes in memorie of his promise.
A great solemne day among the Romanes, at what time they with processions & sacrifices went to visit their corn, this feast was called ustratio segetum on the which day they builded vp a temple,Cal. Rom. and dedicated the same to the goddesse Fortune that shee might vouchsafe to accept their processions and sacrifice and to prosper their corne. Constantinus the great that good Emperour that fauou∣red the Christians and the church of Christ after manie great good thinges by him done,Pantal. 5. died as vpon this dae at Nicome∣dia a cittie in Bithinia after he had raigned 31 yeares and had liued 66. Lodowick the fourth of that name surnamed Buarus, was most solemnly crowned Emperour of Germanie by all the Cardinals of Rome, in spite of pope Iohn the 22. of that name in saint Peters Chuch at Rome, for the Pope had elected Fri∣derick duke of Austria,Lodowick the 4. and would haue crowned him, and stood against the state of Germanie, for the space of 8. yeares wars did grow, in so much that Frederick was taken and killed by Lodowick the fourth, 1327. Henrie the third surnamed Niger, sonne to Gerardus the second, who was by his fathers meanes crowned king of the Romanes as vpon this daie, and afterward by consent of all the Princes of Germanie was elected emperour who streight inuaded Bohemia and subdued them,Functius. hee plagued Hungaria, spoiled their countrey and subdued two of their chiefe citties, and restored their king whom they had driuen out of his king∣dome againe, 1054. The 23 Day. CRunnus the Prince of Bulgaria gaue a great ouerthrowe to the Christians as vpon this daie at Adrinopohs a town which Adrian the Emperour builded, and called it after his own name, about which time Mahomet the 2. went, to Rode vppon this day with an infinite number of souldiers, and there plaied the cruell tirant for three moneths both on sea and vpon land besieged Rhode, and seeing that hee could do no good hee
returned his siege and marched with his army toward Apulia,Naucl. 1474. After the Philistines had the great victorie ouer the Israe∣lites, when they had found the bodie of Saul being slaine and his three sonnes dead in the field with him, they stripped Saul out of al his armour,Sam. lib. 1 cap. 31. they cut of his head and sent it to the land of the Philistines to publish the victorie, and they hanged the armour of king Saul in the temple of Astaroth their Assirian i∣dol, they commaunded also that his body should bee hanged on the wall of Bethshan, and his head to be set on a pole, they sent also the heads and the quarters of Ionathan, Abinadab, and Malchisha being the three sonnes of king Saul vnto diuers ci∣ties of the Philistines to hang them vpon poles in the temples before their Gods in token of victorie and triumph. An ouerthrow was geuen to Charles the fifth his armie, at Uisurgine and vppon the same day Wittenberge was yeelded vp vnto the Emperour, for this Charles the fil neuer quieted himselfe before he had subdued all Flanders and the most part of Germanie vnder his empire, 1547. The 24 daie A Great daie among the Syracusans, and commaunded to be solemnly celebrated in memory of their famous victorie had ouer the Athenians by the riuer called Asinara,Plutarch. at what time Niccas generall for Athens with all his whole armie were o∣uer throwen, slaine and scattered. This Syracusa the chefe ci∣tie in Sicilia, was by the perswasions and councell of Alcibi∣ades taken in hande to the great hurt and losse to Athens. Otto the thirde was crowned Emperour of Germanie by Gregorie the 5. pope of Rome after hee returned to Saxonia, and hearing that Gregorie the 5.Otto the 3. crow∣ned em∣perour. whom hee had caused to bee made Pope was deposed by Crescentius and by the cittizens, and had put in his roome a Grecian borne named Iohn the 17 of that name, the Emperour returned in all hast besieged the cittie and tooke it, tooke Crescentius, pluckt out both his eies, cropt his eares off, and put him vppon an asse to ride through Rome as a spectacle, and after slue him, he restored Gregory
to his papacie,Iustin. and made Iohns eies to bee had out▪ and after to be banished, 1000. Edward the 5. with his brother Richard sonnes to Ed∣ward the fourth king of England were slaine, some say smo∣thered, some say drowned in the tower at London by that cruel monster Richard the third their owne vncle Edward the 4. his brother, 1483.Lili. The 25. Day SEruius Tullius the sixt king of Rome triumphed on this day ouer the Hetruscans and ouer the Sabines this annexed to the cittie three hilles or litle mounts called mount Qirinall, mount Uiminall, and mount Erquiline, he entrenched rounde the walles of the cittie, and he did first inuent the mustering of men, at what time their was not found in Rome past 84. thow∣fand cittizens. M. Marcellus being againe reconciled to the EmperourEutrop. 1. Caius Caligula was slaine by his familiar frende Magius Chilo as he returned to Rome by the way, and after Magius slue himselfe,Sulpit. the 43. yeare of our sauiour Christ. Sethon one of Vulcans priestes afterward made king of Egypt being so hated of his people, and in such contempt with his subiectes, that▪ at what time Senacherib king of the Assi∣rians came with a great armie of Arabians to inuade E∣gypt, at what time in the moneth Pachon the people forsooke Sethon and reuolted from him, how be it hee was warned by a vision in sleepe to geeue battail to the Arabians which he per∣fourmed, he pitcht his tentes at Pelusium hauing fewe souldi∣ers in his band, the night before the battail should bee fought, a great and huge swarme of rats and mise came and deuoured their bowstringes & their quiuers, spoiled their targets, & buc∣klers, and did eat vp al their matches for their shot, in fine, they disordered all thinges in the Arabian camp, that in the morning they were sorced to flie, in which flight manie were slaine and taken, Sethon the king hauing this victorie, in this the priest of Vulcan caused an arch to be made, on which y• statue of Sethō
was set in Spayrs holding a rat in his hand with this inscripti∣on, In me quis intuens pius est, in this order did the Egyp∣tians triumph in their monstruous huge works and buildings, setting vp their pictures & Images to stand in Spairs, to ma∣nifest their triumphes,Scehons triumph. but in their sacrifices and superstitious ceremonies, they farre exceeded the Romanes which I haue for example set downe, for that they began long before the Ro∣manes, who had most of their sacrifice and ceremonies from the Grecians, and the Grecians from the Egyptians. The 26 Daie. VPon this day beginneth the third moneth, which the Iewes call Siban or Syuan the seuenth of this moneth answeareth the first of Iune. In the third moneth in the which the Israelites went out of Egypt, they came vnto the wildernesse of Sinay, where the Is∣raelites pitched their Tentes, and camped before the Lord, there the Lord commaunded Moses to sanctifie the people,Exod. 19. and that they should be ready vpon the third daie to heare the Lord, saying, you shal bee vnto mee a kingdome of priests and an ho∣ly people. In the first day of the thirde moneth the word of the Lord came to the prophet Ezechiel,Ezech. 3. who spake vnto Pharao king of Egypt, Assur is a Cedar in Libanon with faire braunches and thicke bowes of a high stature all the foules of the aire made their nestes, in his braunches all the beastes of the field brought forth their yong, vnder his bowes and vnder his shadow dwelt all mightie nations, thus the Prophet setteth foorth the pro∣speritie of the Assirians, and prophesieth a like distruction vnto them both. Germanicus the sonne of Drusus, and father to Caius Cali∣gula,Germani∣cus tri∣umph. which was the fourth emperour of Rome had a solemne triumph graunted him at Rome ouer the Cheruscians, An∣griuarians, the Catteians, and ouer the nations that dwelt as farre as Albis. This Germanicus chaunged the name of the moneth September to be Germanicus, as Iulius Caesar and
his nephew Augustus changed the two monethes before cal∣led Quintilis and Sextilis to Iuli and August,Tacit. lib. 2. after their names which still continued, but Germanicus after his death y• moneth called Germanicus recouered his first name which was September. Malancthon in his fourth booke saieth that vpon this daie Lotarius King of Fraunce & also emperour of Germany was fought withal by his brethren: in this great battaile all the wholPlut. Fct. stock af Charles the great were slaine for it is set downe that aboue 100000 were on both parties slaine: of this day writers varie, some referring it to the 11 of Maie, and some to other daies, 841. Ladilaus sonne to Charles third King of Sicilia entred Rome in armes, threw downe Adrian the emperors pillers,Cedr. Funct. raised many auncient monuments and got the possession of the Cappitoll but by the meanes of Paulus Visinus a noble Ro∣mane who ayded pope Gregory the 7, Rome was recouered and Ladislaus put to flight, 1410. Upon this day Basilius Macedo of a poore boy became one in Michaell the emperors chamber, and whome the emperor often times commanded to be slaine for he had some diffidence in Basilius, yet he was slaine by this Basilius and after was crowned Emperour of Constantinople such was the state of emperours in those daies▪ 870. Alphonsus king of Arragon besieged Iohanna queene of Naples in the castle at Capua,Functius. but he was thence remoued & put to flight at that time, but with in a while after he tooke Ne∣apoles and subdued Apulia, and draue their king Reuatus to forsake his kingdome, and after comenced warres against the Florentines, 1443. The 27 Daie GReat solemnities, sacrifices, rites, and cerimones were in Rome on this day in the temples of welthe, honor & vertue, three goddesses among the Romans of great authoritie, whom they celebrated with seurall seruises according to their cus∣tome.
The people of Israel being sanctified, and their cloathes washed, & also hauing abstained from their wines,Exod. 19. being com∣maunded the second day to be ready for the next morning, at what time God appeared in thunder and lightning, commaun∣ding the priests and the people not to touche the hill, least they should perish. The birth day of Antonnius surnamed Geta, sonne to Sep∣timius Seuerus the 21. Emperour of Rome,Herod. 4. who was slaine by his brother Antoninus Caracalla in his mothers lap 213. Spartianus referreth this to the first of Iune. Lewis the 12. was as on this day with great ioy and glad∣nesse of all the kingdome of Fraunce elected king after his Fa∣ther Charles the eights death, as Aemilius affirmeth, 1497. Some say that he was crowned vpon the very same day in the yeare following. The 28 daie. THis was the third daye, wherein Moises and Aaron were commanded by the Lord to coe to mount Sinai, and the people to stand at the foote,Exod. 20. where they sawe the thunder and lightning, and the noise of the trumpet, and the mountaine smoking, and the Lorde deliuered vnto Moises the second table of the commaundements. As vpon this day the games and plaies called Fabrici lud the feastiuall day of Smithes,Fabrici ludi. who met vpon the Theators, and made a common feast together with great pompe, which they sacrificed vnto Vulcan with all solemne ceremonies▪ ac∣cording to their supersticious customes. Titus the sonne of Vespasian the 11 Emperour of Rome, after he had liued 42. yeares, died in the third yeare and eight moneth of his raigne, at the same manner place where his fa∣ther the good Emperour Vespasian died:Eutrop. 7. this emperor buil∣ded the Theator at Rome, yet Sueto. and others referre his death with more reason to the 13. of September, 83. The Cathedrall Church at Misena, when they sang Te de∣m
for ioye and gladnes of the taking of the Elector, the author of a great commotion, where many were slaine,Lycosth. and the church burnt vnto the very ground by lightning, 1547. The 29 Day. AS vpon this daye, Octauius Augustus, M. Antonius and M. Lepidus, three mē called Triumuiri, after some bibering betweene Octauius and Antonius,Liui. & Eutrop. 7. were made by the meanes of Lepidus friends, after which all three ioyned their forces together, against the Cittie of Rome, at what time diuers of the Senate were banished, and many that had beene Consuls were slaine, as Cicero and diuerse o∣ther noble men. The famous Cittie of Constantinople, after long warres, and often repulses giuen, was vpon this day being on the feast of Penticoast by Mahomet the second of that name, and the sixt Emperour of the Turkes taken, and the head of Con∣stantius then Emperour (being slaine at that assault as hee fled) set vpon a long pole,Pantal. 5. and carried through the Cittie of Constantinople. Philippus Valesius the 49. king of Fraunce, and the first king of the house of Valoyes, was with great pompe and so∣lemnitie crowned as vpon this daye king of Fraunce,Anual. Aquit. during this kings raigne Fraunce had most terrible wars with Eng∣land, and since Fraunce neuer had the like since the Romane warre, this is called with writers Atrox cruentum & funestum bellum, 1328. The 30 Day. BErna a towne of Heluetia was besieged as vpon this daye by Rodulphus countie of Haspurge, who (after 12 yeares
of interregnum which was with out y• Empire) was elected emperor of Germanie not by the Pope of Rome crowned but by the Bishop of Lusitania, for said he, manie emperours went into Italie with an huge armie few or none retorne, resiting the fable of the foxe,Iustin. being desired by other beastes to come to visit the Lion being sicke, I wish him wel sayd the foxe but I passe not for the sight of him: I saw the steps of many going in, but I saw the steps of none comming out, 1287. The 31 Daie. THe Iewes kept the feast called Pentecost on the 6. daie of the third moneth called Syuan, which was 50. daies after the feast of the first fruites. In this feast they offered vnto the Lord two waines loaden with fine flower,The feast of Penti∣coast. also they offered 7. lambes without deformitie of one yeare of age, and one young Bullocke, and twoo Rammes, to bee a sacrifice of sweet sauor vnto the Lord.Leuit. 23. Damiata a great cittie of Egypt being once ouerthrowne by the Saracens to the great losse of the Christians,Bel. sac. 4. cap. 3. is now a∣gaine besieged and taken by the Christians and by them inha∣bited. Rolandus sisters son to Charles the great the first French Emperour, a man of great courage, a skilfull souldiour, after a terrible battaile fought about the mountaines Pyrenei, died for meere penurie and want of water to coole his thurst.Pantal. 5. The Romanes celebrated as vpon this daie a feast, wherin were vsed manie sacrifices vpon manie altars in Rome, much like to the feast of Hecatombea, at what time in Athens they sacrifice vppon an hundreth Altars, and therefore the Scy∣thians could not abide the superstitious ceremonies of the Gre∣cians,Hecatō∣bea. for they had no Altars, no Temples, no images, nor no such ceremonies as y• Egyptians had: but in this sort the Scy∣thians do vse their feast or sacrifice, the beast that is to bee sacrificed is made to kneele vppon his legges, the sacrificer standeth behind the beast to strike him downe, then making his
praiers to that God to whom he sacrificeth this beast▪ not with fire, not with vowes, nor vpon altars in temples, for the Scy∣thians haue none, but simplie after their Scythian manner hee taketh the skin off, and putteth the flesh into a great cauldron of brasse, or else in the skinne of the beast, and so he laieth all the boans of the beast vnder the chldron, and puts fire into it and seethes it, and after he sacrificeth the bowels of the beast either to Vesta which is chiefly worshipped in Scythia, or to Mars, & of the rest they make this feast. This is the order of al Scithian sacrifices. The names of those Consuls, and Captaines that had their triumphes graunted them by the Senators at Rome within this moneth of Maie, are these that follow. 1 Pub. Valerius Publicola, 2 Qu. Pub. Philo, 3 M. Claudius Marcellus, 4 Q. Fab. Vibulanus. 5 A. Manl. Torquat. Atticus 6 C. Sulpitius Peticus, 7 Tibe rius Caesar, 8 L. Cornel. Maluginensis, 9 C. Plautius Proculus, 10 T. Manlius Torquatus, The names of the feastes and sacrifices celebrated with great solemnitie in Rome within this moneth of May. Lenuria 1, Lemuria 2, Lemuria postrema, Scyrpea simulacra. Bendidia, Agonalia, The solemne games and plaies in Rome within May are thus named. Ludi Maximi, Ludi celebris, Fabrici ludi. Finis mensis Maij.
Of the Moneth of Iune, which the He∣brewes called Siua their third moneth: with the A∣thenans Hecatombeon their first moneth, and with the Egyptians called Pau∣ni: their tenth moneth. The first daie. ON this moneth the Athenians began their yeare which they called Hecatōbeon, a month dedicated and also consecrated by the old ancient Romanes to Mercurius.Nouid. The Athenians as vppon this day be∣ing the first day of their yeare celebrated a solemne feast in the honor of Apollo at Athens,Hecatom∣bea. which they call Hecatombea af∣ter the name of their first moneth vsing the ceremonies & rites of such sacrifices according to the custome of Athens. In Rome they held a feast to the goddes Carna called Fa∣baria in the which they were woont to vse sacrifice with great solemnitie, and to offer vp new fresh beanes mingled with fine flower to this Carna, and after their sacrifices and religious ceremonies were ended they kept this feast with much deuoti∣on and great holinesse, making cakes as the old Romanes in ancient time vsed of these beanes mingled with flower,Macrob. euerie man kept a peece of a cake, or a whole cake in his house, vntill that time in the next yeare following. To this goddesse Carna Iuuus brutus the first Consull at Rome after the king when hee had banished Torquinius the proud the 7 and last king of Rome, solemnised a great sa∣crifice without the gate called Capena in mount Caelio, and after celebrated a feast in memorie of this victorie according to a vow which he had made to the goddes Carna before the bat∣taile on this day.Macrob. 1 Likewise the Romanes builded a temple con∣secrated the same and dedicated it to Tempest. In the 690 yeare after the building of Rome when Lucius Murena and Cecus Iuuius were Consuls at Rome, Q. Me∣tellus triumphed ouer Creet, at the same verie day that Pom∣pei
the great eriumphed ouer the Pyrats on sea.Eutrop. 6. Uppon this day a famous combat was appointed betweene Carolus king of Cicilia and Petrus king of Aragon about the kingdome of Sicilia, this was committed to an hundred cho∣sen men of either side and they should fight it out, the king of A∣ragon with an hundreth men, & the king of Cicilia should come with another hundreth men,Pant. lib. 6 and on whether side the victorie should goe, thether also the kingdome should goe. Lodowick the fourth sonne to Iohn king of Bohemia was crowned king of Lumbardie at Millaine by his father who thē subdued Luca, Parma, Rhegium, Mutina and other citties in Italie before he was elected Emperour of Germanie 1337..Pan. Io. Iulianus Didius borne at Millaine in Italie a nobleman by birth, and learned in the ciuill lawes, yet factious and very am∣bitious, after hee had raigned seauen moneths Emperour of Rome, Functius saieth hee raigned but 65. daies, was slaine by Sep. Seuerus, and beheaded, and his head put vppon a pole in the market place at Rome. Nicolaus the second Pope of Rome died as vppon this day 1061. This Pope crowned Henrie the thirde Emperoure of Germanie,Volat. and he caused that the Popes should bee chosen by the election of the twelue Cardinals onlie. Robertus, or as some say Rupertus Emperour of Ger∣manie made a great preparation at Augusta with his armie to passe to Rome, but the princes of Germanie at that time were against him, hee returned without anie great thing done,Functius and tooke money of the Florentines to commence warre against Galeatius, but before he came to Germanie from Rome hee died in Achaia after he had raigned ten yeares. The 2 daie BY Henry the fourth and his armie the city of Rome was as∣saulted, who after three sharpe terrible battails fought with Rodolphus duke of Suenia, at y• time elected K. of y• Romans
came and reuenged his mallice vppon pope Gegorie the 7. otherwaies named Hildebrandus draue him out of Rome and possessed all the cittie of Rome, but when Gregorie was re∣stored by Rodulphus as Pantaleon afirmeth to his papacie,Pantal. 6. againe, Hildebrandus the Pope sent a crowne with this inscri∣ption to Rodulphus, written rownd about the sam after this manner. Petra dedit Petro, petrus diadema Rodulpho. Uppon this day Valterius duke of Aquitania with a great armie of the Saracens entred into Fraunce, wasted, and spoiled the countrie vntill king Pipinus sonne to Charles the great came and gaue battail, in the which Valterus was slaine, and the armie of the Saracens was ouerthrowen and killed at Pe∣tragoricon. 968. The 3. daie M Fab. Ambustus at his third time being Consul of Rome triumphed with great solemnitie ouer the Tiburtines, vnder whom the Torquinians which were subdued and taken to the number of 307. soul∣diers in his first Consulship were slaine and sacrificed in Rome for that they rebelled with Torquinius their last king against their countrie, and now again by this Fabius in his third Con∣sulship, 348. of the best noble men were brought prisoners vnto Rome where they were whipped and scourged,Liuius. and after put to the sword in the maket place at Rome, 397. yeares after the building of Rome. Charles the third king of Neapolis leauing his sonne La∣dislaus behind, who after his father succeeded in Apulia, went vnto Hungaria, and their was created king, 1386. but short∣ly he was slaine through the conspiracie of these noble men inBonf. lib. 8 Hungaria, but Boof. referreth this day to the 5. of December, and also affirmeth that this king was bidden to Buda to a feast and was slaine sitting at the table. Antioche a famous cittie in Siria was besieged by God∣fredus and his armie which were Christians, and was taken in
that voiage they went to Ierusam into the holy land to fight a∣gainst the Saracens and Infidels which were scattered into al partes of Asia and then dwelt in Ierusalem, against whom ma∣nie Christian princes went to commence warre,Tir. lib 9. and to seeke to vanqtish out of the holie land 1090. The 4. Day VPon this daie a temple was builded and dedicated to Her∣cules in Circo Maximo,Cal. Rom. a place where the Romanes vsed all kind of exercises and agilitie both on horsebacke and on foot, at which time they also celebrated a feast in memorie of Her∣cules with solemne games and shewes in Numitia▪ Also an other temple was dedicated to Bellona with great solemne sacrifice, in the which Ap. Claudius a noble Romane caused this day to be celebrated in memorie of the victories ofLiuius. & Ouid. Pub. Sulpitius, and also Fabritius against king Pyrrhus when he was wounded, his Elephantes slaine, and his armie van∣quished to the number of 20000. men. The 5 daie AS vpon this day the Romans builded a temple vnto Faith, and yerely on this day they did vse solemne sacrifices to Iu∣piter Sponsar their patron, for the Romanes had Iupiter in most honor, to whom chiefly they did sacrifice, the 2. was to Mars the 3. was to Quirinus which they named Romulus during his life: & putting him in the nūber of the Gods they called him by the name of Quirinus. The Boetians had a great ouerthrow by the Thessalians v∣pon this day at Gerestion two Countries in Greece long be∣fore the Peloponesian warre, which war was the destruction of Greece. As vpon this day the Thebans had that famous victorie ouer the Lacedenionians, at which battail Cleōbrotus the king with al the peeres, and chiefest of the Lacedemomans were slaine, & that noble Greeke Cleomines was slaine at the kinges foote
with a thousande of the most valiant Spartans about him, at that time there was a great feast at Sparta. When this newes came to the Ephories of the victorie of the Thebanes. This battaile was 30. years after the ouerthrow of Athens by Lisander the Lacedemonian,Plut. and now the ouerthrow of Spar∣ta by Epaminondas the Theban: these two citties were na∣med the two eies and the two legs of al Greece, and yet Sparta could not abide Athens, neither could Athens abide Sparta. Gauerus countie of Egmond, and Philip countie of Hornia, were vppon this daie at the commaundement of Duke Dalbe at Brussels in Brabant beheaded. The 6. Daye. VPon this day Moses was called vp to mount Sinai by the Lord with his minister Iosuah, where he was sixe daies co∣uered with a clowde, and in the seauenth the Lord appeared vnto Moses,Exod. 24. whose glorie seemed to bee like vnto consuming fire, and Moses was in the mount fortie daies and also fortie nightes. The huge and monstruous Temple of Diana at Ephesus which for the greatnes thereof was deemed to be one of the se∣uen wonders, was burnt as vppon this daie,Plutarch. at what time the priestes of Diana cried out running vp and downe and saying, that this daie is borne the tormentor and plage of all Asia, for at that verie daie Alexander the great was borne when the Temple was on fire: which afterward verified the priestes say∣ings, yet some hold opinion that hee was borne the 6. day of A∣prill, 3610. Philip king of Macdonia gaue a great ouerthrow as on this day to the Illiricans by Parmenios courage, then being lieuetenant vnto him: hee tooke the cittie of Potidea and there wan the garland of price, in the games which were vsed in the mount Olimpus,Plt. for running tilting, & also iusting, with other exercises on horseback, which were vsuall and had in great esti∣mation among them. Iulianus Apostataan exceeding great persecutor among the
Christians, and of the Christian religion, resembled by Eutro∣pius to M. Antonius, whom this Iulianus endeuored in all pointes to imitate, hee was well seene in the liberall sciences, hee excelled in the Greeke tongue, who in his warres against the Parthians,Etrop. 10 after hee had conquered Assiria, and returned thence was slaine by his enemies after he had raigned ninteen moneths as Eutrop▪ saith, who was present in these warres that hee was slaine in the 7. yeare of his raigne, and the sixt ca∣lend of Iulie, when hee had liued 31 yeares. Alexander sonne to Bailius and brother to Constantius raigned two yeares a most vicious and wicked Emperour, ne∣ther like father nor brother, geuen to lust and slothfulnesse cal∣ling those to honor and to bee chiefe with him which were most like to him in vice, and therefore hee died by such a filthie sur∣phet as is most straunge, with bleeding at his nostrels and also at his priuities,Functius. when he had raigned two yeares, not so long as Iustin writeth. The 7 daie ON this daie the Romanes builded a Temple called Tem∣plum mentis, for that they had bowed going to the African warres if they returned with victorie to build vp a Temple in memorie of the same, and to dedicate it vnto Minde, for they supposed Faith, Mind, Peace, Concord, and Fortune, to bee ca∣nonised goddesses,Nouid. and therefore builded to these Temples, feastes and sacrifices. The temple of Vesta was opened in Rome as vppon this day to renew the lampes where the Uestals Nunnes kept the holie and immortall fire, this ceremonie of keeping the holie fire was also in the Temple of Apollo in Delphos and likewise at Athens, but they differ in the ceremonies, for in Greece old women which were past mariage, and in Rome yong maides who might not marie with great deuotion and religion. These lightes were neuer put out, but once in Athens in the time of Aristion, & once in Delphos, when the temple of Apollo was rnt by the Medes, and once in Rome in the time of the ciuill rres betweee Pompei the great and Caesar, when altar,
fire and al were consumed, and the vestall virgins forced to with the Idol of Vesta with them. The play and games called Piscatorij, which were celebra∣ted in the fields of Mars as on this day by the fishmongers at Rome with their deuised mirth and sportes according to their custome. The 8. daie AFter that Theseus had killed Scyron the Arcadian wra∣stling with him and a litle after slue Demastes in the citie of Herionia a great tirant imitating in al pointes Hercules who sacrificed Busirus and Aper cruell tyrants:Plutarch. enen so Antheus the 8. daie of Hecatombeon, at what time he saw his father Aegeus, but of this Theseus and his exploits hereafter you shall read more. In Vienna a towne in Austria a great meeting of the peers of Germanie with all the imperial state, at what time the chiefe noble men of Austria ordained great games and plaies with great pompe and solemne shewes both on horsebacke and on foot, which continued, as Pantaleon saith, the whole moneth of Iune, at the which plaie Ferdinandus the Emperour bro∣ther to Charles the 5. was present, 1559. Uppon this day Isacius Commenus was crowned Empe∣rour of Greece by the Patriarch then of Constantinople, and became afterward vngracefull to the Patriarch.Iustin. This Empe∣rour after he had raigned two yeares and three moneths, tooke the habit of a Munck vppon him, and gaue vp the empire vnto Constantine Ducas, and so afterward hee liued a monasti∣call life, 1059. The 9. Day. A Great feast in Rome was as vppon this day celebrated, in the which they were wont to decke their Asses with gar∣landes about their neckes, and Crownes vppon their heads▪
and so to lead thē solemnly through the cittie of Rome into all streetes onely by the Milners and Bakers, leauing their Mils and Bakhouses fully dressed with all kinde of flowers and greene boughes, these asses being thus gorgeouslie and braue∣lie set out, were loaden with bread: of the which at their returne they kept a great solemne feast, to the which they inuited their neighbours to celebrate the same,Nuid. 6. after they had doone sacri∣fice to God Pan. Seruius Tullius the sixt king of Rome, was vpon this daie slaine through the wickednes of his sonne in lawe Lu. Torqui∣nius, who was sonne to the last king before him, whom Seruius succeeded, also his owne daughter Tullia, whom he had espou∣sed to Torquinius was of the conspiracie, and the onely means of her Fathers death, in the 219. yeare after the building of Rome. Pub. Rutilius Lupus, then Consull at Rome, after he had fought most valiantly with Marses,Didius Viuius. was slaine in the battell at the riuer Thebonium, the same very day Nola was taken by the Samnits, and the yeare next following they gaue an ouer∣throwe to Didius, 664, M. Crassus a noble Romane, equall in force and power to Caesar or to Pompey, after many great victories, was as vpon this day among te Barbarians and Parthians ouerthrowne: at what time many noble captaines lew themselues for shame and sorrow of their ouerthrowe by Surena: the Leiutenant of Parthia, Censorimus, Octauius Petromus, and diuers other Romane Gentlemen slew themselues, they strake off Pub. Crassus head,Flor. lib. 3 cap. 11. Plutar. in Crasso. and sent him to his father yet a liue, but on that day slaine also. In this battell 10000 Romanes were slaine, and 1000 taken prisoners, and after that Surena had bathed Crassus head in bloud, and had melted gould into his mouth to the great reproche of the Romanes he sent both the heads of Crassus and of his sonne to Hyrodes king of Pahia, 50 yeares before Christ was borne. Now Charles duke of Bugundie, sonne to Philip, brought 100000 armed men to Marten a towne in Heuetia assaul∣ted it but in vaine, after tooke Lotoringia, vpon the which offence warre grewe betweene Lewes king of Fraunce, and
this Charles: this warre Paulus the second of that name pope of Rome pacified: after this he came to the Emperour Frederike the third, which lay then at Treueris with a braue companie of Horsemen, expecting to bee created king of the Emperour,Functius Monst. but missing of that hope, hee entered againe into armes, and was slaine with 20000 of his men with him in a great battaile giuen him by Lewes the eleauenth king of Fraunce. 1478. Alphonsus king of Arragon assaulted Naples as on this day, tooke it and dwelt there, then he warred in Apulia, draue Renatus out of Apula,Pant. lib. 6 and possessed the kingdome: this king Iohana Queene of Sicilia depriued of his interest and title which he had through hir into Sicilia, for she had adopted him after her dayes to be king of Sicilia, and now she adopted into his place Lewis the third. The long broiles of Henrie the fourth his furie and rage of ciuill warres, was vpon this day ended, at what time Rodul∣phus duke of Sueuia,Mar. scot. who also had married Henries sister and his great secret enemie was slaine at the riuer of Vusere∣dom in Saxonia, as Marian Scotus affirmeth, 1079. The 10 Daie TItus Didius, Proconsull for the Romanes against the Celtiberians in Spaine, whome hee most valiantly ouer∣threw in a great battell,Liuius. ouer whome hee had his triumphe graunted him by the Senators with great honor into Rome as vpon this daye, in the 660 yeare after the building of Rome. Cruell Nero the sixt Emperour of Rome, sonne in lawe to Claudius, who adopted him his successor in the Empire, not vnlike vnto his Unckle Caligula giuen to all riot and strange lust, a tyrant that committed diuers murthers vpon his owne kinsolkes, slew his owne brother, his mother, and his wife, hee murthered a great number of the Senators, and cheefe men of the Cittie of Rome, and at last he set the Cittie on fire, that he might see how and after what maner & fashion the Cittie of
Troye burned, when it was set on re vy the Gretians, and hearing that he was adiudged by the Senators that he should be drawne naked through the Cittie,Tacit. lib. 16. with a forcke thrust into his head, and so whipped vntill he were dead, fled fourth of his pallace,Eutrop. 6. and slue himselfe three miles off from Rome. 69. Frederike the first, surnamed Barbarossa, Emperour of Germanie, in the voiage that he made to the holy land, waged wacres against the Turke,Cuspina. and ouerthrew him, and subdued him, and in Armenia died, some say that he was drowned after he had raigned 37 yeares, 1190. The 11 Day. THe solemne feast called Quinquatria, was in Rome most solemnlie celebrated with great mirth, this feast endured fiue dayes,Quin∣quatria. in the honour of Minerua: of this feast I haue spoken before. Constantius surnamed Monomachus, Emperour of Greece, was maried vpon this day to Zoes, and was crowned Emperour by Alexius Patriarch of Constantinople, this Zoes whom he married had beene before married to the Em∣perour Romanus Argyropylus, whose death she conspired with Michael Paphlago whom after she married, who dyed within seauen yeares after, then shee adopted to the Empire Michael Calaphates who likewise abused hir,Volat. lib. 23. Cedr. & Iust. in epit. Ceso∣rum. saying that Zoes went about to poison him, and so he banished her, for the which he had his eyes pulled out by the people, in the fourth yeare of his raigne, and Zoes restored to the Empire, and at last married to this Constantne, with whome she liued 12. yeares and eight moneths. The 12 Day. AS vpon this daye a feast was celebrated at Athens cal∣led Cronia, in honour and memory of Saturne which continued 5 daies, wherein the Athenians vsed to feast
one another with great mirth, and to send mutuall presents and gifts, this feast is also called Saturnalia among the Romanes, and is assigned to Saturne as some write in the moneth of December, in the which the Romans being more religious thē the Greekes were woont to sacrifice with great solemnitie,Satur∣nalia. and to celebrate a feast according to their custome and rites. Likewise the Romans held a feast with prompe and ceremo∣nies after their manner vpon this day called Messorum pom∣pa, which vnto this day is vsed at Rome. Pub. Lucinius Crassus Proconsul for the Romanes in in Hispaine, after his good seruice in many battailes, he van∣quished the Lusitans, and triumphed ouer them at Rome with the fauour and consent of both the Senators and people 600. yeares after Rome was builded. Now this time Maximius was emperour, who then was in Britaine by the Souldiers proclaimed Caesar, and after cal∣led Augustus,Trip. 9. cap. 12. Iustin. came to France, slew Gratianus at Lugduum and draue Valentianus from the west empire to flie to Theo∣dosius, this Theodosius commenced warre vpon Maximus and vanquished him at Aquilea, where he was by Theodosi∣us slaine, as vpon this day, 392. Carolus the third, surnamed Crassus, was by pope Iohn the eight of that name, and 42 in number, crowned Empe∣rour of Rome for that hee defended Italie from the Sara∣zens, which then were readie with an huge armie to inuade Italie. This Emperour was sonne to Lewis king of Germa∣nie of Almania, and of Lotharingia, he was called from Ita∣lie into Fraunce against the Normanes and the Danes, who then sore afflicted Fraunce,Aemil. lib. 4. at what time he concluded a peace betweene him and the Gothes, and married the daughter of Gotfredus king of the Gothes named Gisla, and after he had raigned 12 yeares he died in Sueia, and was buried vpon this day in Augia, 889. The 13 Daie. THe Romans held this daye most solemne, for that they re∣corde this daye in their Calenders, as the birthe daye of the
Muses, celebrating a sumptuous feast, where they vsed many seuerall ceremonies in religious sort,Nouid. . with sundrie vowes to be perfourmed to euery one of the Muses, according to the quali∣tie and nature of the Muse. Likewise they celebrated the feast of Merchants called Feriae mercatorum, wher they gathered in one place to make soleme vowes to Neptune and to Mercurie for goods lost, and for further good speede in their Nauigation.Nouid. Quinquatria a feast vnto Pallas which endured fiue daies, celebrated at Rome with much solemne state, and great mirth by the musitians, and songmakers, called Poets. The Musi∣tians should with their trumpets, shalmes, and all other instru∣ments, playe through all the Cittie of Rome,Quin∣quatria. and their Poets should sing all kinde of verses through the streetes, vntill they came to the Temple of Minerua, and there solemnized a great feast, singing Odes to Pallas with many ceremonies therevn∣to belonging. Charles the fift road vnto Augusta with great states, where many of the peeres of Germanie came to meete him, where certaine learned protestants exhibited their supplictions vnto the Emperour in defence of religion, as they did before at Maspurge, Vuormatia, Spire, and at Bernia, and in other places, where both papists and protestants by the appointment of Charles the Emperour met,Sleid. at what time disputations were had, and the same in writing published, 1530. Among the Egiptians vpon the 18. of the moneth Pauni, in the Cittie of Sais, when the day of their solemnitie approached to be celebrated, the feast of Minerua which is called Ellychi∣num, that is the feast of lights,Minerua▪ for that is solemnized in the night time, at what time candles, torches, lamps, with al other kinde of lights, hang at euery mans doore, in their temples, in the obeliskes, and in their pyramides, feasting and sacrificing vnto Minerua all that night long, to this feast infinit number of Egyptians came: this feast is not onely in the cittie of Sais solemized, but also in euery cittie of Egipt, though chieflie in Sais, the secret ceremonies of their sacrifice were such, as it might not be solemnized in the day time, which was y• cause y• it was doone in the night time, for they are by their oracles war∣ned,
and by their priests taught and instructed, the time and the manner of their sacrifice, as were the Persians by their magi, and the Romanes by their Soothsaires called Augures. The 14 daie. XErxes the great king of Persia leauied a huge armie, and tooke his voyage into Greece, at what time the games of Olympia were celebrated,Herod. 7▪ Dionys. 9. thinking thereby all Greece were busie in setting foorth their Olympicall feast, came to Ther∣mopila, where he was met by Leonidas a noble Greeke, and was put to light with the losse of 20000 Persians. Attila king of the Hunnes a mightie Captaine, the onelye king that raigned among the Germanes, that plaid his part in the weast kingdomes, no otherwise then Cyrus or Alexander did in the East: hee on this daye assaulted Auerlia a cittie in Fraunce, and wanne it, but at that time hee was by Aetius the Romane Leiutenant through the aide of the Frenchmen and Burgundians kept from the spoile thereof: this Attila kept Germanie vnder his winges,Tritem & Pant. lib. 6 and subdued many of Fraunce as you shall read. 451. The 15 Daye. GReat solemne sacrifices were vsed at Rome to the wine, to Oyle, and to bread, for the Romans omitted nothing by the which they had any gaine, but they would vse vowes, sacrifices and other religious ceremonies, this sacrifice was vsed for those that were bitten by madde Dogges.Sacrifice. Also vpon this day the Romanes cleansed and purged the Temple of Vesta, and brought the filthe of the Temple into the riuer of Tiber, and after they kept shut the temple as Ouid. Hc est illa dies, qua tu purgamina Vestae, Tybri per Hetruscas in marimittis aquas. The Hungarians inuaded Austria, at what time the most part of the nobles of Hungaria dyed in that voyage, not with∣out great losse of the people of Austria, for though they had the
victorie yet Frederike the Archduke of Austria was slaine in that warre, and that made some writers attribute the victorie to the Hungarians, as Functius dooth, saying that all the No∣bilitie, and also the Archduke Fredericke were ouerthrowne and slaine, 1235. All countries solemnized this feast called Bacchanalia, by diuers and sundrie manners, in Egipt they held this feast vnto Bacchus without Sines flesh, the ceremonies wherof seeme strange, for the women had hanging about their neckes like small strings of a Lute,Baccha∣nalia. vpon the which hanged small pictures like little puppets, instarphalli, for that was the onely pompe of the feast which these women did carrie about them, with such madde frisking, skipping, and strange gamalds of daunsing, hauing minstrles before them playing, and they following after singing songes in the honour of Bacchus, these little pictures were made by some fleights to mooue of themselues as though their chinnes mooued and sang with them for company, mentu∣la mutante, as though they honoured the feast of Phallum with songes and dauncing to honor God Bacchus, the like ceremo∣nies the Pelasgans taught the Athenians,lib. 2. who first erected the Image of Mercurie, and vsed the like ceremonies in their sacrifices, of the which Herodot doth write at large. The 16 Daie MEtoichia a feast solemnlie kept at Athens,Meoi∣chia. in memorie of Theseus for diuers great good benefits doone to the Athe∣nians, this feast onely was for strangers, which came to dwell at Athens which Theseus had brought from diuerse places,Plut. in Theseo. at what time Theseus cained money, which he marked with the stampe of an Oxe, in the memory of the Bull of Marathon which he slue: that feast is celebrated to this day by the stran∣gers at Athens, vpon the 16▪ of the moneth Hecatombeon which moneth also in Greee is generally called Cronius. The most renowned victorie of the Greekes ouer the Per∣sians by sea at Artemesium, where Xerxes with all his whole Nauie was ouerthrowne, as vpon this day: this victorie made Themistocles to be so honored of the Gretians, y• the captains
fter sacrifice doone, gaue him an oliue branche in token of the victorie, and they sent 300 of their lustie youthes to accompa∣nie Themistocles, his renowne grew such by this victorie, that when Themistocles came to the next feast of the Olim∣picall games, all the people cast their eyes on him, clapping their hands, & shewing him vnto strangers that knew him not, of this daye diuers varye, for that the moneths of the Greti∣ans differre, and are mistaken by writers. Hugo Countie of Paris, father to that Hugo Capetus,Beuth. Funct. which was the first king of Fraunce, of the nations of the inha∣bitants called Galli, (whose stocke is famous among the Frenchmen) dyed vpon this day, and is buried at S. Denis in Paris, 957. The 17 Daie. THe Iewes celebrated a ioyfull feast in memorie of their de∣liuerance from Hamons malice, at what time he had pro∣cured king Asueus to direct his decree for the killing and murthering of so many Iewes as could be found within all the dominions of the king of Persea, which were 127 regions, and nowe by the meanes of Mardocheus, and the prayer of Ester, they were deliuered,Hester. 16 and Hamon and his ten sonnes hanged, with an infinit number of their enimies slaine, but this feast was kept on the thirteenth of▪ the moneth▪ Adar, which is Marche. Sp. Posthumius an auncient Romane, as on this daye gaue battell to the Volscans and to the Aequeis, and vanquished them:Liuius. the victorie was the greater and farre more famous, for that the Romans then were not strong, nor their territories great, for it extended not past 18. miles from Rome, 266. Io. Albertus king of Polonia dyed vpon this daye at Tu∣rone in Prusia, after whom succeeded his brother Alexander duke of Lituania, 1502. Upon the verie selfe same daye 48. yeares after Charles the ninth king of Fraunce was borne, 1550.
The 18 Day VNto Anna were certaine ceremonies and sacrifices vsed as on this day, at which time Alexander the great fel in a Fe∣uer after much surfetting and drinking,Mel. lib. 2 & within 21 daies after died at Babilon, 324 yeares before Christ our Sauiour his birth. Charles the 5. was elected Caesar, and made emperour of Germanie as vpon this day, though he was absent at Franck∣ford about other businesse of his owne, some referre it to the 28. of this moneth,Sab. lib. 29. but he was crowned at Aquisgraue the 12. day of October, as Func. in his Chronicles most plainly affir∣meth. A League of peace was concluded betweene Henrie the first king of Fraunce, and Philip king of Spaine that nowe is as vpon this day at Paris with great roialtie. Pontianus the 19. Bishop of Rome, was in the time of the Emperour Alexander Seuerus persecuted for the profes∣sion of the Gospell, and died for the same in Sardinia, Ono∣phrius doth varie much from Functius and others as well in the numbers as in the time, 231. The 19 daie ON mount Auentine great and solemne sacrifices with reli∣gious ceremonies were celebrated as on this day in the ho∣nor of Pallas.Nouid. In the great warres betweene the Polonians and the Rus∣sians in a battail at Sauichostum, as on this day, in the which the Russians were vanquished and oerthrowen. After some terrible battails and betweene Philip prince of the Catteians and Charles the fifth, the Catteians yeelded, at Hala in Saxonia, at what time the riuer of Rheine did much harme to men and beastes, 1205.
The 20. Day THis day was the 40. daie after y• Noah entred into the ar during which time the fountaines of the deepe were broken vp, and the windowes of Heauen were opened that it rained for the space of fortie daies, in so much that the water encreased & rose 15 cubits aboue the height of any mountaine for an 150. daies,Gen. 7. that all flesh perished. As on this day the Tarentines desired Pyrrhus king of Epy∣rus to assist them against the Romanes, which was the first battaile that the Romanes had with any forreine enemie, they builded a Temple in Circo Maximo to the God Summa∣nus, for the Romanes much feared Pyrrhus being the greatest warriour of the world,Cal. Rom. and therefore they as on this daie vsed solemne sacrifice within this newe erected Temple vnto Sum∣manus. At Antiochia a great cittie in Siria by Godfredus and Bal∣duinus two captaines and conductors of a great armie of chri∣stians was geuen a famous battaile vnto the Persians,Aemil. in the which battaile, 5000. were slaine after they tooke Ierusalem where they raigned kinges one after another, 198. Philippicus surnamed Barnamus being but a Souldiour at Chersona became by seruice to bee Emperour of Greece, and after he had raigned two yeares hee was forced to forsake the Empire vpon this day and by Artemius,Onoph. which is called A∣ustasius was taken, and his eies pluckt out, and after put in prison where he died, 715. Terouana a towne in Fraunce was assaulted and taken by the imperiall armie, spoiled and afterward was lamentablie burnt with fire.Aemil. Cont. Io. Chrisostom a singular, godly & a learned man, was ba∣nished by the generall councel then assembled at Cyprus,Onoph. for that he would not subscribe to the burning of Origens books, which were by Epiphanius and Theophilus condemned, but he was afterward called backe with great honor. The 21 Daie.
AT the cittie of Rome this daie is kept a festiuall daie in the honor of Hercules, to whom they do great sacrifice, with al religious ceremonies thereunto belonging▪ C. Centumalus proconsul for the Romanes ouer Iyrica, whom he vanquished and ouerthrew by a battaile geuen on the Sea,Pantal. 6. ouer whom he with great commēdation triumphed cum nauali triumpho. Mahomet the second of that name and the 6 emperour of the Turkes the onely scourge that plagued the Christians,Caelius de Saracenis and al∣so the only trant that afflicted Asia, who did much augment his empire as vppon this day, againe the third time hee laied siege to Rhodes, and yet failed of his purpose, and was forced to passe with his armie to Apulia. The Heluetians being in warre with their next neighbours,Stumf. 6. gaue them battaile at Lauppen a cittie in the Confines of Hel∣uetia, ouerthrew them and slue them to the number of three hundreth, 1338. The 22 daie PHilip the sunne of Frederick surnamed Barbarossa and the first Frederick of that name,Functius. after his great warres against Alsatia, Argentina, and Thuringia taking some repose in the castle of Bamberga, was there traiterouslie slaine by Otto the County of Uietelspatch to the great grief of al Germanie af∣ter he had raigned 9. yeares, 1208. The mariage of Philip king of Spaine was solemnly cele∣brated as vpon this daie at Paris in Fraunce vnto Elizabeth daughter to Henrie the second, but Functius saith the first of that name king of Fraunce, with great pompe, roialtie & mag∣nificence, in the which feast 8. daies after the marriage Henrie king of Fraunce was slaine by apeece of a staffe which brake & ran through his eie into the braine pan as hee was running at Tt, 1559.
The 23. daie AS vppon this day the Romanes vsed to sende mutuall pre∣sentes one to another, and to salute their neighbours with diuers kind of sweet sauours, as ginger, peper, suger, and such like, and likewise they gathered all kind of hearbs in the honor of Vulcan,Nouid. and after this, they met togither with manie cere∣monies, and did great sacrifice vnto fire, for the sauegard and tition of their young children. The famous victorie of Hanniball ouer the Romanes at Thrasimenum in Perusia was such, that Flaminius the consul was killed, and fifteene thousand more slaine in the field, and al∣most so manie taken, this battail was so fiercly fought on both sides, that a great earthquake which was at that instant, ouer∣threw some cities, and turned mighty streams of riuers against their course: and did manie terrible thinges besides: yet they were so earnest in fight that nether parties felt it,Plutarch. but the moane and lamentation was such in Rome for so great an ouerthrow, that they recorde this day as one of their chiefe vnfortunate daies and this happened by the oueright and rashnes of Flami∣nius the Consul. Otto the first of that name Emperour of Germanie, and sonne to Henrie the first duke of Saxonie and after crowned king of Germany, maried y• daughter of one Edmundus King of England: this Otto ouerthrew the Bauarians, and gaue the Hungarians such a terribl battaile at the riuer of Licum that 3. kinges were taken by Otto and hanges at that ouerthrow,Fnct. he after made warres vppon the Bohmians, wasted and spoiled Bhemia, an tooke their citties, thence hee entred into Italie, and lated siege to Rome, and the gates were opened to him, at what time he tooke the pope Benedictus the 5. from his papa∣cie, and restored Leo the 7 to his formr estate. The Turkes againe inuaded the Ile of Melitia, and in the time of Solyman the tenth emperour laid hard siege to the ca∣stle of Mercurie, where Caelius affirme that manie thousands on either syde were at that Turkish armie slaine, 1565.
Aulphus ounte of Nassau was elected Emperour of Germany, this Adulphus for his ambitious dealing against Albertus duke of Austria, sonne to Rodolphus the Emperor which was well esteemed and beloued with all the lates of Germanie, whome this Adulphus by all ambitious meanes sought to banishe, and to driue him from Austria,Cuspina. but he was therefore deposed from his Empire after he had raigned ixe yeares, and with all the consents of the Princes of Ger∣manie, Albertus Duke of Austria was as vpon this day placed in his roome, 1298. This day of Onophus and others is set downe to be the 27 of Iue. As vpon this day died that noble and valiant Gretian Peri∣cles, cheefe gouernour of Athens after Themillocles, whose victories and triumphes were such that hee had nine euerall monuments, equall in number to the nine victories which hee got in nine great battels, set vp in diuerse places, some in A∣thens, some in other places of Greece,Cerami∣cus. but especially in Cera∣micus, which was a place appointed by the Athenians to ho∣nour Conquerours with triumphant arches and pillers,Alex. lib. 3 with their names therevpon ingrauen with letters of gould, where∣by he merited by his victories lenitie, iustice, and diuers other vertues, to be surnamed Olymphus. The 24 Day. A Great solemne feast at Rome, at the which they vsed much deuotion, wit sacrifice and many religious cere∣monies to the goddesse Fortune,Pantal. 6. Plutarch. as vpon this day they trimmed their shippes vpon the riuer Tyber with sundrie garlands, and crowned their toppes with lawrell, mirtle and Oken boughes, in token of Triumphes and victories, and there they banqueted and feasted with all pleasant mirthe and melodie. Asdrubal brother vnto Hanniball,Asdrubal. being sent for to come from Spaine into Italie by his brother Hanniball, fell into the handes of Appius Claudius Nero, by an ambushment laid for him, where he was slaine manfully fighting for himself,
his head was brought and throwne before Hannibals tents, his armie slaine and taken, and a great quantitie of treasure was brought to Rome:Liuius. lib. 18. this Asdruball has plagued the Ro∣maines in Spaine, and slue both the Scipios which had beene long conquerours for the Romans in Spaine,Eutrop. 3. Funct. of whom I shall speake when I came to the time of their dealings. Warres being proclaimed against the Carthaginians by Scipio Affricanus and by Masinissa king of Numidia, who had ioyned friendship with the Romanes, this Masinissa being 92 yeares ould gaue an ouerthrow to king Syphax on this day this Masinissa left behind him 44 sonnes, and appointed Scipio Affricanus whom he deerelie loued, to be ouerseer, and to distribute his kingdome as it pleased him amongst them,Eutrop. 3. 609 yeares after Rome was builded. Vespasian the ten emperour of Rome, a good and a vertu∣ous man, after he had raigned nine yeares, and liued 69. yeares died in a manour of his owne,Suet. lib. 10. among the Sabines of the Flixe as vpon this day,Eutrop. 7. 81 yeares after Christ. The Sarazens as vpon this day 1083, had a great battaile giuien them by the Spaniards in the territories of Granata in Spaine, at what time by chaunce not lookt for, an armie of Englishmen entred fresh into the battaile, whereby the Sara∣zens were ouerthrowne, this the French Chronicles allow, and Pantal in his fift booke affirmeth. Cazimirus Duke of Massonia, was crowned king of Po∣lande with solemne pompe and great magnificence, as vpon this day, being then vpon the feast of S. Iohn Baptist, 1448. So also was Henrie the eight king of England, and his wife Katherine Dowger crowned at Westminster, in the yeare of Lord, 1532.Lu. Sur. Iohn Baptist was borne as vpon this day, but I finde great contrauersie heerein amongst writers.
The 25 daie. THe 25 daye of Iune beginneth the fourth moneth of the Iewes called Tamutz, and the first daye of the moneth Tamutz. Henrie the fourth, emperour of Germanie, gaue a great o∣uerthrowne on this daye to Rodulphus duke of Sueuia, and king of Italie, whome Pope Gregorie the seauenth called also Hildebrandus, who reuoulting against Henrie the 4. crowned Emperour, and against all the states of Germanie, that betweene them both began great warres, and diuers ter∣rible battels, the first at Fladenhen,Cuspician. Functius Chrom. the second at the flood El∣lestra, the third at Merseburge a towne in Saxonia, where Rodulphus was ouerthrowne, and his armie scattered and slaine, with no lesse losse to Henrie, the victorie onely excepted, 1080. Ludouicus Gallorum Delphinus, duke of Aquitania and sonne to Charles the sixt surnamed Beneamatus, was made king of Apulia by pope Iohn the 24 of that name, and the law∣full king Ladislaus was by the Pope reiected: This Dolphin of Fraunce married Margaret the daughter of Iames king of Scotland, and within a while after died, after whom succeeded Iohn his brother,Io. Til. & in Apulia Iohanna the sister of Ladislaus succeeded, 1436. The most of the prices of Germanie being protestants, professed the Gospell, and confessed the same before Charles the fift emperour at Augusta, as vpon this day, in the assem∣bly of the Peeres of Germanie, for Martin Luther had dispu∣ted and opened the treacherie of Papacie in diuerse townes of Germanie,Sleid. lib. 7. and had wrote in the defence of the Gospell, 10. The 17 Daie. AS  this day, Ancharsis the philosopher, after he had tra∣ue Egipt, Greece, and other places, returning into the
countrie of Scithia againe, being excellently well learned, he liking the religion of Greece better then Scythia, vowed to the mother of the gods that if he sailed safe to Scythia that h would celebrate hir feast day, and offer sacrifice after the man∣ner of the Cyzecenians which he performed in Scythia, in a wodie place called Hyllaea,Anachar∣sis, not farre from Achilles race, there Anacharses was spyed in his Grecian robe, with his Thyrsis in his hand, with such madde ceremonies as are in the sacrifice of Orgies, after the manner of the Grecians, Saulus the king of Scythia being his owne vnckle, as Herodot saith, was brought to the place, who finding Anacharsis occupyed in the Grecians ceremonies, shot him through with an arrow and slew him, so that the Scythians cannot abide to heare of the name of Anacharsis, for that he followed the Grecians super∣sticious ceremonies. Iulianus Apostata the Emperour, a great persecutor of the Christians,Anmian. lib. 22. 23. & 24. a man excellentlye well seene in the Greeke tongue, and learned in the liberall sciences, he was likened by Eutrop. to Marcus Antonius in many things, after he spoi∣led Assria, and had vanquished the Parthians, and returning from thence a conquerou, was slaine in the sixt of the calende of Iuly, after he had raigned seuen yeares, 366, it is of others otherwaies written, as I said before read Ammianus. In the moneth of Pauni, Sesostris king in Aethiopia, which kingdome he subdued, erected vp many pillers within Egipt, as triumphes of his victories, according to the Egiptians cu∣stome and manner of triumphes, cleane contrarie to the La∣cedemonians,Hod. lib. . who by the lawe of Liurgus were forbidden to make any monument of their victories within Gece, in mar∣ble, brasse, or Iurie, for that it would mooue ciuill warres, and stirre more enuie and discorde betweene Cittie and Ciie, or betweene tribe and tribe: it was also among the Romans, that no triumphe might be had for any victorie gotten by ciuill warres,No tri∣umphe graunted in ciuill warres. for they refused therein to triumphe both Marius and Silla, and after Caesar and Pompey, and at last Augustus and Antonie, for the best and the greatest conqueror hath no cause of triumphe in cill warres.
The 27. Day. CAius Marius a noble Romane was borne as vpon this day, this Marius was Consull at Rome 7. times, of whose tri∣umphes and victories during that time you shall reade them in their places and in their time. Likewise C. Carbo,Pantal. 6. who was Conull at that time in Rome with Marius, when ciuil warres were betweene Silla and Marius and slaine in that yeare of his Consulship by Pompei the great, being then but a yong man, was also borne with Marius as vpon this daie. Romulus blded a Temple at Rome to Iupiter Sator in that place where hee staed when he fled from the Sabines, who had then secretlie entred into Rome through the treache∣rie of Tarpea to reuenge the rauishment of their daughters, and young Sabine virgins, who were entised and deceaued by Romulus,Plutar. then Romulus being forced with shame to flie, lif∣ted vp his hand to heauen, and praised Iupiter to staie the flight of his people, and they staied vppon a sudden, and in that place Romulus builded a temple as vppon this day to Iupiter, the staier backe of Romulus and of his people. Iouinianus after the death of Iulian the Apostata,Iouinianus was by the consent of the armie in Persea chosen as vppon this day to haue the administration and rule of the Empire, a verie good Prince and a religious Emperour, for hee instituted that the tithes should bee paied to the Churches, how be it hee had litle good successe, for hee fell sicke and died within eight moneths,Iustin. after, 365. As vpon this daie died Martianus at Constantinople in the seauenth yeare of his raigne, He from a meane souldier first in Lidia became emperour of all Greece, hee recouered the Em∣e being much troled and also weakned, at that time hee as∣aged the furie of the Parians, and subdued the Uandoles, and vanquished Attila king of the Gotes,Mar. oot. and concluded peace with all countries, for hee loued peace, and would often say, Arma non induamus, dum pace potiri possumus, 458.
The 28. daie AFter that Theseus had reduced all things in order, and had reformed Athens, and remoued Iudges and Magistrates to a greatter state, to whom hee builded a councell hall, long be∣fore Areopagyts who were before the Aphctions, and after that Theseus had brought all into one corporation, hee institu∣ted a great feast and common sacrifice for al the countrie of At∣tica called Panathenaea, This was the onely greatest feast a∣mong the Athenians,Cal. Rom. to this feast no straunger might come and therefore hee appointed another feast in Athens for straun∣gers the 16. of Iune called Metoichia. In the moneth Pauni in the Cittie of Bubasti in Egypt a great feast is celebrated in the honor of Diana to this feast they came from all partes of Aegipt men and women, some by sea, and some on foot, the men cum tibijs dauncing and reioicing through euerie towne as they trauell through the countrie, the the women crepitacula tenentes, in like maner sing & daunce, some clapping their handes togither, some with one noise and some with another, with such antick toes and tricks, and with such strange gestures as I passe with silence to speake of their impudencie, they do come to this feast as Herodot, doth men∣tion 70000. men and women besides children, and in this sort they feast that day, and drinke more wine then they do all the yeare after, offering in sacrifice to the goddes Diana diuers oblations of beastes and foules. Alexander the great after some opinions died as vpon this daie, yet Plutarch and others referre it to the 28. of March, manie were suspected of his death, and therefore manie were put to death by Olympias his mother, as Iola, Antipater, yea Aristole was thought to be one of the conspiracie, and the oely inuentor of the poison: some againe wrote that his drinking and feasting brought him to an ague, drincking out of Hercules, cuppe, for Alexander was so much addicted to that cup making both garlands and crownes, and appointing great rewardes to the best carowser, but howsoeuer it was, he died after he had raigned twelue yeares, and left at Babilon vnbu∣ried
manie daies, for his Princes and Captaines contended for kingdomes. All the kingdomes of the East countries were the in Alexanders handes, but at length he was buried in Alexan∣dria a towne of his owne. As vppon this day Diogenes the Philosopher being bitten with a dogge dyed neglecting his sore like a cynicke dogged fellow, and therfore a piller was set on his graue, and a picture of a dog vpon it. This Philosopher disdained Alexander & all his pompe, in such sort that Alexander wished to be Diogenes if he were not Alexander,Laertius in vita dingenis. for that Diogenes contemned the world, the glorie, and the pompe thereof as much as Alexan∣der did, who wept for that hee could not be king of one world, sith he heard by Democritus and other philosophers that there were diuers and sundrie worlds, so that Alexander and Dio∣genes died both in one daye. The 29 daie HIerusalem was as on this day besieged of Nabuchodono∣sor in the 1691. yeare after the flud, and in the 9. yeare of Nabuchodonosor, and continued vntill the 11. yeare of his raigne, during which time the citie was taken,4 Reg. cap. 25. Zedechias sons slaine before his face, and Zedechias owne eies put out, and al Iuda brought captiue to Babilon, but this is laied down in the last of the Kinges to be the tenth day of the tenth moneth Te∣beth, which is Ianuarie, for the tenth of ebeth is the 21. of Ianuarie. By mistaking of the moneths in diuers countries diuers errors do escape. In the fifth day of the fourth monet Ezechiel the priest and after a prophet, being by the riuer Cheba, and in the fifth ear of Ioachius captiuitie, saw a stormie winde comming from he North, with a great clowe and fire enfoulding it selfe in the clowde, and out of the middest thereof the likenesse of foure beastes appeared, and their form was like to the forme of man, and euerie beast had 4 faces & 4. wings,cap. 1. these 4. had the face of a man, & the face of a lion on the right sie, & the face of an Oxe and of an Eagle on the left side. You may read more of this in Ezechiel.
Upon this day was builded a Temple on mount Quirinall in Rome to Quirinus in memorie of Romulus, which is also named Quiinus their first king and founder, in this Temple they vsed sacrifice and deuout ceremonies to honor Romulus whom they canonsed after his death:Plut. this sacrifice was cal∣led Quiriia after his name. Peter the Apostle of Iesus Christ our sauiour, after he had preached the ghospel in Pontus, in Galatia, Cappaocia, Bi∣thynia, and last at Rome where he suffred death, hanged with his head downward vnder the cruell emperour Nero, so hee suffred death on the third calend of Iulie after whom vpon the same day Paul the godlie and most learned Apostle was behea∣dedas some thinke after that he had preached in Iudea▪ Iirica, Greece, Ita∣lie, Spaine, and in diuers other countries, of whom his epis∣tles make mention of, 68. Scylus king of Scithia affecting the sacrifice and rites of the Grecians was found as vppon this daie, as Anacharsis was for vsing the feast and ceremonie of Orgia, which was a feast vsed with solemne sacrifices to Bacchus, was driuen out of his kingdome, and his brother Octomasides elected King in his place, so straight the Scithians obserue their owne religion, yet Budini a people that imitate the Scithians, whose speach is mingled partlie with the Greeke tongue and partly with the Scithian ve their Trieterica sacrifila euery third yeare after the manner of the Grecians hauing their Temples, altars, and their ols as the Grecians haue, The 30 daie IN Rome as vpon this day they celebrated a solemne feast to Hercules and to the Muses, in the which feast the Romanes vsed their seuerall ceremonies with so manie kind of sacrifices wherein they excelled all nations, for most comely they playd in their gmes and publicke shewes the whole life of tha God with such reuerence and religions customes in obseruing a de∣corum in all thinges as they are full of feastes and sacrifices: in the which moneth the great solemne feast of Iss in the citie
of Busris which is in all Egypt most honoured, they take for y• Moone, as they do take Osiris for the Sunne, in the which feast after their sacrifices and ceremonies are done in honouring of Isis they beat and strike themselues about the face with their owne handes,Isis. yea they wounde and pricke themselues with Kniues and Bodkins, and also with other kinde of sharpe in∣strumentes, afflicting and persecuting themselues with diuers tortures in such a most straunge sort, that they thinke Isis not appeased before they vse these ceremonies according vnto their ancient custome. Q. Mar. Tremulus being Consull at Rome triumphed o∣uer the Hernices and Anaguins in the 447. yeare after the buil∣ding of Rome, this was y• 2. age of Rome, called adolescentia Romana which continued frm the Kings vntil Appius Clau∣dius, at what time the triumphes began to be of great pompeQ. Mar. Tremulus triumph. according to the victorie of the conquerour for the Athenians crowned the victor with a crowne of Oken leaues called ciui∣tas corona appointed for them, that the states of Citties, as Pericles and Demosthenes do affirme, that they might not in Greece make a moment of their victorie in brasse, or in any durable stoane to maintaine or to moue dissention betweene their posterities, but with garlands and crownes made of flo∣wers, leaues, and such like. In the latter yeares of Charles the fit, a decree was made at Augusta by the Emperour and all the states of Germanye, that the new forme of religion so often consulted, disputed, and deended by Martin Luther and others, should continue vntill the next generall councell, this decree of Inreri was publi∣shed in all the citties of Germanie, and allowed by the Empe∣rour and the peeres, this decree saith Functius was published the 18. of Maye, but Sleid and Pantal affimeth this daye, 1548. T. Statilius Taurus then Proconsull in Affick vnder Octa∣uius Caesar, triumphed with great pompe and solemnitie ouer the Affricans, 719. you must proportion the state of the triumph to the greatnesse of the victorie, for great victories made great triumphes, specially among the Romanes, for the Persians and the Egiptians vsed not such stately glorius triumphes as
the Romans did, nor with any great pompe and magnificence, but they vsed for to set vp their statues and images in brasse or in copper, or stne, vpon arches or pillers made for that pur∣pose in memorie of their victories, with certaine Persian ca∣racters, or Egiptian letters, in token of their triumphes, and that they erected vp in euery great cittie, as Memphis, Sais, Pelusium, to signifie vnto▪ their posterities their victories, which the priests of Vulcan had in charge to keepe, contrarie to the Grecians, who were not permitted to set vp any monu∣ment of triumphes or victories by the Iudges of all Greece called Amphictions, because it should not stirre or prouoke enuie betweene Tribes or Citties, but they should were gar∣lands, and be crowned with diuerse kinde of crownes made of lawrell, myrtle, pine, oken leaues, for triumphes were not per∣mitted, neither among the Gretians nor among the Romans for anye victorie obtained in ciuill warres. FINIS.
The names of those Consuls and Captaines that had their triumphes graunted them by the Senators at Rome within this moneth of Iune, are these that follow. 1 C. Marius Rutilius, 2 Q. Cecilius Metellus, 3 M. Fab. Ambustus, 4 T. Didius, 5 Lucinius Crassus, 6 n. Fuluius Centumalus, 7 Q. Marius Tremulus, 7 Statilius Taurus. The names of the feastes & sacrifices celebrated with great solemnitie in Rome within this moneth of Iune. 1 Hecatombaea, 2 Vestalia, 3 Quinquatria, 4 Chronia, 5 Saturnalia, 9 Metoichla, 7 Panathenaea, The solemne game and plaies in Rome within this moneth of Iune are thus named. Ludi Piscatorij. Ludi Gladiatoria. Ludi Circeuses. Thus endeth the first part of the Diall of Daies▪ 1590.
