18639 99848550 13651
The Surueyors Dialogue. Diuided into fiue Bookes: Very profitable for all men to peruse, that haue to do with the reuenues of Land, or the manurance, vse, or occupation thereof, both Lords and Tenants: as also and especially for such as indeuor to be seene in the faculty of surueying of Mannors, Lands, Te∣nements, &c. By I. N. PROV. 17.2. A discreet seruant shall haue rule ouer an vnthrifty sonne, and he shall diuide the heritage among the brethren. Voluntas pro facultate. LONDON, Printed for Hugh Asley, dwelling at S. Magnus corner. 1607.
❧ To the right Honorable, Robert, Lord Cecill, Baron of Esingdon, Vicecount Crambourne, Earle of Sarum, prin∣cipall Secretarie to the most high and magnificent Prince, IAMES, King of Great Brittaine, France, and Ireland, Master of his Ma∣iesties Wards & Liueries, of his Ma∣iesties most Honorable priuy Councell, and Knight of the most noble Order of the Garer. AS the Earth (right Honorable) was giuen to man: and man (after diuine) was enioyned the care of earthly things: euery mā in seuerall place, qualitie and state, the greatest recei∣uing thence greatest dignities, euen to be called Princes of the earth. So, is it not the least regard, that men of whatsoeuer title or place, should haue of the lawfull and iust meanes of the pre∣seruation and increase of their earthly reuenues.
And that especially, by iustly atchieuing, and rightly vsing Dominion and Lordship▪ which principally grow, (omitting publique office and authoritie) by Honors, Mannors, Lands, and Tenants: for, according to the largenesse of reuenues, are the meanes to enable the Ho∣norable, to shelter the vertuous distressed, and to cherish such as by desert may challenge re∣gard: And according to their will and power therein, is the vulgar reputation of their Mag∣nificence▪ But (my good Lord) as mine inde∣uor in this rude Dialogue, tendeth but, as it were, to the plow: So I omit to wade into the impassable censure of Honor and Dignitie, wishing it euer deserued reuerence. And as tou∣ching Land-reuenues, wherwith many are (but especially the Honorable are, or ought to be principally) endowed, I presume onely in this simple Treatise to discourse: So farre (according to my sleder capacitie, and weake experience) as concerneth the ordinary necessary meanes of the maintenance & increase of Land-reuenues. And because the true and exact Surueying of Land, is the principall: I haue herein indeuou∣red, more of Desire, then of Power, (for the vse and benefite of all sorts of men, hauing to deale with land, both Lords and Tenants,) to shew the necessitie, and simple method thereof, Most humbly intreating your good Lordship (the fruites of whose, and of your honorable Fa∣thers fauours, I haue many wayes tasted) to
vouchsafe me your Honorable pardon for pre∣suming, and your like patience in accepting at my hands, this little mite; which, were it as great, as any wel-wishing hart can intend good, it were (together with my poore selfe) in truest seruice vnfainedly your Lordships. It may ther∣fore please the same to accept it: so shall others the more willingly embrace it, or the lesse dis∣grace it, humbly recommending it to your gra∣cious fauour. At my poore house at Hendon, prime Ianuar. 1607. Your Lordships euer to be commanded, Io. Norden.
To the beneuolent Readers, especially to Landlords and Tenants. AS God in his high and incompree∣sible wisedome, th giuen unto man two beings, a Spirituall, and Corporal: So hath hee enioyned him two pre∣script cares, the one of diuine & heuē∣ly, the other of humane and earthly things. And al∣though the first bee as farre more excellent then the second, as the brightest Sunne exceedeth the blackest darkenesse: yet hath hee not omitted, to giue vnto all men an expresse commaundement, to bee mindfull of the second: Although it must bee confessed, that no man taking an extraordinary care, can adde, a of himselfe, one iott of increase of any good thing, neither can hee of his owne proper in∣dustry, assure himselfe of any part of true prosperitie in this life, yet must he not therefore dissolutely neg∣lect his vttermost lawfull indeuour, to aduance his own welfare, which he neither can do, without feare and trembling, if hee call to mind the cause why the earth bringeth forth vnto vs of it owne accord, nothing but the very tokens of our originall disobe∣dience, wherein s imprinted this Motto or Poesy of our shame: With the sweat of thy face thou shalt eate thy bread, al the dayes of thy life. And this without exception of persons. Whereby it appeareth, that none is exempted from labour and trauaile, in one
kind or other to maintaine his estate here. Our Fa∣thers of fame began it. Adam digged the Earth, and manured it. Tubal wrought in Mettals. Noah plan∣ted a Vineyard. Abraham, Lot, Moses, Dauid, Eli∣zeus, Amos, and many other godly and great men were Shepheards. Gydeon was a Thresher of Corne. Iacob and his sonnes the Patriarkes, were Herdes∣men. Ioseph a Purueyor of Corne in Egypt. Paul made Tents. Mathew was a Customer, or Toll-ga∣therer. Peter, Andrew and others were Fishermen. And Saul a keeper of Asses. If these men began the way of labour in so many kinds, who may say he is free in one kind or other? And hee that in res∣pect of his greatnes of birth or wealth, will pretend a priuiledge of idlenes, or vaine and vnprofitable ex∣ercises, doth discouer his forgetfulnes, or neglect of the dutie in earth, which euery man, euen the great∣est oweth vnto the Common-wealth, his owne fa∣mily and posteritie. And hee is censured euen by the mouth of God, Worse then an Infidell, that neg∣lecteth these duties. And none is excused, or exemp∣ted out of this Law of prouision for his familie, be hee neuer so high or meane; not that such men as are honorable by byrth, office or aduancement, should till the earth, or be Shepheards or Herdsmen. But that they should, according to their greatnes, exe∣cute great place in the Common-wealth, whereof (after the care of Diuine things, in respect of God that gaue them their greatnes) they should haue care to performe some seruice, in respect of the King, vnder whome they enioy their greatnes: To shew loue and diligent regard, to ayd their inferiours, in respect of whome they haue the imputation of their greatnesse. To bee prouident in prouiding things necessarie for their Families, that haue an interest to partake of their greatnes. And lastly, in respect
of their posterities, that are to becom the more great by their greatnesse. And how can they do thus, vn∣lesse they looke into, and vse the meanes of the increase and preseruation of their greatnesse? And for as much as the same consisteth, for the most part, in the reuenewes of land: what greater care ought they to haue, then to maintaine and lawfully to augment the same? which decaying, their Honor and honorable reputation diminisheth. To pre∣serue or augment Reuenues, there must be meanes: the meanes are wrought by Knowledge; Know∣ledge had by Experience; Experience by view, and due obseruation of the particulars, by which Reuenues doe, or may arise. Wherein are to bee considered the Quantities, and Qualities of Land, with the present Rents, and estimate values, by a reasonable improouement: which duly found, to haue a due regard to proportion yeerely distribu∣tions and expendings, with the annuall Incoms, in such sort, as alwayes the present yeere may rather adde vnto the next, then the next to bee charged with the yeere past. For when the present yeere shall expend more then the Reuenues of the same may beare, the yeere following cannot but be sur∣charged: and so will it surcharge the future so long, that either he shall be forced to strike the topsayle of his improuident wasting, in time; or at length, through the furious blasts of excessiue prodigalitie, be blown vnder the water of disability, by ouerswel∣ling the sayles of his vainglory. I speake not this in the way of attachment, but of preuention. And so I trust, all men will take it, and accept of my poore in∣deuour in this kind, considering that necessary it is, that al mē should know what it is to haue reuenewes, namely, first to know them, & then to vse thē to their own aduancement, and to the good of others▪ And because it is not the worke of the Honorable, & of
such as haue high & serious common-wealth imploi∣ments, to bee personal actors of their owne affaires in this kind, they are to vse the seruice of such as are fit in knowledge, and iust in dealing, to trauel in this kind of busines, by whose faithfull and sincere infor∣mations, they may know what is iust and right to be done and demanded: And in al fauour and clemen∣cie to deale with such, as are in this manner within the compasse of their commands, and by whom and by whose labours they maintaine their greatnes: for (no doubt) there is none but well considereth, that how great or powerful soeuer he be in lād reuenues, it is brought in vnto him by the labours of inferiour tenants: yea, the King consisteth by the field that is tilled. And there is none of these inferiours,Eccles. 5.8. of ordi∣nary discretion, but well knoweth, that what hee in∣ioyeth, is by the fauour of his Lord in a sort: And therefore ought there to bee such a mutuall concur∣rence of loue and obedience in the one, and of ayd and protection in the other, as no hard measure offered by the superiour, should make a iust breach of the loyaltie of the inferiour: which kind of vnion is no waies better preserued and continued between the Lord and tenants, then by the Lords true know∣ledge of the particulars that euery tenant holdeth, & a fauorable course in fines and rents: and by the tenants loue and thankfulnes in al readie seruice and dutie towards the Lord. And to that end, it is (no doubt) expedient, that Lords of tenants haue due re∣gard of their owne estates, namely of the particulars of all their tenants landes, and that by a due, true, and exact view and suruey of the same, to the end the Lord be not abused, nor the tenants wronged & grieued by false informations, which cōmonly grow by priuat Inteligencers, & neuer by iust Surueyors. And because the office of a Surueior (duly waid) is an
office both necessary, expedient, & of trust. It beho∣ueth him to be first honestly and vprightly minded, and next, skilfull and iudicious in the facultie. Then can he not, but by industrie and diligence, produce an exact discouerie and performance of the worke he vndertaketh, to the true information of the Lord, whose benefite and vttermost lawfull profite he is to seeke, in a good conscience, disswading him yet from distastefull Auarice, the greatest blemish that can befall a man, seeking true reputation and renowne, by his reuenues. For too much seueritie afflicteth the hearts of poore Tenants, who (by common experi∣ence) are found to be more firmely knit in the band of true dutie, loyall affection, and readie seruice vn∣to their Lords, by their Lords frugalitie, sweetened sometimes with the chearefull drops of true liberali∣tie, then by the extreames of austeritie, vaine pro∣digalitie, or compulsiue exactions. And yet not so, as Lords of Tenants should be so ouerswayed with abused lenitie, or carelesse looking into their owne, as may breed contempt in Tenants: but rather that they should keepe such an eeuen, and equall hand ouer their Tenants, as may continue mutuall loue, and in them a louing feare: And not to seeke the in∣crease of reuenues so much for vaine glories, as for vertues maintenance. Which will appeare by doing good to deseruers, by their vertuous life. A worke of true vertue, when contrarily, vaineglorie seeketh idle and vaine reputation, by vniustly atchieuing, and either prodigally consuming, or too miserably in∣creasing Reuenewes, which I must leaue to euerie mans owne fancie, wishing all to fashion their waies in this kind, to Gods glory, the Kings seruice, the good of the Common-wealth, and to other such ends, for which God hath giuen them greatest earth∣ly blessings; recōmending vnto you this simple
rude lumpe, of which, if some more skilfull, will be∣stow the re-licking, & bring it to his true shape, my selfe with many others, should thankfully imbrace it. In the meane time friendly accept it, and in kindnes afford sparing reproofe. Eccles. 7.13. Wisedome is good with an inheritance. Yours, I. N.
The Printer to the friendly Reader. THe Author ot being present at the examination of the proofes, sundry faults haue escaped, by mistaking the copie, which faults the Author snce, for the most part hath reformed, and if you find any not corrected, I pray with patience beare it, and vse the meanes to reforme it. I pray the Reader to correct these faults commit∣ted in Printing, in absence of the Author. vz. Page 5. line 20. for vnder, read ouer. pa. 7. li. 27. for farme, read same. p. 8. l. 15. for rudely, read rea∣dily. ibid. l. 32. for estimate, read extenuate. p. 9. l. 31. for there, read their. p. 12. l. 3. for Surueyors, read Surueyes. p. 14. l. 4. for corruption, read com∣passe. p. 45. l. 27. for Mannors, read mannor. p. 53. l. 21. for sine, read sine. p. 58. l. 9. for seruice, read fee. p. 62. l. 34. for promise, read prouiso. p. 119. l. 19. for former, read forme. p. 88. l. 2. for leaser, read leasee. p. 76. l. 16. for person, read purses. p. 74. l. 32. for our, read one. p. 44. l. 28. for can, read ran. page 39. line 21. for affirmeth, read assumeth.
The Author to his Booke. LOoke ere thou light into the hands of some: Some lay but traps, to catch thee in disgrace; Disgrace thou none, be silent where thou come, (Yet thou shalt come where Momus is in place,) Place thee with those, whose hearts aright do see: And seeing, iudge, in fauour, faults that be. Faults be in thee; who sayes he doth not erre, Erres, in conceit, that he alone is free: And such, not free, will sure thy faults transferre, And for one fault, transferre them ten in thee: Not thee in this, but me they discommend, That I abroad do thee so basely send. Base I thee send: excuse me what thou can, If thou can not, plead thus to seeming friends: Alas, my friends, abortiue I began: Who me began, thus meanely foorth me sends, That I might send him, how I passe the taunts Of tanting toūgs, that seek their praise by vaunts. I vaunt it not, but am content to be, Where meanest be, that blush to shew their face: Who sees my face, a picture base may see; Yet may he see farre fayre find disgrace. Disgrace not him, that sends me for good will: But will him well. Requite not good with ill. Inuidia sibi, & aliis venenum.
The Contents of the fiue books of the Sur∣ueyors Dialogue. THe first Booke containeth a communication be∣tweene a Farmer and a Surueyor of land: where∣in is proued, that Surueyors of Mannrs and land, are necessarie both for the Lord and Tenant, and in what maner Tenants ought to behaue themselues towards their Lords, in respect of their tenures. In the second Booke, is intreated between the Lord of a Mannor, and a Surueyor, concerning the estate of a Mannor, of the parts and profits thereunto be∣longing, & how the Lord of a Mannor ought to deale with his Tenants. In the third Booke is contained the maner and method of keeping a Court of Suruey, and the Arti∣cles to be inquired of, and the charge: how to enter & inroll Copies, Leases and Deeds, and how to take the plot of a Mannor. In the fourth Book is shewed the maner of the ca∣sting vp of the quātities of acres of al sorts of grounds by the scale and compasse, with Tables of computation for ease in accompting. In the fifth Booke is shewed the different natures of grounds, and whereunto they may be best imployed, how they may be bettered, reformed and amended, fit for all Farmers and husbandmen.
❧ The Surueyors Dialogue, betweene a Farmer, and a Surueyor: wherein is prooued, that Surueyes are necessary and profitable both for Lord and Tenant: and wherein is shewed how Tenants ought to behaue themselues towards their Lords. The first Booke. Farmer. SIr, I am glad I haue so happily met with you, for if I be not mistaken, you are a Surueyor of Land. Surueyor. Admit it so, Sir, what then? Farmer. I haue heard much euill of the profession,Surueying rashly con∣demned. and to test you my conceit plainely, I thinke the same both euill and vnprofitable. Sur. You seeme to be but a yong man in yeeres, and are you so deeply seene in the abuse of this Faculty, that you can so peremptorily condemne i? Far. Call it you a Faculty? What meane you by that word? Sur. Abilitie to performe a thing vndertaken. Far. Then this faculty of yours, I say,Faculty. is a vaine facultie, and a needlesse worke vndertaken. Sur. Speake you this by coniecture, by report of others, or by due experience of your owne▪ Far. I speake indéede, as indured to the opinion I hold, by all the three reasons.
oftentimes you are the cause that men lose their land: and sometimes they are abridged of such li∣berties as they haue long vsed in Mannors; and customes are altred, broken, and sometimes per∣uerted or taken away by your meanes: And aboue all, you looke into the values of menslands, where∣by the Lords of Mannors do rack their tenants to a higher rent and rate then euer before: and therefore not only I, but many poore tenants else haue good cause to speake against the profession. Sur. Be you not offended at the comparison which I will make to your allegations. Why should not such persons as are inhibited by the lawes of the Realme, to commit certaine acts within the com∣mon wealth, cry out against them, that by the same lawes are appoynted Magistrates and Officers to see these lawes executed vpon them, as Roagues, Beg∣gers, and other like vagabonds? for if such officers and ouerseers were not, these offensiue persons might haue their wills: so would it follow, that men of peace, and good members of the Common∣wealth, should be endangered to be sacked of that they haue, by such lewd persons. Necessary there∣fore it is, that there should be such as should see vn∣to, informe, punish, and reforme these. And by your assertion you may as well intend, vnder like reason, against keeping of Courts in a Mannor, wherein many abuses are found out, reformed, and punished, which without such Courts would lye smothered, festering so long, that there would be few sound members left within the same. Farm. It séemes, you compare tenants of Man∣nors, that are (many of them) honest, ciuill, and substantiall men, to Roagues, and vagabonds. You forget your selfe. Sur. My plaine words are that as well these euill
members of the common wealth may speake a∣gainst the Surueyors of the common wealth, which (to speake only of the vnder officers) are the Iustices of the peace, Constables, and such like, as may te∣nants of a Mannor speake against the surueying of their lands within the same. Farm. That were strange; for by the one, the whole state of the kingdome is kept in peace, and by the other,Friuolous obiections against the Suruey of Lands. many millions disturbed, that might liue quietly in their Farmes, tenements, houses, and lands, that are now dayly troubled with your so narrow looking thereinto, measuring the quan∣tity, obseruing the quality, recounting the value, and acquainting the Lords with the estates of all mens liuings, whose auncesters did liue better with little, then loe can do now with much more, because by your meanes rents are raysed, & lands knowne to the vttermost Acre, fines inhaunced farre higher then euer before measuring of land and suruey∣ing came in, and therefore I thinke you cannot but confesse, that other men as well as I, haue gd cause to speake of you and your profession, as I doe. Sur. I perceiue that the force of your strongest arguments is as before I sayd, your eare and vn∣willingnes that the Lord of the Mannor,The faulty are afraid to be seene. vnder whom, and in whose land you dwell, should know his owne: and that you thinke it better for you, that he should continue still ignorant of what he hath, and that your estates should be alwayes hid∣den, and what iniury you doe should be concea∣led, then that he should be acquted with what you hold, and your abuses, incrochments, vsurpa∣tions, intentions, and wrongs discored. Farm. Sir, we acknowledge that the Lord ought to haue his rent, and that is all, and our seruices at
his Courts, but the land we haue, is our owne. Sur. Howsoeuer you may accompt them yours, yet the Lord hath such an interest and propertie in them, as he may also call them his, nay,Tenants may be sayd to be the Lords men. I may say, you are not in such sort your owne, but next vnder the King, you may be sayd to be the Lords. Farm. Fye vpon you, will you bring vs to be slaues? neither lawe, nor reason, least of all reli∣gion can allow what you affirme, and therefore as I before conceiued, so I may now protest, that you, and such as you are, are euen the cords whereby poore men are drawne into seruitude and slauery,A rash cen∣sure. and therefore I say againe▪ it is pitty any of you haue any imployment in a Common wealth. Sur. What Sir, because I say you are in some sort the Lords? I tell you, that I mistake it nothing at all: for as the King is Supreme head and Prince, and defendour of all his Subiects, so vnder the King is euery Lord of a Mannor chiefe and head ouer his Tenants, namely,The Lord of a Mannor, vnder the King, is head of his Te∣nants. A Lord, why so cal∣led.  such as hold of him: And he hath a kinde of commaund, and supe∣rior power ouer them, as they are his Tenants, and for that cause he is called, and they doe ac∣knowledge him to be their Lord. And what doth the word Lord import, but a Ruler or Gouernor? If he be your Lord, then are you his, to be gouer∣ned in causes determineable within the Mannor, and as I will heereafter prooue, the Lord of the Mannor may commaund his Tenants to accom∣panie him into the Field against the enemyes of the King, by reason of some tenures, and they are to follow and be commanded and directed by him, and if they refuse the seruice, the Lord may distraine for it, or may enter vpon their Lands, and resume it as his owne in some case; so that I may well say, that in a sort, euen your lands and your selues are the
Lords. The vse and occupation i yours, but if the land were so yours as were none aboue you, you might then call it yours: but so is none, but the Kingdome which the King holdeth of none but of God. And no man is so absolute within the King∣dome, but he holdeth his land of some Mannor, or person, or of the King. And of whom such land is holden, the same is called the Lord of that land after a sort, because it is held of him by some kind of  or serui, and by possibility this land may come vn∣to, and by law be cast vpon the Lord  whom it is holden, as if you be so willing as you seeme to talke of these mysteries, you shall anon perceiue. And therfore you can not but say, that the land and your selues are in some sort the Lords. And therfore is it not lawfull for the Lord of the Mannor, to enquire and examine of the things in those kinds belonging vnto him? And if there be cleane and plaine dealing among tenants,The innocent neede not fear to be locked into. they need not feare who looke into their lands and estates. But if there be deceits and wrongs against the Lord, policie willeth you to ba∣nish any man, and to barre all the meanes that may discouer them, though equitie and honestie be con∣tented to discouer all things to the manifestation of truth. Are not these the matters of chiefe impor∣tance that disquiet you? The measuring of your lands, the obseruation of the quality, and estima∣ting the value of your lands. Farm. It is true: for these are the causes that our rents are increased, and our fines raysed, and this would the Lord neuer do, if such as you did not in∣kindle the Lords desire, by your soo seuere scruta∣tions, examinations, impositions, & imputations: for were the Lords of Mannors ignorant of these things, us in former times, poore tenants might haue things at the rate they had in former times.
Sur. My friend, if I compare you to a dead I∣mage, be not offended, for I perceiue you haue eyes to see, and yet you see not, you haue a heart to vnderstand, and yet your vnderstanding is amisse. Farm. I am beholden to you Sir, to make me worse then a beast, for a beast hath the things you say I want: how prooue you what you haue sayd? Sur. Because you impute your great impositions vnto the acte of an honest Surueyor, when I will assure you and prooue, that the cause is in and of your selues. Farm. Then in déede you might account vs bru∣tish, if we would worke our owne woe. Sur. I perceiue, though you may be a good worldly Farmer, you are but a meane obseruer of the course and carriage of things passing dayly vnder your nose. He that hath seeing eyes and an vnderstan∣ding mind, may easily see and perceiue, that there is no Mannor, nay, no Farme, be it great, or little, farre off, or neere hand, but hath bin, and dayly is discouered, by priuate intelligencers, lurking in or neere the same, prying into estates,Priuate in∣telligencers, and not ho∣nest Suruey∣ors, giue false informations to their Lords. yming at the quantity, wide, short, or ouer, seldome hitting right, obseruing also the quallity, and glauncing at the value of euery mans land, and therefore se∣cretly and vnder-hand do informe the Lords of the Farme, and they being credulous ouermuch, and not a little couetous, build their demaunds both of rents and fines, vpon these most deceiueable informations, whereby the Lord is abused, and the Tenant wronged; whereas were the things seeme, viewed, and surueyed by a iudicious and faithfull Surueyor, who vpon due consideration, and discreet obseruation of all particulars, giues in a true and indifferent certificate vnto the Lord, vsing▪ rather his vttermost indeuour to moderate
and mitigate the Lords excessiue demands,The course of an honest Surueyour. then aggrauating the validity beyond reason▪ or a good conscience, you would be of another minde, and I protest, I hold that Surueyor a very bad man, that will either for affection or bribe carry a parciall hand betweene the Lord and his Tenants yee sith he hol∣deth as it were the beame of the tance, he should rather giue the better waight to the weakest, respe∣cting nothing but a charitable course to be held by the Lord, for whom he trauaileth with the Tenant, a∣gainst whom if he speake not, he shall be often sus∣pected of the Lord to be parciall. But if there be e∣quall consideration on all sides, the Lord will be∣leeue the Surueyor deales iustly, and the Tenant rest satisfyed, willingly to leaue, or rdely to accept, as his owne iudgement agreeth or disagreeth with the things propounded. For this haue I obserued, that oftentimes Tenants consider not when they are kindly vsed, neither see they at all times when they are abused. Farms. Truly I beléeue you in part: for indéede there are euen amongst vs, to ye Mannor wherein I dwell, officious fellowes, that to procure the Lords good opinion, will pry into mens estates, & indéede as you say, into ye quantity, quality, & value of mens lands, and giue false information oftentimes, and I know it is a foule abuse,Officious In∣formers dan∣gerous for Lord and Tenant. and of the two, I rather al∣low a true suruey, then a false report: for such fond fellowes as are thus busy in other mens causes, are of all mē least to be beléeued; for they speake always for affection or gaine: for they wil  the value of them they loue, or haue gaine by, and aggrauate the same, as their hope is of the Lords reward: all this I know without your report. But what is that to the thing you charge poore tenants withall, that they art the cause of their owne hard measuree
. Sur. That can , and I thinke I shall haue the whole world to witnes it for your further satisfaction, who can not your selfe be ignorant of the same thing; for you haue in part  of whom you ast spake,  case thē not all, nay, I cuse none in particular for I haue seene and obserued among them a kind of madnes, as I may call it, but in the best sence it is a kind of ambitious, or rather auaricious emulation,Tenants stri∣uing in low∣ing and bid∣ding, inhan∣ceth fines and rents. wherein they striue one to outstrip another in giuing most: as where my selfe haue had businesse of this nature, namely, of letting, setting, or selling of land for yeeres or liues, being, or neere being determi∣ned, in farmes or other like, whereby the Lord hath bin at liberty to dispose therof at his will, for best ad∣uantage, by choice of a new tenant, Proclamation to that effect hath bin made in opē court, where I haue seene, and it is dayly in vse, that one wil outbid ano∣ther, as at an outcry in London, in so much as I haue wondred at their emulation, and could not haue as∣ked what they haue raysed it vnto themselues. And should any that is in authority in this case (who in duty is not to hinder the Lord, or the Lord himselfe) inhibit such hot spirits to clyme as high for the Lords aduantage, as the ladder of their owne will, and sup∣posed ability will reach▪ This is not as one Swallow in a Summer, but they are many, and euery where Winter and Summer, and yet are other mē accused and condemned for thē and their faults, if there will be a fault in itselfe: but I should thinke it greater madnes for a Lord, wilfully to refuse what is so vo∣luntarily offered, and so willingly by giuen. Now, who is the cause of raysing rents and fines? Farm. I know, such rash & ouer forward mē there
are in the world not a  eery Mannor▪ who are especially priched forward to this reuelati∣on through enuy and a , hauing mean to at∣chieue their desires. But this bidding and out-bid∣ding is in things, wherein the Lord i at his liber∣tie to take a tenant whom holist. But in  tenemnts of inheritnce the case is otherwise, where the rent is and the fie (for the most part) certain, what needes the Lord haue this surueyd, or any free-hold lands? Sur. It is fit the Lord should know what hi tenant holde to, be it free or customary, though at this day there be a needlesse nicenesse in some free-holders of Mannors, who seeme to conceale their estates, and to kick against the view of their lands: but if they knew what they did, they would reforme that error. Farm. Call it you, an error, for a free-holder to refuse to shew his estate to the Lord, or not to suffer his land to be surueyd? Sur. I may well so call it, nay, I may call it a great fault, or an iniury done against the Lord, and hurt∣full to himselfe. There is none (it may be you know it) that holdeth of any Lord land, but he holdeth the same by some kind of rent or seruice, and when he comes to take vp his land after the death of his aun∣cester, or vpon purchace, but he doth or ought to do homage and fealty,Homage and fealty by free-holders. or one of them, vnto the Lord of whom he holds it; the doing whereof, how cere∣monious it is, if you be a Tenant to any such land, you know, and wherein he maketh a solemne vow and oth, to be true Tenant vnto the Lord for the land he holdeth. And somemes the Tenant of such a Tenure, is forced to be ayded by his Lord for the same land, if he be impleaded for it: now, if such a Tenant refuse to shew his estate, or to permit his land to  see, , to e
true Tenant, and to  are due vnto the Lord, among which, this,A needlesse icenesse in free-holders to shew their deeds and lands to the Lord, or his Surueyour. of permitting the Lord to know his owne, is not the least, nay, he ght by his oth of fidelity, to further it by all meanes, both by his proper knowledge and eidence, not only his owne, but other  lands, and thereby he shall not only not preiudice himselfe, but he shall for∣tifie his title so much the more, by hauing his eui∣dence inrolled, and his land recorded n the Lords booke of Suruey, that when his heire shall take vp the land, or he alen the same, it appeareth that he is true Tenant vnto such lands for such rent, and for such seruices: but there be so many scruples thrust into mens heads, by such as haue a pretended skill in matters of policie in this kinde, and Lords  Mannors haue bene so remisse in taking knowledge of the things in this maner appertaining vnto them,Some Lords too remisse in surueying their land. that questions of Titles and tenures are dayly had and moued, to the great trouble oftentimes both of Lord and Tenant, as is seene by experience dayly as well of land holdē of the King, as of inferior Lords, which may be reconciled, if Tenants were not too curious, and Lords too negligent. Besides this, there are other reasons to mooue the Lord to know what land is holden of him, and by what title, rent, and seruice: for free-holders may forfeit their land, and their land may escheat vnto the Lord: if then he should be ignorant what land it is, where it lyes, and how much it is, he may be easily abused for want of records▪ and so are many Lords of Mannors, who for want of due knowledge of their tenants and of their land & tenures, other men are intitled to their right. Far. You haue said more then I heard or dreamed of, and it holdeth in some sort by reason, how it is by law I cannot dispute: but in all yt you haue said, you haue not satisfied me in the thing before I spake of▪
touching the  which (as I said before)  iger then in former times, y your . Sur. You strike alwayes one string, and I find the ound of your meaning, you would always  ea∣sily charged in your ies as might bed and in that I blame you not,  mans case to beare as light a burden as he can. But if you remember what I spake before, touching the cause of this raysing of fines, where I prooued it came most by your owne meane, you may be the sooner satisfied in this, for it is in nature like the former. Although this kind of Tenant hath seldom any competitor to emulate his offer, because the Tenant leaueth cōmonly one ei∣ther in right of inheritance, or by surrender to suc∣ceed him, and heby custome of the Mannor is to be accepted Tenant, alwayes prouided, he must agree with the Lord,Information hurtfull in fines of land of inheritāce customary. if the custome of the Mannor hold not the fine certaine, as in few it doth: now this composition is commonly made by demaund of the Lord, and offer of the Tenant. The Lord asketh according to his conceit of the value of the thing, and eyther his knowledge must arise by his owne experience, or by information: the information is eyther by secret intelligence of same officious neighbour, or by due iudgement of an indifferent Surueyour, , such a one as carieth equall re∣spects to Lord and Tenant. And although, as you alledge, former times did affoord Tenants more fauour in rating and arbitrating fines, as you sup∣pose, if you consider it well, it is now as then it was. Farm. There you much mistake you: for I will shew by auncient Court lls, that the fine of that which is now twenty pound, was then but thirteene shillings foure pence, and yet will you say they are now as they were then?
Sur. Yea, and I thinke I  in it▪Former fines and rents, and the pre∣sent, not vn∣equall. For if you consider the state of things then and now, you shall find the proportion little differing: for so much are the prices of things vendible by Farmers now increa∣sed, as may well be said to exceed the prices then, as much as twenty pound exceedeth xiii. s. iiii. d. Farm. You speake farre from truth, and I mar∣uell you will erre so much, pretending to be a  of that reach, that men imploy you o ouer reach others. Sur. To shew you then n instance, looke into the Chronicle in the time of Henry the sixt,Iohn Stow. and you shall finde, that a quarter of Wheate was sold at Roystn▪ in Hartfordshire for twelue pence: and I trust,Wheat at twelue pence the quarter. if you be a Farmer, you are a Corne-seller, and I thinke, if a man offer you thirty times as much for a quarter, you will say it is better worth. Farm. Was it possible that ane was then and there so cheape, and to rise since to this ra? it is very strange. Sur. Not at all:Rents of lād, and prices of things grow together. for since  grew such emulati∣on among Farmers, that one would ou bid another▪ (which in the beginning was little seene) it grew at length, that he that bought deare, must sell deare, and so grew the prices of things by degrees to this te as  they be, and a Farmer gets as much by his Farme no, a then he did. Far. You erre therein, I assure you: for else could Farmers keepe as good houses & hospitality now, as they did then, and alas, you sée how vnable they be. Sur. It is true, and the reason is manifest: for where in those dayes Farmers and their wiues were content with meane dye, and base attire,The causes why things haue growne to this extre∣mity. and held their children to some stere gouernment, without haunting Alehouses, Tauerns, Dice, Cards, & vaine delites of charge, the case is altred: the Husbandman
so publikely: for Vin mendibi suspsa heder a non est upos. A gd workeman néeds not stand in the stréetes. Sur. I confesse, in this you haue sayd truly: for none that is in deede fit for imployment, will, or needs to craue it, in such manner,The perfe∣ction of a Surueyors office consi∣steth not in one part. for they will be sought vnto and solicited. But euery one that hath but a part of the arte, nay, if he can performe some one, two, or three parts, is not thereby to be accoun∣ted a Surueyor, as some Mechanicall men and Countrey-fellowes, that can measure a peece of Land, and though illiterate, can accompt the quan∣titie by the parts of money, as a peny to a , a groat to a day-worke, ten groats to a Roode, and consequently, a marke to an Acre, which manner of calling sufficeth, and satisfyeth them in their small accompt, but the maner of their measuring to  erronious, as I will shew you hereof  serue. Some haue the skill of plotting out of ground, and can neatly deliniate the same, and by Arithme∣tike can cast up the contents, which is a necessary point of a Suruey on office. Farm. Sauing your , we poore Coun∣try men due not thinke it good to haue our Lands plotted out, and we thinks in déede it is to very  all purpose: for is not the Field it self a goodly Map for the Lord to looke vpon, better then a pain∣ted paper? And what is he the better to see  out in colours? He can adde nothing to his land, nor diminishut: and therefore that labour aboue all may be saued, in mine opinion. Sur. They that speake at any time againste any thing done, or propounded to be done, do either shew their reasons against it, or else they conceale their conceits, and without any good argument, inueigh only against the thing: And I know your
meaning in misliking ploing of your land,A plot of land neces∣sary. and yet you  doo what you thinke: for a plot rightly drawne by true information, describeth so the likely image of a Mannor, and euery branch and member of the same, as the Lord sitting in his chayre, may see what he hath, where and how it lyeth, and in whose vse and occupation euery particular is vpon the sud∣daine view; which tenants mislike, not that the thing it self offendeth them, but that by it they are often preuented or discouered of deceitfull purposes. For a tenant that is both a free-holder and a copy-hol∣der for life▪ or by indenture for life or yeeres, hol∣ding these lands inter,Great abuses that grow by Farmers and tenants that are free∣holders. may easily (vnlesse the land for life or yeeres, be very specially butted and bounded in their copies or leases, as seldome they are, through the sloth of some stewards, or for de∣fault of a true suruey led guide them) appropriate vnto himselfe copy or leased land to a free, and espe∣cially hauing time nough to alter names and pro∣perti, to remooue meeres, and to call downe dit∣ches, to stock vp hedges, and to smothee vp truth and falshood vnder such a  conueniency, as before  be suspected  view, it will be cleane for gotten,  shall be able to say, This is the land: whereas if it be plotted out, and euery parcell of free copy leased, and the rest be truly distinguished, no such  can be done against the Lord, but it shall be  readily recon∣ciled. And I dare presume to say, that the want of due plots and descriptions of land in this forme,Want of plots of land pre∣iudiciall to Lords. hath bin the occasion of infinite concealements, and losses of many mens land, and many intrusions and inrohmens haue bin made, and to long continu∣ed, that now neither memory or record can reforme them; besides infinite other abuses, which are dayly done to the preiudice of Lords, for want of such a
monument to be always at hand for their instructiō. Far. You ayme vnhappily, I thinke, to some mens purposes: but for my part, I promise you I had no such thought in me, & yet what you say, may indéede be easily wrought in mo Mannors, if they be as yt Mannor is wherein I am a Tenant: for I am per∣swaded, there hath not bin any view taken of it, or perumbulation made, or suruey had within the me∣mory of any man aliue. And to tell you truly, I thinke the Lord hath much wrong both by his owne Tenants, and by confining Lords; for so the Lord haue his rent, and his other duties of vs, he is con∣tented: but I may tell you,Tenants commonly wish not for surueys. if he did better looke into it, it would be better for himselfe and his hereaf∣ter, yet we wish he would let it rest as it doth, for we may do in manner what we list, and if a Sur∣ueyor come, we shall not do as we haue done, nor hold that that some haue held, long, without any trouble: but that I leaue. Then you say, that plot∣ting is the chiefe part of a Surueyors skill. Sur. I say not so, but I say, it is necessary for him that is a Surueyor, to be able to do it, and that he be paine∣full & industrious, & hauing this quality with the rest more necessary, he may be then called a Surueyour.Who is a Surueyor. Farm. What are they I pray you? Sur. To little purpose I thinke I shall tell you, yet because you may know that euery one that hath the name, is not indeede a Surueyor:What a Sur∣ueyor must be able to do. for besides the former faculty of measuring and plotting, he must haue the vnderstanding of the Latin toong, and haue some sight in the common lawes, especially of Te∣nures and Customes, and must be able to reade and vnderstand any auncient deeds or records, French and Latine, and to iudge of the values of Land, and many other things, which if time will permit, I will hereafter declare more at large vnto you.
Farm. Why is there such a precise knowledge re∣quired in a Surueyor? Sur. Because they are imployd in such businesses as concerne greatest persons in their estates: for al∣though men be indowed, by the prouidence of God and in his ounty, with Honors, Mannors, Castles, houses, lands, tenements, woods, and other like reue∣nues, which indeed are the sinnewes and ligaments which conioyne & tye Honor and Habiliti together,Reuenues the sinnewes of Honor. yet if these be not managed, guided, and carefully continued and increased by a discreet & honest Sur∣ueyor, fo and in the name and behalfe of his Lord, and the Lord agayne proportion his expence and charge, according, vnto or within the compasse of his knowne Incomes, the Lord may be disabled to maintaine that which he hath gotten, the title of Ho∣nor: & where Honor is without meanes, it wanteth the substāce, & hath only ye shadow of it self to looke vpō. Far. It behaues not only men of Nobility, but in∣ferior mē also to looke vnto thēselues, for ye preserua∣tion of their estates, but they indéed yt haue but little may quickly view it: Sufficit exigno strigilatio curta caballo. But he that hath many Honors, Mannors, Lordships, Tenements & Farmes, can not of him∣selfe take view with ease; for indéede they lye for the most part dispersed in many parts, & they must be ayded by the skilfull & industrious trauaile of some iudicious Surueyor, who finding by his view & exa∣mination, the true values & yearly possibilities of his Lords Lands, may be a good meane to retaine his Lord within compas of his reuenues,A discreet Surueyor may be a good meane to manage the Lords reuenues. and to worke him to be good to his Tenants, and by that meanes the Surueyor shall deserue prayse, & his Lord win more honor. But I maruell how such great persons did before surueying came vp: for this is an vpstart arte found out of late, both measuring and plotting. Sur. You speake, I thinke, according to your con∣ceit,
but I will proue it far otherwise, that measuring,Plotting of land, and measuring, is very aun∣cient. plotting, and surueying hath bin vsed in ages of old. As for description, it was vsed in Egipt by Ptolomy the King, who described the whole world. And where the Riuer Nilus in Egipt ouerflowed the bancks (as at this day it doth about haruest) the violence of the inundations were such, as they cōfounded the marks & bounds of all the groūds that were surrounded, in such sort as none knew his own land: wherupon they deuised to measure euery mans land, & to plot it: so that afterwards alwayes at the waters recesse, euery man could finde out his owne land by the plot. Far. Truly that was a most excellēt inuention, & I thinke it indéede a most necessary course to be held in some grounds yt I know in England, which are subiect to like cōfusion: many marsh lands néere the sea coast in Kent, Sussex, Essex, Suffolke, Lincolneshire, Cambridgeshire, & other Shires confining the Sea, or subiect to great waters,Grounds subiect to surrounding, fit to be plot∣ted. & if they were thus plotted out as you say, I must needs confesse it were a good worke, howsoeuer these kind of grounds should be hereafter surrounded, increased or diminished by the force of Seas continuall rage, whereunto they are dayly subiect: for by ye meanes, if the ditches, which are the ordinary méeres, meates & bounds betwéene seueral mēs lands, be confounded, this deuice might after the winning of these surrounded grounds a∣gaine, truly reconcile them, and allot euery mā his own▪ which otherwise will be impossible to bring to true appropriations. And this, in my conceit, is not the least part of your professiō, to lay out grounds in their true formes, that euery seuerall parcell may be distinguished frō other: for I know where great strife hath risen by confounding one Mannor with another, where ye sea hath woon & lost groūd, & deuou∣red ye true boūds▪ of which I am not alone witnes, & it is dayly seene, ye questiōs do rise by like casualties,
where townes, houses, fields, woods, and much land hath béen and are dayly deuoured, and in some pla∣ces augmented, Riuers by force turned out of their right courses, vpon other confining lands; whereof time hath takē such hold, as ye truth is now brought in question, to the stirring vp of quarrels betwéene parties, which if these places had béen formerly laid out in plot, the doubt would be easily answered. In these things I can not but agrée with you, that your profession may stéed men that haue vse of your tra∣uaile in this kind, although no such arte hath bin, nor is it reported to haue had any vse in ye word of God. Sur. Is there a necessity to produce the vse of this, from examples out of the word of God, when these indifferent things are left to the discretion of man for matters of politike and ciuill society? If euery profession should be driuen to fetch authority from the vse in sacred things,Euery mat∣ter in mo∣derne vse among men, can not be prooued to haue had vse in holy Scriptures. many things plentifull a∣mongst vs that liue in a Common-wealth, would be found prophane: but because you seeme to vrge it, I will not stuck to let you know, that it is not without example in the diuine old Testament. If first you wil haue the proofe of measuring, looke into the second Chapter of Zachary, and there shall you finde, that the Prophet reporteth, that hee saw a man with a measuring line in his hand, and he asked him whi∣ther he went? and he said vnto him, To measure Ie∣rusalem, that I may see what is the bredth thereof, and what is the length thereof. Farm. I doe remember now that I haue read such a thing indéede, but as I take it, this measurer was an Angell of God. Sur. Then is the warrant of measuring so much the more strongly cōfirmed vnto mē. But you may per∣ceiue that measuring was then in vse in other things: for had not there bin the vse of the measuring line
before, how could the Prophet haue knowne it to be for that purpose? Farm. Yes, being a Prophet. Sur. He could not haue called a thing by it pro∣per phrase, that had not bene in vse before, neither could his relation thereof bene vnderstood of them to whom he declared it, vnlesse they also had before knowne the like. Farm. Can you prooue the like of Surueying? Sur. Ioshua commaunded the children of Israel, that euery Tribe should choose out three men,Ioshua 18. Surueying prooued by Scripture. that he might send them thorow the land of Canaan, to view, suruey, and to describe it: for so is the word, Yee shall describe the land into seuen parts, and bring them hither to mee. And what description could they make, without viewing and surueying the places? Farm. It is true that you say, such a view was taken at that time, that euery Tribe might haue his portion of inheritance. And surely in these Sur∣ueyors was much trust reposed by Ioshua the chiefe head of those children of Israel: for according to their report, did Ioshua diuide to euery Tribe his portion. This surely was a works of great discretion and iudgement in the Surueyors, and great prouidence in Ioshua: for indéede he could not trauaile in all those parts himselfe, and therefore he did wisely to ap∣poynt such as were fit to performe the seruice, and it makes me remember your former defence of the profession, in travailing for great persons, who can not affoord time nor paynes to view their owne lands themselues. And it is not euery mans gift to be able to diuide lands into equall,Euery man can not e∣qually diuide Lands into many parts. or certaine vne∣quall parts, that men that are partyes therein, may hold them equally trait withall, vnlesse it be such a one as hath skill in diuiding and opportionating, which thing comes often in vse among men in this
. Sur. If you had time and experience to looke into, and to vnderstand what hath bin done concerning this matter long ago, you should find in the records of the Tower euen before the Conquest, matter to satisfie you, that this profession was then in vse, and there shall you finde the fruites. And since the Con∣quest, the booke called Dowes day, lying in the Ex∣checker, will confirme you I thinke sufficiently, that it is not as you say a new inuencion. Beside, the same arte hath been in summe and substance established by act of Parliament,3. Edw. 1. Extenta Manerii. called Extenta Manerii: vpon which Statute, that learned Iudge Master Fitz her∣bert, hath written a little commodious and com∣pendious Treatise; so that if you stand vpon any further authorityes, I will leaue you to the present general vse thereof, which men of best discretion and greatest reuenues doe hold and continue, and none sprie against it, but the malicious or ignorāt. Farm. I confesse, I was lately ignorant of the things which now in part I know, but I was neuer malicious: as for the records and Statute where∣unto you referre me. I beléeue you without frther search, and for my owne part I am sory that ouer I haue so with others backbitten the profession, and slandered the honest professors thereof▪ for I now do well see and plainely vnderstand, that the same i lawfull and expedient, and not any way hurtfull vn∣to ye Tenants, if the Surueyor be skilfull & honest, and his information giuen by his assistants, which
, e true, and his help of the Lords  ready:The Lords records, and the Tenants informatiōs, are the pil∣lers of a suruey. for these are the two pillers, vpon which a Surueyor must of force build his worke, information and record, as I take it, al∣though record be alwayes preferred before verball intelligence, ye▪ if records be neuer so autentique, and true, of things vnknowne to him that hath the examination of them, what can be effected or done, but as by a blind man that knows his face is to his way, but how & where to step he is vncertaine? and although he desire none to beare him, because his legs are sound, yet he will not refuse to be led by the hand the way he would goe. So a Surueyor, in my poore opinion, yt hath a bundle, nay a whole trunck full of records of seuerall tenements, and parcels of lā whose names he can reade, whose buts & boūds he can relate, but yet he sees not the way of himselfe to go to thē, or can say without direction, This is it: and therfore I know, that Tenants must giue ayd to a Surueyor, or else he will fayle in his arte much. Sur. You haue said well, and it appeareth, your ap∣prehension is good in this businesse, and in deed the ayd of the Tenants is a good help in this case, especi∣ally when records are also present: for if record and their informatiō concurre, then is the Suruey or in the right way. But many times if the Surueyor can not help the Tenāts by his records whē they are at fault,The Suruey or by the Lords re∣cords may in some things guide the Tenants. he shall hardly finde which way his game goes: for a skilfull Suruey or carying his record in his hād, in his perambulation of a Mannor, shal after the first entry be able to guide himselfe, and go frō place to place, from field to field▪ euen by his owne euidence, if they be truly made, and the buts and bounds right, espe∣cially at the names continue vnaled, and that the Tenants can  it as he citeth it, and nothing then s required to be altred, but the names of owners,
who change often. And for this businesse, the fittest mē to accompany the Suruey or abroad, are the most auncient,The aunci∣entest Te∣nants fittest to guide the Surueyor. and longest inhabitants within the Man∣nor, for the Surueyors instruction, and the yongest, to the end they may also learne to know the like, to giue like ayd by their experience to posterities. Farm. Me thinks it were a good course (if I be not too sawcy) that a Surueyor should after his perambulation made, and the particulars entred, publikely reade the same before the Tenants in open Court, to the end that they may approue or reprooue what is true or mistaken, for the best may erre in setting downe of many things. Sur. I like your aduice well, and surely he that doth not so, and compare it also with former re∣cords, doth not as behooueth. But I know, and haue found by tryall, that Tenants thinke it a hard impo∣sition,Tenants vn∣willing to accompany the Surueyor. once in their life time to attend such a busi∣nesse, they had rather do any worke, then to do their Lord seruice, and themselues this good: for many of them are so wise in their own conceits, as they thinke thē fooles that giue any assistance vnto this worke; and some so wilfull, that if they knew that they and theirs should be for euer benefited by it, they will stand aloofe, and any small occasion of their owne will easily withdraw them from it; and some againe are so worldly, that they thinke no day well spent, but that is spent vpō their present profit: and lastly, some are so giuen to their vaine delights, as neither loue of their Lord, or feare of forfeiture of their tene∣ments, or doing good to their neighbors, or secu∣ring their posterity, can get any duty in this behalfe to be done by them. Farm. As farre as I conceiue, the Lord of a Mannor may force his Tenants at such a time, to giue their attendance, else you may well thinke, not
a few would finds excuses ynow to absent them∣selues. Sur. You say well, and therefore hath the Lawe prouided a punishment for those that will not doe their duties in this,The law pu∣nisheth Te∣nants that will refuse to ayd him in his Suruey. or in any thing that the Lord hath to do within his Mannor, for ordering of his Te∣nants. And because Tenants should not be forget∣full of their duties, they were in former times, and may be still, summoned to the Lords Court euery three weekes. And the Lords remissnes in calling them, hath bred in many places a kind of contempt, whereby groweth their slacknes in times of their Lords seruice. But the Lord of a Mannor hath po∣wer to punish them, and they are remedilesse with∣out submission, if the paine be within the compasse that the Court will beare, which is large ynough to weary him that is most arrogant. Farm. You haue satisfied mée in many things whereof I doubted, you haue cleared the profession it selfe of many slanders, and for my part I will henceforth speake more sparingly, and aduise such as I heare too forward, to be better aduised. And were I perswaded fully, that I my selfe might be a Surueyor, & yet retayne a good conscience, I should wish I were also capeable of the same faculty. Sur. And if I were perswaded, that you would giue an indifferent care, and afford an impartiall censure of what I would deliuer vnto you, I could be contented to bestow some time, to shew you what were fit to be done, to the attayning vnto such a measure of knowledge in the same, as might inable you to steed your selfe and your friends in that kind of office. Farm. I would thinke it well, if I could attaine but to some part of this faculty, I would leaue the rest to better capacities: but my desire is farre from
it, I may not be  that the practice is lawfull,A good minde. for I would deale with nothing, where∣in I might stand fearefull that God alloweth it not. Sur. I like you well, I wish him that you seeme to feare, to fauour all your honest desires, and name, and that his blessing may follow euery our good indeuors: for whosoeuer vndertaketh any professi∣on, be it neuer so lawfull or expedient and necessary for Church or Common-wealth,No profes∣sion without the feare of God can prosper. and hath not the grace and fauour of God to guide him, he may for a time seeme to prosper in it, and to flourish and ruffle it out with showes of great blessednes, but it is but like Iozahs Gourd, that grew vp in one night very great and fayre, but withered the next day. Farm. That I thanke God I haue learned, and to tell you truly, for my part I had rather liue in a meane estate in my calling, frée from bribery, ex∣tortion, and wrong, seruing God, then to get infi∣nite wealth thereby, yea, although not the world, but mine owne conscience can reprooue me for it: for I sée,The brauest is accompted most skilfull. such riches continue not many generati∣ons, neither hath it a promise of any blessing, al∣though I know, that they that can so rise and flou∣rish, and braue it out, are the men best accompted of; for they are held wise and politike, and to haue skill in their profession, wheeas others that beare not the minde to deale corruptly, can not keepe way with them in show, and thereby are condemned to be mpe fellowes, and their honest caage and  ate in the world,The simply honest, most suspected. maketh their  to performe what they vndertake suspicious; .
Sur. You are in the right way of a good consci∣ence, which is a continuall feast, such a feast, and of such sweetnes,Though the wicked seeme not to see their owne errors, God seeth them, and will dis∣couer them. as the world can not see or vnder∣stand the same, but happy is hee whose conscience accuseth him not: for howsoeuer men may seeme to set a good face on euill actions, as if hee could not accuse himselfe  his due examination of his owne heart, yet▪ it will come no passe that his con∣science will one day bewray it, to his intollerable terror, and hee shall bee forced to accuse, iudge, and condemne himselfe, without any further wit∣nesse. And this I tell thee is the end of all such as feare not God, and liue not vprightly and iustly in theyr callings: for it is not the calling it selfe that corrupteth the man, but the man may be cor∣rupted in his calling, and abuse his best profes∣sion▪ therefore I say, see that thou finde thine in∣clination apt vnto this profession,Some are na∣turally incli∣ned to some profession. and in thy de∣sire thou tremble not to attempt the same, for some professions are more naturall then others to euery man, and all mysteries and sciences whatsoeuer, are attayned by some with greater facility and ease then by others; and some by small industry, study, and endeuour shall attayne quickly to that perfe∣ction in some faculty, wherein another shall neuer excell, liue hee neuer so long, and bee hee neuer so studious and paynefull. Farm. I finde mine inclination in conceit, pli∣able vnto this course of life, how it will succeede, must bee seene by practice: but that is the least doubt, all my feare is, whether I may do it and yet  God▪ Sur. Know this, that if thou be already of a godly conuersation, hauing the true feare of God sealed vp as it were in thine heart, and dost not desire this pro∣fession,
as Simon the Magician did, for lucres sake, di∣uine knowledge, thou mayst assure thee, this profes∣sion will not hurt thee, although the workeman is worthy of his hyre: for none will force thy labour for nought: dulci labor cum lucre. If men did not get by their honest paines, it were meere slauery to vn∣dertake any kind of faculty. But to come to the law∣fulnes of it,The manner of the execu∣tion, not the matter exe∣cuted hur∣teth. know, that it is the manner of the exe∣cution, and not the matter of the profession that woundeth the conscience. Euery man is not borne nor bound to one faculty or trade, neither consi∣steth the common wealth of one member, but of many, and euery one a seuerall office, too long to expresse them all in kinde. Is not the eye surueyor for the whole body outward,Surueyers of the body. and the heart the sear∣cher within? And hath not euery common wealth ouerseers of like nature, which importeth as much as Surueyors?A Mannor is a little Common-wealth. And is not euery Mannor a little com∣mon wealth, whereof the Tenants are the members, the Land the bulke, and the Lord the head? And doth it not follow, that this head should haue an o∣uersee or Surueyor of the state and gouernment of the whole body? And followes it of necessity, that the office is vnlawfull? An vniust officer maketh not the office vniust, no more then a crabbed face im∣paireth the faire glasse wherein it looketh, or a dusky cloud corrupt faire water whereon it lowreth. In case of Suruey of Land, against which you haue so much inueighed, if you consider it in reason, and make it your owne case, you will say perchance, The case is altred.Priuate and meane men suruey their small things, euen their little Farme. You haue now peraduenture a small Farme, will you be carelesse and dissolute of the estate there∣of? will you not wey and consider with your selfe what Land is fit for Pasture, what for Arable, what for Meddow, and the like? and will you not com∣mand your seruāt to view it dayly, that no trespasses
be done therein, and to see vnto the hedges, ditches, fences, water-courses, gates, and such like? Will you not regard the estate of your Cattell, their number, health, and safety? And haue you not a continuall watch ouer all your seruants and children, and to the preseruation of things within and without? If you do thus in one small Farme, what would you do in ten? could you see vnto them all your selfe? If you had as many Mannors, would you sit at home and receiue the rents and fines that your Tenants would bring you, without consideration of the estate, or values, quātities or qualities of the things for which you receiue their money? And why haue you this care, or would you looke into these things? Is it not, because it is your liuing and liuelyhood,If reuenues decay, a mās estate de∣cayes. by which you and yours are maintained? And how much the more it is neglected, so much the more it decayeth: and if it decay in quantity, you can not continue e∣quall in quality. And can you therefore thinke it a hard course in that Lord (that hauing his Lands which are his liuelyhood, dispersed in diuers parts of the Realme, to which, through greater imployments of importance, hee can not personally resort,Great States∣men can not suruey their owne Lands. if hee could, it is neither his experience, nor fit for his cal∣ling to trauaile therein) to authorize and send such as may take view of his reuenues, and of the estates of his Tenants, who are by custome and law in many things bound vnto him, and that by such his substi∣tute, he may be truly aduertised of what he hath, and how his meanes do arise, that he may propor∣tion his charge and expences accordingly?The charge imposed vpon a Surueyor. and whe∣ther he be abused by his Tenants, or his Tenants by his officers, or one Tenant by another, or the Lord wronged by confining Lords, by intruding too far into his Lands, how rents be answered, and customs continued, how free-holders do performe their suits
vnto his courts, how his tenements are mayntayned and repayred, how his woods are preserued, his fishings, fowling, and prerogatiues mayntayned? All which, by how much the more they are neg∣lected and let run without view or suruey,Wherein ho∣norable per∣sons do of∣fend, in neg∣lecting their reuenues. so much the more doth the Lord weaken his estate, and preiudice his heyre: wherein, it can not be denyed, hee offendeth God, deceyueth the King, and de∣fraudeth the Common-wealth. God, in that he is carelesse of his blessings bestowed vpon him. The King, in that he wilfully disableth himselfe to doe hym the seruice he oweth him in body and goods: and the Common-wealth, in that he disableth him∣selfe to giue it that assistance, that his quality and place ought to affoord; and consequently, shew∣eth hymselfe vnworthie to ouersee matters of State and Common-wealth, that is carelesse to see vto hys owne. Furthermore, where a due and true suruey is made and continued,True surueys continue peace be∣tweene Lord and Tenant. there is peace mayntayned betweene the Lord and his Tenants; where, if all things rest betweene them confused, questions and quarrels arise, to the disturbance o both. In priuate familyes, if there be none to ouersee and to manage things domesticall, what disorders, what outrage, what vnciuill and vngod∣ly courses, and what spoyle and ruyne of all things doe follow? The lyke of necessity, where Tenants are left vnto theyr owne will: and yet, as the vn∣ruly companie in a family could be contented to bee masters of themselues, and to haue no con∣troulement. So Tenants can well brooke theyr Lords absence, and that they might be theyr owne caruers, and that the Lord should haue what they would yeeld of theyr owne accord. I speake not of the honestly minded: but where a multitude is without a guide or gouernor, there is disorder; and
disorder breedeth complaynts; and complaynts are vnsauory to a kind Land-lord, who must be forced for redresse, to punish the offendors: and the most offensiue will speake most of theyr wrong, and wyll soonest exclayme against any course that may keepe order. So that, to conclude, I affyrme,The faulty will first finde fault. that it is most requisite and expedient for due order sake, that euery Lord of a Mannor should cause his Lands to be duly seene, and truly surueyd and certifyed,A Suruey must be re∣nued once in seuen or ten yeeres. and once in seuen or tenne yeeres to haue it reuiewed: for the inconueniences that growe by the neglect thereof, are of so many kindes, and they so dangerous, (lyke the most perilous disease long concealed) that they worke contempt in the Tenants, and losse to the Lord. Now, to keepe this vpright betweene the Lord and hys Tenants, I thinke you can not deny, but a true and honest Suruey is necessary and lawfull, and may bee performed with a good and safe con∣science, and in the feare of God; if (as I haue sayd) the conscience bee not before stayned with the corrupt desire of vnlawfull gayne, and (as I sayde before) I thinke fewe or none wyll mislike the course,None mislike true surueys, but decei∣uers. but such as are fare gone in some disease of deceyuing theyr Lord, which can not in∣dure to haue this kynde of salue to come neere theyr sore. Farm. Truly Sir, I know not how to answere you, but doo consent to that you affirme: For, for mine owne part I can not but confesse, I can finde nothing in mine experience to contradict your speech. But pitty it is that Surueyors should be ignorant, or vnhonest: for the one especially abu∣seth the Lord, and the other wrongeth both Lord and Tenants.
Sur. But whether is there cause, in your conceit, to approue or reproue the profession, as it is simple in itselfe? Deliuer your mind plainely, leaue not a scrple in the minds of your neighbors, that haue exclaymed with you against them that neuer offen∣ded them, reproouing as much as they durst, Lords, for looking into their owne land: and vnlesse Lords were dead images or pictures of men,Lords that will not looke to their owne Lands, are as dead images. hauing only the name of Lords, and could not at all command their Tenants, that could neither heare, see, nor con∣sider what were fit to be done with their owne pro∣per reuenues, I can not but wonder, that any should spune against them herein. Farm. I thinke you speake something too force∣ably against Tenants in generall: for surely all are not opposite to this course, though some be. Sur. I condemne none, but I reprooue some, that of mine owne knowledge haue giuen testimonie of their inward dislike, by their outward murmors, for what is done with an euill will,Euill will is neuer duti∣full. can not be sayd to be done at all. Such as come cheerefully to the seruice, are dutifull, and I hold it impiety to abuse them, but the vnwilling deserue little fauour. Farm. What should Tenants principally do in such a businesse? Sur. Nothing but that law, custome, and duty requireth at their hands, to giue their best ayd to the Surueyor,What Te∣nants should do in the Lords sur∣uey. to trauell with him about the circuit, buts, bounds, and limits of the Mannor, to informe him of the same, and of euery particular mans land, and rent, to shew him their copies, leases and deeds, to the end he may enter and inroll thē all together in a faire booke, for the Lords vse, and for a perpe∣tuall record for themselues. Farm. For, information, and shewing the parti∣cular grounds and bounds of the Mannor, indeed is
fit, but for their euidences, as their copyes and lea∣ses, the Lord hath the Court-rolls of the one, and counterpanes of the other; and for fée holders déeds, their Land is their owne, and whether they may be compelled to shew them or not, I can not tell. Sur. These are iuolous doubt that some haue formerly made, but they haue bin answered to their cost, for the law compelleth them all. For, admit the Lord of the Mannor haue the rolls wherein the co∣pyes are recorded,View of Euidences necessary. may not copyes be abused after their entryes, or counterfetted in some things pre∣iudiciall to the Lord, as may also the Lease, as hath been found oftentimes, names and liues of men, par∣cels of Lands, dates of yeeres, and such like, azed, inserted, or altred? And is it not fit therefore that they be seene & entred together, that without search of so many court rolls the Lord may be satisfyed, & the Tenants iustified? And what preiudiceth it the Tenant, to haue his euidences truly recorded, if he meane plainely, be it copy, lease, or free deede? he will thinke it a confirmation of his estate▪Entry of deeds conue∣nient for the Tenant. what ca∣sualty soeuer come to the same, he may be the bet∣ter assured that such a record will witnes with him; whereas if none such appeare, his intrest will be the more suspicious: and therefore such as are wise and discreet, will not only consent to this good course, but be thankefull vnto the Surueyor as behooueth. If it be iust and right, that the Lord should know his owne, who should manifest it, but the Tenant himselfe▪ and how should hee doe it, but by his eui∣dence? And most vniust it is in that Tenant, that by any wilfull or sinister meanes or couert practice, doth either detract his fellow Tenants from the ser∣uice, or concealeth any thing that may further the same. Farm. This I can not deny, although indéede
some oly fellowes will  doubt héerein, but I sée it is to good purpose, and for our better security,The Tenants duty. to do all things requisite in this bu∣sinesse, and that all the Tenants within the Mannor should conioyne in , and euery one for himselfe, and all for one▪ and one for all, should séeke, examine and declare the vttermost truth of euerything, to∣wards the exact performance of this seruice, and that the Surueyor should know the quantities, qualities, and indifferent pain of euery mans Tenement and Lands, their rents, seruices, cu∣stomes, wors, and whatsoeuer the Tenant is in lawe or conscience bound to yéeld or performe to his Lord; and indéed thus  haue I heard giuen in charge at a Court of Suruey, with many other articles, which are now out of my mind▪ all which may be done by Tenants with a good conscience, both by relation in Courts, and in the perambula∣tion: but the concealing of these can not stand with an honest mind, for these things of themselues can not preiudice the Tenants, but the misconceiuing misenring by the Surueyor, may be erroneous, and the ouer-racking,What things are euill in a suruey. vrging▪ and ouerburdening the Tenants by the Lord, may be extortious. These things may fall out by meanes of an vniust and vn∣skilfull Surueyor, and a couetous Landlord. And the feare of this maketh the Tenants to exteate the values, and to smother the truth of things to their soules danger: therefore happy are those Te∣nants, that haue a gracious Lord, and an honest Surueyor; for then there can not be but an equall and vpright course held betweene them▪ then can not the Tenants but be faithfull and louing to their Lords,The princi∣pall causes of instituting Mannors. and their Lords fauorable to them, so should the Tenants be defended by their Lords, and the Lords fortified by his Tenant, which were the
two principall causes of the originall foundation of Mannors as I haue heard. Sur. You say rightly, and I am glad to heare you conceiue so well of this apparant necessity; for so may I say, that it is of necessity that the Lord should know the full and absolute estate of his Mannor, and of euery particular thereof: for howsoeuer of late dayes Tenants stand in higher conceits of their free∣dome, then in former times,Tenants ar now in con∣ceit more free, then in former times. if they looke a little back into antiquity, they shall see that Tenants (for the most part) of euery Mannor in England, haue ben more seruice vnto theyr Lords, and in greater bon∣dage then now they are, whom the fauorable hand of time hath much infranchised, and it can not be altogether euery where forgotten, because they may see as in a glasse, the picture of theyr seruitude in many auncient custome rolls,Auncient bondage. and in the copyes of theyr owne auncesters, and many seruile works haue been due and done by them, and in many pla∣ces yet are, though the most are now turned into money: but neyther theyr infranchisements, nor the conuersion of works into rents doe so farre free them, but that they still owe seruices vnto their Lords, in respect of their tenures, as well freehol∣ders as customary Tenants, as both in most of their copyes and deeds is expressed by these words, Pro¦editu & seruitiis vnde prius debit. & de iure consuet.Euery infe∣rior estate is conditionall. which proueth their tenures in a sort to be condi∣tionall: which condition if it be wilfully broken by the obstinate carriage of any such Tenant, he indan∣gereth his estate. Lord. It were hard, if for not doing some small seruice vnto his Lord, a man should forfeit his li∣uing. Sur. And it were very foolishnes in a Tenant, for wilfull refusall thereof, to indanger the ame: for if
the Lord be in lawe tyed to mayntayne the right of his Tenant, and to defend him against any other that shall pretend a false title vnto his Land, the Te∣nant is againe bound to performe all such seruices, and to pay all such dutyes as of right he ought. And it is expedient that the Lord should see these dutyes continued, and it hath been and is dayly obserued, that the neglect thereof extinguisheth the remem∣brance of them,The Tenants seruice is parcell of the Lords in∣heritance. and so the Lord loseth his inheri∣tance: for euery seruice of the Tenant is parcell of the same, and the remisnes of looking into these tenures, hath brought it to passe, that infinite within this king∣dome, that hold in fee quillets of Land, and some Mannos, know not how or of whom they hold; so that hereby Lords of Mannors, of whom these quil∣lets were heretofore knowne to hold,Discontinu∣ance of ser∣uice hurtfull to the Lord. haue lost their tenures and seruices, and such as hold the Land by vnknowne tenures, are cast into the danger, to hold to their, and their posterities further hurt. Farm. If Tenants will be wilfully obstinate, and refuse to do and continue their vttermost seruices vnto their Lords, as bound by their tenures, béeing (as you say) parcell of the Lords inheritance, they are worthy to be attached of disobedience, and to pay for their contempts: and if Lords will bée so negligent, as they will not looke vnto their owne, they are worthy to lose their right: and therefore I hold it discretion in the one to do his duty, and pro∣uidence in the other to continue what is due; and if by age or impotencie the Tenant be disabled in person to performe his seruice,Seruice of the Tenant. to craue dispensati∣on, or to do it by another; and if the Lord be farre off and can not be present, to substitute one to re∣ceiue it for him. But Sir, in all your discourse, I haue obserued, you haue pleaded (as it were) for the Lord, against the Tenants, exacting sundry
dutyes from them to their Lords, but I haue not heard you speake much against the Lords in fauour of the Tenants, and yet I know there is a kind of reciprocall bond of duty each to the other, and may be broken of either side. Sur. It is very true, for as children are bound to their parents by the bond of obedience, so are the parents bound to the children by the bond of edu∣cation: and as seruants are bound to their masters in the bond of true seruice, so are the masters bound to their seruants in the bond of reward. In like maner, Tenants being bound vnto their Lords in the bond of duty,Lords and Tenants are bound each to other. so are Lords bound vnto their Tenants in the bond of loue: and though I haue sayd little at this time of the duty of Lords to their Tenants, the occasion hath not bin offered at this time. Farm. I trust you haue sayd enough concerning the duty of Tenants, for they can but pay rent, and do seruice, more can not be exacted. Sur. Yet rent and seruices are diuers and diuersly answered and done, which I could be content to shew you more at large, but that yonder comes a Gentleman that will interrupt vs: know you what he is? Far. I will tell you by and by as he comes néere. Oh Sir, it is my Landlord, a man of great possessi∣ons, Lord of many Mannors, and owner of diuers Farmes, who hath béen inquisitiue for a man of your profession, but to tell you truly▪ I altogether disswaded him before this time: but now hauing heard your reasons, I will solicit him for your im∣ployment, and I would wish you might vndertake first the Mannor wherein I dwell. Sur. At his disposition and pleasure be it: and so for this time I leaue you. The end of the first Booke.
The Surueyors Dialogue, betweene the Lord of a Mannor, and a Surueyor: where∣in is intreated of the state of a Mannor, of the parts and profits thereunto belonging: and how the Lord of a Mannor ought to deale with his Tenants. The second Booke. Lord. FRiend, of late I met with a Tenant of mine, who told me you are a Sur∣ueyor of Land. Surueyor. I haue beene, and am sometimes imployd in that kind of seruice. Lord. I haue at this time some occasion to vse the ayd of one of your faculty: and I haue heard by my Tenant, that your skill and diligence may satisfie my desire therein. Surueyor. I shall do mine endeuour wherein you please to commaund me. Lord. There bée many, I know, that beae the name of Surueyors, but when they are put to it, they come far short of some principall poynts required in the absolute performance of the worke,All that pro∣fesse it, are not Suruey∣ors. and ey∣ther leaue it halfe done, or so shuffle it vp, as the Lord is abused, and the Tenants wronged, by the blind and vncertaine returnes of the Surueyors trauailes: for a Lord of a Mannor knoweth not, but by such as he vseth therein, the estate of things, and how the particulars stand betwéene the Lord and his Tenants. If the Lord of the Mannor haue neuer so good a mind to deale well with his Te∣nants,
and the Tenants be neuer so inclinable to do true duty to their Lord,Ignorance in Surueyors, dangerous. they may be both misled by an vnskilfull Surueyor, to the vniust condemna∣tion or suspition of both. And therefore I thinke it behoueth men of worth, that haue vse of such as you are, to be well assured of the skill and ability which you pretend to haue in your profession; and because I haue no further experience of you then the bare report of my Tenant, I must intreate you to dis∣course vnto me a little of your knowledge of such particulars, as are to be considered in the absolute suruey of a Mannor. Surueyor. Sir, you seeme to oppose me farre, and the thing you demaund, will require a longer time, and a larger discourse, then either my leysure, or peraduenture my present memory of euery parti∣cular will readily permit. And it may be, that you that pretend little knowledge in the arte, may ap∣prehend both the truth of the thing,Some not ha∣uing the name of Sur∣ueyors, may haue the skill. and an error committed in the performance, as well as he that assumeth the title of a Surueyor, although neither your leysure nor your quality may in reason permit you the trauaile in it: for I know many Gentlemen of good woorth, that haue the speculatiue parts of the whole, and the practick of the deepest, and yet they will not be seene to tread that path that a Sur∣ueyor is forced to do, in the whole businesse. You haue the matter and subiect whereon a Surueyor worketh, and without which a Surueyor loseth both arte and name, and therefore you cannot be altoge∣ther ignorant of the things required in the busi∣nesse, as the Master of a feast can not dresse the dainties, but the Cooke, yet can the Master reproue the Cooke if he do not his duty therein. Lord. Thou sayst true in thy comparison: but for my part, although  I haue Land, and I
know how many Mannors I haue, their names, and where they lye, and the most of my Tenants, and theyr rents, and if you should erre in these, it may be I might be able to reprooue you, yet for matters of farther search, I assume not to be skil∣full, fo then I néeded not yor seruice, as of quan∣tities, qualities, values, validities of estates, te∣nures, customes, and other things incident to a Mannor, which are not in all Mannors alike, the true discouery whereof belongeth to the Suruey∣ors offce, yet none but such as are truly skilfull, can sufficiently discharge the duty héerein required: and therefore by your leaue, you shall briefly (I will not be tedious) relate vnto me what you can say of the defnition of a Mannor, whereof it consisteth, how, when, and by whom it was erected, with o∣ther such things as shall be expedient for the Lord of a Mannor to know the particulars whereof I will leaue to your relaton, and first tell me What a Mannor is. Suruey. Sith you will needs diue into my poore skill, by your opposall, and sith indeed I do in some measure professe the arte, wherein I thinke no man is or hath bene so exquisit,A man may erre in what∣soeuer arte. but hee might erre in some poynt or part much or little, as in other artes, yet to answere your demaunds, I will as briefly as I can, satisfye your desire. And first, where you demaund what a Mannor is, A Mannor in substance is of Lands,What a Mannor is. Perk. fo. 127 Wood, Meddow, Pasture, and Arable: It is compounded of demesnes and seruices of long continu∣ance. As touching the beginning of a Mannor, and the institution thereof, the beginning of Mannors was,The begin∣ning of Man∣nors. when the King gaue Lands vnto his followers, in such quantity, as did exceed the proportion of a mans manurance and occupation, as a thousand, two thousand Acres more or lesse: which quantity
of Land being at that time as it were in a lump or Chaos, without any distinction of parts, or qualities of Land, he to whom such Land was giuen to hold to him and his heires for euer, enfeoffed some others in parts thereof, as one in ten, another in twenty, and some in more, some in lesse Acres, and ion∣sideration of such feoffements, euery of these were to do the feoffer some kind of seruice, as he and they agreed vpon, reseruing such a part vnto himselfe, as he might conueniently occupy in his owne hands, and by this meanes the Land thus giuen by the King, and thus proportioned out to others by the Donee, became to be called a Mannor. And he that was thus inuested in this Land by the King, was in respect of such as he infeoffed, called the Lord,Lords and Tenants why so called. and such as were infeoffed, were called Tenants: Lord, in respect of gouernement and commaund; and Te∣nants, in respect of their tenures, and manner of hol∣ding vnder the Lord whom they were to obey. Lord. But when or about what time was this erection of Mannors? Sur. As I take it, and as it seemeth, in the time of the Normans:When Man∣nors began. for among the Saxons was no such name as the name Mannor, yet the thing euen in substance was then, for they had Demeisnes, and seruices in substance,Inlandt. Vtlandt. but the demeisnes they cal∣led Inlands, and the seruices Vtlands, so that it dif∣fereth only in name, but in Iurisdiction little or no∣thing at all. Lord. Whereof is it called a Mannor? Sur. There is some differēce of opiniōs whēce the wod Mannor should be deriued: it is in Latin called Manerium,Whence a Mannor ta∣keth name. yet a word not vsed among the Romans or ancient Latins, & therfore to find the etimon by it, can∣not be: for the word is vsed among our Lawyers, as many other made words are, which haue bin termes
raised by our Lawes, & are not elsewhere in vse; and therefore the neerest way to find the signification of the word, is by the quality of the thing; so that some hold, it should proceed of the Latine verbe, Maner, which signifieth to abide, or remayne in a place, as the Lord and his Tenants did in this, wher∣of the head house, or the Lords seate was called Berrye,Berrye. quid. which signifieth in the Saxon toong, a dwel∣ling place, which continueth yet still in Hartford∣shire, and in diuers other places, and is also taken sometimes pro castro, which was also the seate of the Lord of some Mannor. Mannor houses were also, and yet are called in some places,Halls. Courts. Halls, as in Essex, and Northward: Courts and Court-houses West∣ward, as in Somerset, Deuon, &c. as also Mannor places all which are places of the Lords owne abode, and therefore it may not vnfitly be said, to take name of abiding or dwelling. Some thinke, and not im∣properly, that it taketh name of the French word Manemirer, which signifieth to till and manure the ground. And of the two, I take this latter to be the most proper deriuation of the word Mannor: for thereof are many chiefe houses of tillage, called Pre∣dia,Predi. Graunges. It may also take name of Mainer, to gouerne and guide, because the Lord of the Man∣nor had the managing and direction of all his Te∣nants within the limits of his iurisdiction. Of these deriuations qualem mauis accipe▪ necessity tyes to neyther. Lord. These significations of the word may stand all with sence, and much materiall it is not whence the word ariseth, but the likelyest is indeed that which most agreeth with the propertie of the thing. But I haue within my Mannors sundry mesuages: whence is the name deriued? Sur. Of meisus, or mesuager, which is as much
to say, as familiam administrare,Mesuage, whence it taketh name. to gouerne a hous∣hold: for euery of the Tenants had his family, and of diuers of them and of the Lords family did a Man∣nor consist. Lord. Then no doubt, if a man haue a thousand Acres of Land more or lesse, to him and his heires, which lyeth in one intire péece not yet diuided, may be diuided into parts, as a portion for the Lord himselfe, and some parcels to erect such mesuages for Tenants to do him seruice, as he may make a Mannor where none was before. Sur. No Sir, for although a man haue a compe∣tent quantity of Land in his manurance, and would conuert it to the end you speake of, were it neuer so great, and could establish many mesuages,A Mannor may not be made at this day. and could erect whatsoeuer seruices, this would not become a Mannor, because all these must haue long continu∣ance, which can not at this day be confirmed by any priuate man, but by the King only: but he may haue thereby a kind of seignory, a Lordship or gouerne∣ment in grosse ouer his Tenants by contract or couenant, but no Mannor. No man at this day can create a seruice or a tenure, or by any meanes rayse or erect a Mannor: for there must be very Lord and very Tenant in fee-simple, and that of auncient cōmencement and continuance, or else it can inure no Mannor. For a man may haue demeisns to occupy, and Tenants to do him seruices, and that of conti∣nuance, and yet no Mannor. As if a man that had Land, did giue part of this Land in former time to some others in tayle to do him seruices, heere are demeisnes in the donor, and seruices in the donees▪ and a tenure: yet because there be not very Tenants in fee simple, remaketh no Mannor. Lord. Whether are all Lands holden of a Man∣nor, parcell of the same Mannor?
Sr. No, Lands may be holden of a Mannor by certaine seruices, the seruice may be parcell of the Marnor, and yet the Lands not. Lord. But may not this Land be made parcell of the Mannor at this day? Sr. By no other meanes but by escheat, for if the Land fall vnto the Lord by escheat, then it comes parcell of the Mannor: for then is the seruice extin∣guished, and the Land commeth in place of it. Lord. May not a man purchace Land that lyeth néere his Mannor, and annexe the same, and make it parcell of the Mannor, though it held not of the Mannor before? Sur. Forraine Land newly purchased, though it lye within the precinct and bounds of the Mannor, can not be annexed, though the Tenant thereof be willing to do his seruices there: for this is in nature of a new creation of a tenure, which at this day the lawe will not admit, only the King by his prerogatiue may. Lord. What if it were tyed vnto the Lord of a Mannor for the payment of an annuity, is not the annuity then parcell of the Mannor? And if that Land be purchased by the Lord, and thereby extin∣guish the annuity, doth not that Land come in place of the annuity, and so become parcell of the Man∣nor, as the Land you spake of before, which by the escheat ran in place of the seruice▪ Sur. The case is not alike: for the annuity was not parcell of the Mannor,22. Edw. 4.44. neither can it be by such meanes as you propound by the way of Mortgage. But in another sort it may: as if a Mannor be to be diuided into sundry parts,22. lib. ass. 53. and because the parts fall out vnequall in value, there must a rent or annuity be apportioned to make vp the value, which rent becomes parcell of the Mannor.
Lord. If the Mannor be diuided, as you say, and a rent allotted to one part, how can the rent be par∣cell of the Mannor, forasmuch as in my vnderstan∣ding, the Mannor becommeth by this partition, to be no Mannor: for if there can be no addition to a Mannor, there can be no diuision of a Mannor, and yet the Mannor to continue still a Mannor. Sur. Yes Sir, of one Mannor may be made diuers at this day. Lord. How I pray you? Sur. If a Mannor descend to diuers partners,26. H. 8.4. and they make partition, and euery one hath demeisnes and seruices, euery one hath a Mannor, and euery one may keepe a Court Baron. Lord. What if a man make a feoffement vpon conditions of parcell of his Mannor, or do graunt a Lease to another for life of part, or do intayle part, are not these parts still parcels of the Mannor? Sur. If parcels of a Mannor be once thus seuered, they immediatly become no parcels thereof: yet may they all reuert and become parcels of the Man∣nor againe, as if the condition of the feoffement be broken, if the Tenant for life dye, or the limitation of the entayle discontinue for want of heires. Lord. Then a man may say, that though such Land be not, yet the reuersions are parcels of the Mannors. Sur. So it is intended. Lord. Well, you haue reasonably well satisfied me in these poynts, yet would I gladly haue some further satisfaction of some other matters, touching the state and profits of a Mannor. Sur. I would be willing to do my best to content you, but you partly hinder me of other businesse. What else would you know? I wish breuity. Lord. It shall be so, neither shall you lose your
labour: for I meane to vse you, if my future satis∣facton be answerable to this former. May euery Mannor kéepe a Court Baron▪ Sur. Euery Mannor in the beginning, no doubt, might keepe a Court Baron,Euery Man∣nor may keepe a Court Baron. and so it may at this day, vnlesse the Mannor be so dismembred, as it wanteth that which may warrant the keeping thereof: for if all the freeholders of a Mannor do escheat, or all but one, the Mannor is then disabled to keepe a Court Baron, for the Court cannot be kept without suters, which are the freeholders.35. H. 8. Lord. Then me thinks, the Mannor loseth the name of a Mannor:A Mannor may lose the property, and so the name. Fitzh. 3. C. A Seignory. for if it lose the quality, it is not the thing, no more then a logge that had fire, can be sayd a fire-logge, when the fire is extinct. Sur. It is true, it becomes no Mannor, but a Seig∣nor, hauing no power to keepe a Court-Baron. Lord. An ignorant Surueyor, I sée, may be easily deceyued, in terming that which is no Mannor, a Mannor, and that no Mannor, which indéede is a Mannor. But satisfie me in this one thing. A man hauing two Mannors lying together, and the one of them is decayd, and hath lost his power to kéepe a Court Baron, and the Lord is willing to haue the Tenants of both these Mannors to do their suites and seruices to one Court, namely, to that which standeth yet in force, and that me thinks were good for the Tenants to ease them, and it would preserue the Lords right without preiudice to any▪ for then one homage would serue both, and both serue as one, one Bayly, and other officers, as if it were an future Mannor. Sur. Yet this can not bee, for this vnion of the Mannors can not extinguish theyr seuerall distin∣ctions, for they will be still two in nature, howsoe∣uer the Lord couet to make them one in name, and
the more powerfull Mannor hath no warrant to call the Tenants of the decayd Seignory, but euery act done in one to punish an offendor, in the other is trauersable, and therefore it is but lost labour to pra∣ctise any such vnion; if it be considered by such as are forced to seruice in this kind, they may refuse it: yet if they will voluntarily submit themselues to such a nouation, and the same be continued without con∣tradiction,How two di∣stinct Man∣nors may be made one. time may make this vnion perfect, and of two distinct Mannors in nature, make one in name & vse, and I do not thinke but such there are. Lord. Then is there, as it séemeth, no meane to annere two Mannors in one, howsoeuer necessary it were both for the Lord and Tenants. Sur. Yes Sir, two Mannors may become as one, if one Mannor do hold of another, and it escheat to the Lord, the escheated Mannor may be annexed, and vnited, and of two distinct Mannors become one, if the Lord will, in vse. Lord. I am answered in this poynt, and it stan∣deth with more reason indéed then the former: now I pray you tell me what things do properly belong to a Mannor. Sur. There do belong to a Mannor, Lands, Tene∣ments, rents, and seruices, as I shewed you before in part, which are a parcell in demeisne, and parcell in seruice. Lord. But speake, I pray you, something more at large of euery of these, and first tell me what de∣meisnes are. Sur. Demeisnes are all such Lands, as haue bin time out of the memory of man, vsed and occupied in the Lords owne hands and manurance, as the site of the Mannor house, Meddowes, Pastures, Woods, and arable land, that were reserued for the maintenance of the Lords house from the beginning.
Lord. This then is that you call parcell in de∣meisne: what is that you call parcell in seruice? Sur. Parcell in seruice.All those lands, tenements, and heredita∣ments, which yeeld rents of Assize, as rents of free∣hold, copyhold, or customary land: all which are par∣cell of the Mannor, yet no demeisnes. Lord. But are not all customary land copyhold land?Copy and cu∣stomary Lād, and their difference. why then make you a distinction betwéene copy and customary? Sur. All copy hold Land is commonly customary, but all customary is not copyhold: for in some places of this Realme, Tenants haue no copyes at all of their Lands or Tenements, or any thing to shew for that they hold, but there is an entry made in the Cout-booke, and that is their euidence, and this especially of the ancient Duchy land of Cornewall, and other places. Lord. These Tenants then may be called Te∣nants by Court-roll, according to the custome of the Mannor, but not Tenants by copy of Court-roll. Sur. It is true, but they are held only a kinde of conuentionary Tenants, whom the custome of the Mannor doth onely call to do their seruices at the Court,Conuentio∣nary Tenāts. as other customary Tenants do. Lord. The word conuenire, where of they be called conuentionary, doth, as I conceiue, import as much as to call together, or conuent: but what say you to the Rents of Assize? What meane you by Assize? Sur. Truly, for my part I take it to signifie, set in certainty:Rents of As∣size, why so called. for these kind of rents are as in the begin∣ning, neither risen nor falne, but doe continue al∣wayes one and the same, and only they and none else can be properly called rents of Assize. Lord. I thinke you take it rightly: and are all rents of one kind? Sur. No: there are properly three kinds, as rent
seruice, Rent seck, and Rent charge.3. kindes of Rents. Lord. These termes are strange to me, though I be Lord of many Mannors, and no doubt, I receiue rentes of euery of these kindes, but how to distin∣guish them, I can not tell. And whether I haue bin abused by mine Officers or no, I know not: for they neuer told me of these many kindes of rentes, and therfore let me intreat you, for my satisfaction, a little to explaine their seuerall natures? Sur. These Seuerall rentes are paide vpon seuerall considerations,How euery kinde of rent is to be payd. and haue seuerall grounds and com∣mencementes, and are diuersly to be leuied and re∣couered if they bee denied. That which is called Rent seruice, is so called, because it is knit to the te∣nure, and is as it were a Seruice, whereby a man hol∣deth his Landes, or Tenements. As, where the Te∣nant holdeth his Lands, by Fealty and certaine rent, or by Homage, fealty, and certaine rent, or by any o∣ther seruice and certaine rent, the rent is called Rent seruice: for, as the Seruice followeth a Tenure, so the Rent followeth the seruice. And if this rent bee behind, the Lord of Common right may enter and distrayne for it. The Rent charge is so called, because when a man graunteth any Land, whether it bee in fee-simple, ee tayle, for life, for yeares, or at will, and in his deede reserueth a rent, with clause of dis∣tresse for non payment, by vertue of this clause, the Land is charged with payment of the rent, by ex∣presse wordes, and by force of it the Lord may dis∣traine for his rent behind. Lord. This kind of rent is at this day, I thinke, most common: for fewe will graunt Land,Rent charge most common at this day. but they will make such prouision, that the Land shall stand charged with the rent. Sur. It is true, for at this day, there can be no rent seruice raysed, because it cannot bee without
a tenure, which can not be at this day created. Lord. What is that you call Rent seek? Sur. It is a bare rent reserued vpon a graunt, wherein there is no mention made of charging the Land by distresse,Rent seek. and it signifieth redditum siccum, a dry rent, for the recouery whereof the Land is not charged. Lord. Few such rents are now adayes, for a man had nede to make all the prouision he can to secure his rent, and yet he may be driuen to try his vtter∣most meanes to recouer it. But you haue satisfied me also touching these rents: now let me intreate you to shew something of oer things incident vn∣to a Mannor, by which the Lord receiueth profit or prerogatiue. Sur. Profits may rise by infinite meanes and wayes out of a Mannor to the Lord,Profites of Mannors are infinite, and in all Man∣nors diffe∣rent. but all Mannors yeeld not profits or commodities alike neither in na∣ture, or value. Lord. I thinke indéede all Mannors are not a∣like profitable to the Lord, neither hath euery Man∣nor like meanes, yet I desire to know for my expe∣rience sake▪ what may grow out of a Mannor, that I may the better looke into the natures & qualities of such as are vnder my power and commnd. Sur. If you haue a Mannor or Mannors, there is (as I sayd before) a Court Baron at the least, incident thereunto, and to some a Leee, or Law-day, which is called the view of franck pledge,Profites of Court. by which Courts do grow many, and diuers perquisites and casualtyes, as fines of land, Amerceaments, heriots, rehefes, wayues, estrayes, forfeitures, escheates, profits growing by pleas in Court, and such like. Lord. You may doe well to shew mée, though briefly, what euery of these former things doe pro∣perly import, for to tell me the names, and not the
natures of the things, is, as if I should know there is a Sunne, but whether he giue light and heate, to be ignorant. Therefore before you passe further in any discourse, shew me how fines of Land doe arise vnto the Lord, and what amerceaments are, and the rest. Sur. Fines of Land are of sundry kindes,Fines of land. and yet properly and most especially they arise of copyhold, or customary Lands and Tenements, which are in diuers Mannors of diuers kinds: for there are cu∣stomary Lands, which are called copyhold of inheri∣tance, and they are such as a man holdeth to him and his heires, according to the custome of the Mannor, at the will of the Lord. When such a Te∣nant dyeth, and the heire commeth to be admitted (if the custome of the Mannor beare a fine certaine) he giueth but the accustomed fine: If it be vncer∣tayne and arbitrable, he agreeth and compoundeth with the Lord, or Surueyor, or Steward, for the fine. Some hold Customary Land for liues, as for one, two, or three liues, whereof the fine is alwayes at the Lords will, as is also the fine for yeeres. There are also fines for licences of Surrenders of Custo∣mary Land, and for alienation also of free-hold Land, and these are called Fines, which signifieth as much as a finall composition:Fine why so called. and when the fine which is the end of the contract is answered, all but the yeerely rent during the terme agreed vpon is payd. These and such like summes of money raysed a a Courtar, are parcell of the pequisites of the Court, as are all amerceaments, which are summes of money imposed vpon the Tenants by the Stew∣ard, Surueyor by oth and presentment of the ho∣mage, for default of doing sute, or for other misde∣meanours punishable by the same Court, infinite in number and quality.
Lord▪ Whence taketh the word Amerceament name? Sur. Of being in the Lords mercy, to be punished more or lesse,Amerce∣ments. crumenally at the Lords pleasure and will. It is no doubt, a borrowed word, as many o∣ther words vsed in our common lawes are: for hee that is amerced, is sayd to be in misericordia, that is, in the mercy of some body. Lord. These wordes may be vnderstood by vse, and by the manner of the vse of things: but he that should seeke the etimon, among the Latines, of the substantine Amercmentum, and the adiectiue Amerciatus, might seeke long, & be neuer the nere. But I perceiue, we must take it as our athers first framed it and left it, I vnderstand what it mea∣neth in our common sence, and that sufficeth. Sur. Other words, not a fewe, in like sort to bee vnderstood, we find in vse amongst vs, which doubt∣les the Romans neuer knew: and yet they that haue to do with the things wherein they are vsed, vnder∣stand the meaning, although their deriuations be strange, as amōgst others it is questionable, whence the name of a heriot may be deriued. Lord. Heriots.That would I be glad to learne for I haue to doe sometimes with Herios▪ But because I know not why they are so called, what they bee, how, where, when, by whom, & for what they should bee answered, I do feare I am sometimes abused. Sur. I may tell you as I haue heard, and of my selfe coniectured, whence the word commeth. But I haue no certaine authority for it. I may be said, and most likely it is, that it should come of the word Hrus,Heriots whence so called. a Lord and Master: and Heriot belonging to the Lord. And it was in the begin∣ning a thing for the warres, as the best Horse a man that died had at the time of his death.
Sixe Control 11/26 maketh a Barony. 25600. acres, whose reliefe is 100. Marks.Mag. Cart. Ca. 3. An Earle∣dome. One Barony ½ make an Earledome 38400 acres, whose reliefe is 100. pound. Lord. Do these proportions of Land alwayes hold, with their titles of honor? Sur. Surely no▪ for we may obserue, they are in∣creased, and diminished, as men are in disposition to spend, or saue, to adde to, or to dismember their pa∣trimonies. But these were the proportions at the first institution of these particular allotments, and the de∣nominations do hold, though the quantities of the Land be more or lesse: the lesser parts we see, as yard lands, plow-lands, &c. differ, as the custome of euery Countrey drawne by time, doth at this day hold and allow: but that is no preiudice to the first purpose, which allotted a certainty to euery part, and a cer∣taine reliefe to be paid, according to the first institu∣tion of euery part, and the payment followeth the title, not the quantity. Lord. You haue sayd inough of reliefs: now speake of the rest: and as I remember, the next after reliefs was waynes, what are they? Sur. Waynes, or wayned goods, are goods or chattels of what nature soeuer, stolne,Waynes, or wayned goods. & in the fugacie of the thiefe, he leues them behind him for want of conue∣nient carriage, or conueyance, being pursued; and wheresoeuer such goods are, they are ye Lords of that Mannor o liberty wherein they are foūd, if the pre∣rogatiue of ye Mannor wil beare it: for euery Mannor wil not, but such as haue it by graunt from the King. Lord. Whence commeth the word Waiffe? Sur. The goods thus stolne and left behind the thiefe, are called in Latine Bona, or catalla waniata:Waife, whence deriued. a word, which our common Lawyers only vse, and the signification is gathered by the vse: for I thinke, none
that is a stranger to the , he be neuer so well seene ▪ can say this word signifies the thing for which it is now ken. Lord. Well then, as long as we vnderstand the meaning, by the vse it sufficeth, without further ex∣amination, or disputation about the word it selfe. But how is it to be  goods? for it may be as  casually lst, as  stolne. Sur. Therefore when any such thing is found within a Mannor,How to prooue way∣ned goods. the Bayliffe, or other the Lords of∣ficer, seizeth it to the Lords vse, as a thing wherein at the instant no man claymeth propertie. And if it be nor euident by the pursute of the theefe, that it was stolne, it is proclaymd and presented the next Court, and found by the Iury of what nature it is, and that the property is in the Lord: and because these and estraye are spoken of at large at euery Court-Baron by the Steward, no man can pretend ignorance of them, therefore I will omit to speake any more of them.Forfeitures. But, a little of forfeitures, though no doubt, you being Lord of many Mannor, know right well what they are, and how they grow, and the  no doubt, could wish you and other Lords knew lesse then generally you do. Lord. Tush, if there were no penaltyes, men would commit offences without feare, and if there were no forfeitures for abuses done against Lords of Mannors,Forfeitures fit to curbe offendors. Tenants would too boldly make waste  spoyles of the Lords inheritance, without regard of law, loue, or humanity: and therefore let me heare your opinion what forfeitures are, and for what causes, Lords of carelesse Tenants may take aduantage of forfeitures. Sur. I know many Lords too forward, in taking aduantage of forfeitures vpon small occasions, and if manifest cause be giuē them, they shew little com∣passion:
And if I knew you were a man desirous to take aduantage in this kinde, I would be sparing to discouer any thing tending to that liberty: for, I well conceiue, that the lawe did not to much pro∣uide, to enrich the Lords of Mannors, by their Te∣nants forfaytures, as to keepe Tenants in good or∣der,The chiefe end of for∣faytures. and to restraine them (with feare of losing their Tenements) from rash and wilfull abuses. And therefore in all forfaytures, there are diuers circum∣stances to bee considered; as whether the Tenant did it ignorantly, negligently, or as constrained through necessity. In these cases, whatsoeuer lawe in extreme iustice alloweth, a good conscience for∣biddeth to take aduantage, though the second be worthy to suffer some smart: for negligēce cannot be excused: for nature it self teacheth beasts, & they in their maner of liuing, vse a kinde of prouidence. But if the forfayture be cōmitted wilfully or malici∣ously, it deserueth in the first, little, & in the second lesse pity. Yet where a good mind is, there lodgeth no reuenge, or couetous desire. And where neither of these are, there all extremities die. Yet I wish, that in these last two cases, the offendors should be pu∣nished more in terrorem, for examples sake, then to satisfie the greedy desire of a couetous Landlord, who (though he may say, he doth no more then the law warranteth) doth yet straine a point of Christian charity,A good meane to make Land∣lords sparing to take for∣faytures. by which men are bound to measure all mens cases by a true consideration of their owne. So shal he that is Lord of much, and of many Mannors, looking into the law of the great Lord, of whom he hath receiued, &  whatsoeuer he hath, finde,  himselfe hath committed a forfayture of all, if his high Lord should take aduantage of all the tres∣passes  wrongs hee hath done against him. Lord. You are out of the matter, wherof our talk
consisted, I desire you not to tell  I may take a forfeiture by a good conscience▪ but what a forfeiture is? and  the taking and leaing the aduantage, vnto such as haue the power to pu∣nish or forgiue. Sur. So must I when I haue spoken all I can. But I hold it not the part of an honest mind in a Suruey∣our,The part of a good Suruey∣our. to be an instigator of the Lords extremities to∣wards his Tenants: though I confesse he ought to do his vttermost indeuour to aduance the Lords bene∣fit in all things fit and expedient, yet ought his coun∣saile and aduice to tend no further, then may main∣taine obediēce in the Tenants towards their Lords, and loue and fauour of the Lords towards their Te∣nants, which being on all side vnfained, neither of them shall haue iust cause to complaine of, or to vse rgo to the other, for it is not the actor himselfe of any extremity, that is only to be reprooued, but the abetter there unto: and if I wist that any Lord, who shall quire the vse of my poore trauaile, would ex∣pect more at my hands, then the performance of my duty with a good conscience, I had rather leaue then take the reward for such a trauaile. Neither do I find that you, howsoeuer you reason of this poynt, will commit any act towards any Tenants you haue, that may not be iustified by the law of loue: there∣fore I leaue further to perswade or disswade you herein.Forfaytures diuers in dy∣uers Man∣nors. And as touching the matter and manner of forfeitures, I pray you vnderstand, that they be of di∣uers kinds, and diuers wayes committed for in some Mannors it is lawfull to do that, as ath in others in∣currs a forfeiture. Forfeitures grow either by brch of a custome, as in Customary or copy hold Land, or of a condition or promise in a Lease or graunt, of which last, the Tenant can not say he did not thinke it was so, because the meaning is expressed in his
deede: but of  in some sort ignorant  them to leade them.A custome∣ro necessary But for the most part causes of forfeitures are apparent, and knowne of all within a manner; as non payment of their rent, not doing his ser∣uice▪  where cu∣stome inhibits it,Causes of for∣feytures. letting his  to fll  the Lords  waste, and such like, which as I sayd before▪ are not alike in all places, and therefore it is most conuenient that the customes of euery Mannor were knowne, and the Tenants made ac∣quainted with them, that when question groweth for any cause of forfeiture, they may not say they knew it not: for Lords commonly know better how to take aduantages of such casualties, then the Te∣nants know how to auoyd them. Lord. You speake that is reason, I confesse. But may a Lord enter immediatly vpon a forfayture? Sur. The forfayture must be first presented to the homage at the next Court holden for the Mannor,How and when a Lord may enter after a for∣feiture. and there found, & recorded, & then hath the Lord power to shewe Iustice or mercy. It were inconue∣nient, that the Lord should bee iudge in his owne cause; and his present caruer of things doubtfull. And therefore hath the Lawe ordained, in all con∣trouersies, euen in these inferiour courts, a iust man∣ner of tryall by Iury. Lord. May none, but Copyhold Tenants, for∣fayt their land? Sur. I shewed you before, that Tenants by deede indented for life or yeeres, may forfeit their estates, but that is by couenant or condition expressed in the deede, according to the prescript agreement made, and interchangeably confirmed betweene the Lord and his Tenant.
Lord. What is an Escheat for▪ as I remember, that followeth in your formerly rcite perqui∣sites of Court. Sur. What es∣cheates are.Eschete is, where a freeholder of a Mannor committeth felony, the Lord▪ of whom his Land is holden, shall haue his Land, and that kinde of forfey∣ture is called escheat. Lord. The Lord may then enter immediatly in∣to this Land, because the lawe hauing tried the fe∣lony, it casteth the Land vpon the Lord Sur. The King hath it for a yeare and a day, and then commeth it vnto the Lord, and his heires for euer. Lord. Is this all the causes of escheats? Sur. Escheat for want of heri∣ots.Escheat may also be, where a Freeholder, Te∣nant in ancient demeisne, and a customary Tenant of in∣heritance, dieth without heire generall or speciall, & none of the blood comming to claime the same, it falleth vnto the Lord, by way of escheat. Lord. This then is immediatly the Lords, and the King hath no part, or time therein, and with∣out any further ceremony, he may enter & dispose of that his pleasure. Sur. How es∣cheates are found.It must be also first sound, and presented by the homage of the Mannor whereof it is holden: and after proclamation made to giue notice vnto the world, that if any can come and iustly claime it, hee shalbe receiued, the homage then finding it cleere, doth intitle the Lord therof, as a thing escheated for want of an heire. Lord. You speake of an heire generall or speciall, what difference is there▪ Sur. The heire generall, is of the body of the de∣ceased, and the speciall, of his bloud or kinne. Lord. So haue you satisfied me thus farre: nowe what say you to the pleas of Court? for I remember,
it is part of that you before spake of▪ Sur. It is true: they are parcell of the Perquisites of Court.Perquisites of Courts. Lord. Whereof commeth the word Perquisites? Sur. Of the word Perquir▪ (as I take it) which signifieth to search for: or to enquire diligently, as also to get or obtaine. Lor. It may well be so: for these things before rehearsed vnder the name of Perquisites, are all casu∣all, and not at all times alike: and therefore may be called Perquisita, things gotten by diligent enqui∣e. And to that end, so many things are giuen by the Steward to the Iury of a Court Baron, & Leee in charge,Perquisites, why so cal∣led. that they should diligently enquire of them, finde them, and present them: and yet scarcely one of forty, of the seuerall things, where∣with they are charged, are found by the Iurie. And some things happen at one Court, that happen not againe in twentie Courts after: and therefore are also called Casualties, as happening now and then, as I conceiue it, hauing little experience in them. Sur. Yes: it seemes you haue the better part of experience, namely, comming in of the profite of the things: where some know the same, but they know them as appertaining to others, not to themselues. But of this nature are the profits that arise by Plea of Court, which because they are diuers, and doe di∣uersly arise, there need no long relation of them. Lor. Are there no other Perquisites of Court, but such as you haue already remembred, nor other  Mannor▪ Sur. There be many other profis that may grow also vnto a Lord of a Mannor: yet they not certaine, nor in all Mannors alike. Lord. Then are they also casuall▪ and may e called also Perquisites of Courts,
Sur. Perquisites, but not per∣quisites of Court.Casuall: But no perquisites of Court, yet foe of them may be called perquis in some sence, because they bee gotten by search and inquitie, as those that are hidden in the earth: as Treasures, which, as long as they lie vnknowne, benefit not the Lord: but when they are found, they are called Treasure troue, as Siluer, Gold, Plate, Iewels, and such like,Treasure troue. before time hidden, which appertaine vnto the Lord. So doe minerals of Lead, Tie, Copper, and such like: And quarries of stone, Free-stone, Sae-stones, Marking-stones, and all such: which may long lie vndiscouered▪ As may also Col, Lime, Chalke, and such: for which search being made, are haply found: yet because the benefite is vncertaine vpon the present, and what continuance and vent it may afford, they may passe vnder the name of Perqui∣ses,How casual∣ties may be∣come cer∣taine. and Casualties: as may also Fishing and Fowling, vnlesse the Lord can bring the same to bee a certaine conuing rent: Then are they no more casuall du∣ring the graunt, but are in nature of other rents cer∣taine. And of these kinds, are infinite other things, incident to some Manors, but not to all. As the pro∣fits of Faires, and Markets, Woodsales, sales of heath, flags, and Turburie, panage and such like. All which are in themselues vncertaine, as touching the value, vnlesse they be turned into a rent cer∣tāine. Lord. Sur. Yet the Lord must be  howe he lets these casuall thinges, before hee knowe what they are,
how they rise, & what profite they may yeeld, how they will continue▪ and to whom, and vpon, what conditions he graunt them. Otherwise he may bee ouertaken and much abused: for a secret once et, can not be reuoked a pleasure▪ Lord. Sur. Therefore I say, it behooueth the Lord, to whom such casualties shall befall▪ first to make due and diligent triall by men, both of trust and experi∣ence, what may bee made of any such thing by the yeere: for such is the way dealing of some,Policie in Bailies, and ouerseers. that haue the guiding of things of this casuall nature, that they will obserue the conditions and qualities, circum∣stances and value to themselues, and disable the thing, and estimate the value to the Lord, to bring him out of conceite with the goodnes and validitie thereof, to the end they may obtaine a graunt, as hath fallen out in many things, and to many men, whose future profite of the things thus atchieued, haue approoued the Lord to be much abused. This I knowe by experience, in the graunt of a cole mine, which as long as it was in the Lords hands, it yelded a small yeerely reuenew, vntill he that managed the same, got a graunt of the Lord, and then the profite was twice quarebled by the lessees own confession. The like of a Sa on fishing, wherin the Lord lost two parts in three, & yet at the time of the letting, made to beleeue, it was hardly worth the rent: yet would I wish that Lords of Mannors in these casual things, would be contented, after true triall made, to grant the same for a reasonable ēt, though the lessee gain▪ for the trauaile and hazard in these vncertaine
whereby I may apprehend truly the full estate of my Mannor as belieeue , and what commodi∣ties do rise, or may by any meanes lawfully be rai∣sed in the same. Sur. If a painter should draw your picture, Sir, and you hauing a blemish in your face, or defect in your limmes, would you thinke he dealt truly with you, if he omitted the blemish, and made your liue a∣mēts perfect & straight, being deformed & crooke? Lord. I know your meaning: I like no such flat∣terie, neither would I he should make a straight leg crooked, but true conformitie in all parts. Sur. So will I as neere as I can: for neither in quantitie, qualitie, nor value, will I,A Surueyor should be e∣qual betwen Lord and te∣nant. for I ought not be partiall: for these are the things wherein inue may be done to the tenants: neither will I, for I ought not cōceale or counterfeit their estates, terms of yeeres, liues, couenants or conditions, rents, ser∣uices, forfetures or offences, neither whatsoeuer pro∣fites, emoluments, or commodities that may any wayes arise or grow vnto the Lord. For a parciall eye seduceth the heart, and the heart, the hand, and the hand the pen, which cannot but witnesse against a corrupt entrie of these collections, many yeeres af∣ter the Surueyor is in his graue. Lord. Thou speakest as an honest man, and I mislike thee not, if thy words and thy works agrée. And séeing we are growne thus farre, I pray thée make an end of thy whole discourse, & tell me what else appertaineth to a Mannor. Sur. I haue alreadie declared the most. But Man∣nors much differ in their profites. For a Mannor of small quantitie of land, and few tenants, may be more beneficiall to the Lord, then a farre grea∣ter. Lord. How may that be?
Sur. Diuers Lordships yeld extraordinarie co∣modities,Commodi∣ties vnder the earth. some vnder the earth▪ some of the earth, some aboue the earth: as Tine, lead, copper, cole, stones, milstones, and such like, found vnder the earth, which euery Mannor hath not. Lord. But these are chargeable commodities to get. Sur. So is the Lord of the Mannor at no cost in planting, plowing, setting, or sowing them. Lord. That is true, but commonly the land is barren where these things are found. And therefore it is a great worke of diuine prouidence,The wise∣dome of na∣ture. to yeld such a commoditie from vnder the barrenest soile, to supplie the want thereof in plates more fertile, of o∣ther things more behoouefull for the reliefe of man. And yet in many of hese barraine places, groweth by the diligence of man, corne in aboundance, as the Psalmist sayeth:Psa. 70.16. A handfull of corne shall bee sown: vpon the toppe of the Mountaine, and the fruit therof shall shake like the Trees of Lebanon. Sur. Whee diligence is and the feare of God, there no doubt, God blesseth the labors of men, and watereth euen the highest Mountaines from his Chambers. For when Israel turned to God from their Idolatrie,Psa. 104.13. Ezech. 36.9. Psa. 109.3, 4. hee promised by Ezechiel, that their desolate places, and high Mountaines, should bee tilled and sowne. But he maketh a fruitfull land bar∣raine, for the sinnes of them that dwell therein. So that whether God send his blessings vnder the earth, vp∣on the Mountaines, or in the Vallies, whether in grasse for Cattle, in herbes for the vse of men, whe∣ther in Wheate, Oyle, or Vines: he truly inttleth none vnto them, but such as feare to offend him, and shewe thankfulnes. Lord. Though these words digresse from our pre∣sent matter in hand somewhat▪ yet it is good, that
both Lords and tenants should know and acknow∣ledge indéed, frō whom all these good things do pro∣céed. For although they come,Lords and tenants must acknowledge all to come from God. some from vnder the earth, some of the earth, and some aboue the earth, they e not yet the gifts of ye earth, but of God that hath prouided the earth to bring them foorth to our vse. But what mean you by the things of the earth? come not these of the earth? Sur. Yes, I confesse i: but some things are more perfect of themselues then other. But such as by an extraordinarie working of mans art, are made of the earth, I tearme things of the earth, and they also rest to the benefite of the Lord of that Mannor where such earth is found: as the earth whereof Allome,Things made of the earth. Co∣pras, Salt-Pter, Glasse, or other such is made, together also with Fullers earth, Bricke, Tile and Potters clay, which are not common. Lord. Is there any other thing Materiall, inci∣dent to a Mannor Sur. Yea, and amongst all the rest of the priuiled∣ges which the Lords of Mannors haue to raise their further benefites by, are two not yet mentioned, wherein if they be not very precise and circumspect how they bestow them, and in what sort they dispose of them, there will follow a fearefull account, when the great Lord of all Lords shall take suruey of the things done by the Lord of the earth. Lord. What are these things, I pray you, that you make such scruple to vtter them? Sur Things of themselues lawfull by the lawes of the Land, where they be iudiciously and carefully handled, as they are by the lawes intended, and by the chiefe disposers meant: namely, the mariages of Wards,Wards. Presentatiōs and disposition of their lands in their minori∣ties, and the presentations of benefices in the gifts of priuate men.
Lord. For the first, I haue yet no occasion to make proofe, how or what they are, but the second, I haue had some power to bestow, wherin I was not so re∣misse, as that I presented such as were not fit for ye funtion, which I thinke is your meaning: & there∣fore let that passe awhile, & learne me what a Ward is, and how he and his land is to be disposed by the lawe, that I may learne it against the time I may haue vse. Sur. The word Ward, whence takē.The word Ward is as much as guard, which signifieth tuition or defence, and he that is in ward, is vnder some mans gouernment and keeping: and the word hath a passiue signification, as it is vsed in our common speech, and yet the same word is also vsed in the actiue sence: as they that watch or attend for the defence of any, are called the ward or guard of that person or thing they do protect. But the wards whereof we are now to speake of, are the sonnes or daughters, heires to some person, that held his land either of the king in chiefe,Wards what they are. or of some inferior person by knights seruice: whose heire male being vnder the age of 21. yeeres, and the female within the age of 14 yeeres, the Lord shall haue the ward, guard, or custodie of the bodie and of the lands so holden of him, to his owne vse, vntill they come to these ages, without making account to the heire when he or she comes to age, as law bookes will tell you. Lord. Then me thinkes, the word as it is com∣monly vsed, is improper, namely, to call uch an hee, a ward: it is more proper to say, he is in ward, or as the Lawer sayes, a ward. Sur. I take it as yu do. Lord▪ But what is the reason that the Lord shuld haue the land to his owne vse? why rather do not ye profits redound to ye vse of ye heire in his minority. Sur. This kind of wardship had some reason for
it in the beginning. For you must vnderstand, that he whose sonne or daughter is to be thus guarded, and his land to be disposed by the Lord, was in his life time bound, by the tenure of his land, to do man∣ly and actuall seruice in person in the time of warre: or to keepe a castle, ith some kind of warlike wea∣pon, in the time of war and peace. And these kinds of capital seruices were called either tenures in capite,What tenure drawes wardship. as holden of the king, who is the chiefe Enage vncer∣taine, grand seritie, or some other like seruice, and was called seruicim mitare, seruice of a soldier, now called knights seruice. These seruices were not to be discontinued, for to that end, were the lands first gi∣uen by the king and other inferior Lords of Mānors, that they might haue the continuall seruice of their tenants. And therefore whensoeuer the tenant of such a tenure died, hauing none to supply the place of like manly seruice, the heire being vnder age, and not of power, the Lord was and is supposed to be bound for the defence of the Realme, to performe the seruice by a person, for whom he must answer in the heires minoritie. And because the charge was in former times great and dangerous,The cause. and the land gi∣uen onely for that cause, the Lord was to keepe the heire, and to see him trained vp, and to be made fit for the same seruice: and for his maintenance & sup∣ply of the seruice, to haue the vse & profit of his land, vntill he became able to performe the seruice him∣selfe in person. Lord. I thinke this to stand with great reason: for if it had not bene thought reasonable, the lawes would not haue prouided in that case as they haue done: as it appeareth by your relation. Sur. Many Statutes indeed haue bene made tou∣ching Wards▪ Mag. cart. ca. 4.7. & 28.Statutes for the confirma¦tion of ward∣ships. Mal. cap. 6.7.8. &c. Westm. 1. Westm. 2. and many Statutes since, to which I refer you, too long here to relate.
Lord. What néeded you then giue such a strict caueat touching Wardes? Sur. Truely, to put Lordes and others, into whose hands they often happen, in mind to be care∣full of their education and disposing: because many incoueniencs follow, if their Guarders be not faith∣full, and prouident for their wel bestowing. Lord. How, in bestowing? Sur. Mariage of Wards.In mariage. For the Lordes haue the mari∣age both of the Male and Female, if they bee vn∣maried at the time of their ancesters decease. And it falleth out many times, that partly for their land, and partly for their mariage, they are bought and sold, and marryed yong, and sometimes to such as they fancie not, & when they come to riper iudge∣ment▪ they bewray their dislikes too late. And some∣times their education is so slenderly regarded, that when they come to gouerne themselues and their familyes, their estates and patry monies, they disco∣uer what their education was, good or euill. Lord. There bée thrée especiall ends whereunto the good education of such an Infant should send.Three ends wherevnto the good e∣ducation of Wards ten∣deth. The  and principall, is the feare of God, in true Religion: the second is, the benefite that the Com∣mon-wealth shall reape, by his vertue and suffici∣encie: the third and last, the abilitie by which hee may gouerne his familie, and manage his patrimo∣nie, for his best maintenance. But what can you now say, touching the second of these chiefe points? Namely, the presenting of Clarkes vnto Ecclesi∣asticall ▪ and how it commeth to passe, that our Lay man (as he is called) may nominate and present a Clarke, to a Parsonage, Uicarage or  Chappell,Why lords of mannors doe present Clarks. whose function is high, and diuine. Sur. The reason why these Lay-lords of Mannors do presn, as aforesaid, is in right of the Parsonage,
Vicarage, or free Chappell, belonging to their Man∣nors, & where the Lord of the Mannor is very and vndoubted patron of such an Ecclesiasticall gift, hee may make his choice of the parson, or vicar. Alwayes prouided, by diuine ordinance & humane institu∣ions: he must be Idoneus, fit for the place. Lord. But lye tht in the Lords power, onely to nominate and present such a one? and is it then suf∣ficient if hee deeme the partie fit? Sur. No, he must be approued fit by his Ordinarie, the Byshop of the Diocesse, by whom he must be in∣stituted and . Lord. Then is the Lord in his nomination▪ and presentation, cleared of offence to the Church, if the partie prooue after insufficient. Sur. He is in some sort. But he is bound in consci∣ence to be very circumspect in his choice. For i any carnall consideration mooued him to the partie, he standeth not cleare before God, into whose steade he intrudeth himselfe after a sort in this case. But if he do it in a godly zeale of the good of Gods church, he will ayme onely to the vertues of the man,No carnall consideration must moue a Lord to pre∣sent a Clark. and not to any humane respect. For, although the party haue an higher probation namely, by the Bishop, that is especially of his literature, which is easily found by examination▪ But his qualities, conditions, and con∣uersation▪ by time and experience, and that most the present or haue good triall of,What a Pa∣tron must consider in his choice. before he either name him, or present him. For he is as it were the hand, that reacheth him forth to be receiued of the church. A matter farre higher and of geater moment, then euery man that couers adousons for such presentati∣ons sake, can reach vnto by their rashnes. For if they weyd the matter in the ballance of diuine iudgment, they should find their vnderstandings far too light to performe it as they ought. For if he proue vnprofita∣ble,
of scandalous to the Church, as too many doe, he that presented him so vnaduisedly, will fearefully answere it in time to come. Lord. Now surely, although peraduenture some may thinke these things digresse much ou mat∣ters of Suruey, yet I hold thy wordes within the compasse of it, for these are necessarie obseruations and admonitions to vs that are Lords of mannors, and o whose lot it often falleth to performe this worke. And I hold thou hast in this, done no more thē a honest Surueyor should,  aduising men, to be wary how they dispose of this part of their patri∣mone. Sur. Sir, I hold it neither part of their patrimo∣nie,A Parsonage or Vicarage no part of a Mannor. nor part of a mannor, neither a thing vnto them of any aduantage to their person: but a thing apper∣taining vnto the Mannor, i such sort as the Lorde may dispose of it, as before is sayd: and the greatest benefite is, that he may vpon the vacation, appoint a worthy man to teach himselfe, and his tenants, which as I cōceiue it, is a sweet gain: for by the godly Minister, he and they may gaine heauenly riches. Lord. As thou sayest, it is a great benefite, nay, it is a high blessing to haue a godly teacher of ye peo∣ple: and it is a blessing of God an him, that huing a godly care, findeth, nameth and presenteth such a one: and wo to him, that negligently or wilfully doth the contrarie. But what say you  impropria∣tions? for they also are within the compasse of a Suruey,Impropria∣tions. where the Lords take the tithes and nomi∣nate a Minister, Vicar, or other hireling, and he (of∣tentmes vnworthy) serues the turne, as is com∣monly obserued in too many places of this Realme. Sur. I know too many such, the more to be lamē∣ted, & that in Mānors of great value, & parishes ve∣ry populous: whose continued ignorance of diuine
duties, bewrayeth the originall to proceede, first from that Satanicall beast, to foster monasticall idlenesse. And as a matter too high for me, to aime at the  formation, I reuerently leaue to their  haue authoritie to reproue it, and power to reforme it. Lord. is there to be consi∣dered, touching the Sur. Nothing Sir, that I now remember: but a matter almost out of vse, a tenure called Villanage:Tenure in villanage. that is, where the Tenants of a Mannor were Bond∣men and Bondwomen, the men were called Villaines, and the women Neiffes. Lord. It hath a base title: A Villaine is an appro∣rious , howsoeuer it tooke beginning. Sur. As the word is how vsed and taken, it is in∣deede a word of great dishonor: but the time hath beene, the word hath bene of no such disgrace. And it is now but as the thing is ment by the speaker, and taken by him to whom it is spoken▪ although some say, that a villaine is quasi seru: which name indeed is of a more tolerable construction in our common sence, then is now the name of , which is in∣deed no more then villanus,Villaine quid. a Rustique or Countri∣mn, which word is in sence contrary to Cies, or  that since the Conquest by the Nor∣manes, these villaines became bondmen: for where the Conquerour came and preuailed by force,Villains came by conquest bondmen. there the Countrey people became Captiues and Slaues. But Kent, which was not subdued by the sword, but by composition, retained their freedome still, as did also many Cities. Lord. Why then should the name villaine bée so odious, if it  but a Countriman: for there are many honest▪ ciuill, and wealthy Countrimen? Sur. Because they indured, vnder that name, ma∣ny
too much frugaitie, and that he needes not to care for getting more, he hath no rent to pay, but some to receiue which will maintaine him: and when he is gone, all is gone, spending is easier then getting. And thus by little and little roweth himselfe and the hope of his posteritie vnder water, in the calme weather. Whereas he, that hath a rent to pay, is not idle, neither in hart nor hand:The farmer cares to pay his rent, and labors for it. he considers the rent day will come, and in true labour and diligence pro∣uides for it, and by his honest indeuors, and duti∣full regard, gets to pay rent to his Lord, duties to the King, reliefe to the poore, and maintaines his estate more pleasing to God, more obedient to the King, more profitable for the common-wealth, and more truly contented in minde, then sometimes his thriftlesse Landlord. I inferre not yet by this Sir, that because they sometimes thriue well, that liue vpon rackt rents: therefore you Landlords, should impose the greater rent or fine: that were to doe e∣uill, that good might come of it, nay rather, to doe euill, that euill may followe: for if there bee not a meane in burdens,Happie is the Tenant, that hath a good Land∣lord. the backe of the strongest Ele∣phant may bee broken. And the best and most care∣full, and most laborious, and industrious husband, may be ouercharged with the rent of his Land. Hap∣pie therefore is that Tenant, that meeteth with a considerate Landlord, and happy is that Landlord, that may see his Tenants prosper and thriue, and himselfe haue his due with loue. And on the contra∣rie, I thinke it will bee very vnpleasant to a good minde, to see his Tenant to be ouercharged, and be forced to fall vnder the burden of ouer-heauie an imposition. Lord. Wel, I haue heard all thy discourse with pa∣tience: and indeede my desire was to heare thee in these things, and I mislike not any thing in thy
whole relations, and thy conclusion is not amisse, though perchance some young nouices of the world might censure thee: reason will not but alow wh thou hast sayd. And I wish that all the Tenants that I haue, may liue vnder me with comfort: for to tel the truth, I had rather buy a smil, and a good report of my faithfull tenants,A good re∣solution in a Landlord. somthing to my losse, then to get their frownes to my gaine. For there is no comfort in a discontented people, though some haue said: Rustica gens, optima flens, pessima gau∣dens: which may hold among Infidels, and vnde Tyrants, but not among Christians, that should not grieue one another. Sur. I am right glad, Sir, you are of so qualified a disposition, your example may do good to others, if not, it will giue euidence against the contrarie min∣ded in time to come. And so for this time I must in∣treate you, I may take my leaue of you. I will attend your other occasions foorthwith. Lord. That is my will. But who comes yonder? Sur. I take it is your Tenant, that lately departed from vs. Lord So it is, I will leaue you two together: far you well. You know the place where mine occa∣sions will draw you, and in the meane time I will make you a warrant to go in hand with it. The end of the second Booke.
The Surueyors Dialogue betweene the Farmer and Surueyor: wherein is shewed the manner and method of keeping a Court of Suruey: with the articles to be inquired of, and the charge how to inroll Copies, Leases and Deeds, and how to take the plot of a Mannor. The third Booke. Farmer. YOu are happily met here againe, Sir, haue you euer since had conference with my Landlord? Sur. Yea. Farm. He is a man of good vnderstanding, and very inquisitiue of things of profite. And yet to tell you truly, he is a good man to his tenants. Suruey. Loue him then, for such deserue loue.Good Land∣lords deserue loue. Farm. He is beloued of his tenants indéede: for they will go, and ride, and fight for him. Sur. It is the part of good tenants, and an argu∣ment of a good Landlord. But fare you well, I can∣not now stay, I haue bene long letted by your Land∣lord and you. Farm. Are you presently to vndertake the suruey of my Landlords Lordships? Sur. I am now going about it. Farm. I thinke it be in your choice where to be∣gin, let me therefore intreate you to begin with Beauland, a Mannor of his here at hand, whereof I am both tenant and Bayly: and therfore I will and must attend you, and yéeld you my best ayd, both by my trauell, information, and records of the Mānor.
Sur. Keepe you the Lords records? Bay. The key is in my keeping that leads to the Chest, but the key of the Chest is in my Lords kéep∣ing: but I will send for it, that you may haue ye full view of the euidence. Sur. A Surueyor ought to see the Lords euidence.So it behooueth. Is it a large Mannor? Baylie. It is spacious in circuit, and of great ap∣parance of Tenants, full of diuers commodities, both vnder and aboue the earth, as also of fishing, and fowling, and beareth not the name for nought: for the Mannor is faire, and very commodi∣ous. Sur. Be you then my guide: Is yonder it, with the faire house by the Woods side? Baylie. That is it, and a stately house it is in∣deede. Sur. It seemes to be a large and loftie cage, if the Bird be answerable. Baylie. What meane you by that? Sur. I meane, that a Titinus may harbour in a Peacockes cage:Great houses with small reuenewes, cannot sute well. and yet the cage maketh her not a Peacocke, but will be a Titinus, notwithstanding the greatnes of the cage: So if this loftie Pyle bee not equalized by the estate and reuenewes of the buil∣der, it is as if Paules steeple should serue Panras Church for a Belfrey. Baylie. I thinke my Landlord sent you not in∣steae of surueying his Land, to deride his house. Sur. The house is beautifull and faire: I deride it not, you doe your selfe wrong in attaching mee, neither discommend I the builder. For he that hath gold enough, let him build a house of gold, with Ner,Mart. lib 2. Great houses fit for great men. who made vnto it a pond Mari istr, and woods full of all kind of wild Beasts. Publius Clodius whom Mil slew▪ bought a house which cost him 147000, Sestrties. Let Princes haue their Palaces,
and great men, their pleasant seates: for the poorest will please his fancie, if he be wilfull. But to tell thee by the way, (for this is but idle communication) that I haue obserued in nothing more sudden and serious repentance, then for building:Building of∣ten repented. I could point out pla∣ces and persons too with my finger, but what needs that? I wish their repentance could redeem the thing repented of, but it cannot, no more then Quintus Curtius could redeeme himself out of the deuouring gulfe. We haue in our dayes many and great buil∣dings, a comly ornament it is to the face of the earth. And were it not that the smoake of so many chim∣neyes, did raise so many duskie cloudes in the aire,Many chim∣neys, little fires. to hinder the heate and light of the Sunne from earthly creatures, it were the more tolerable. Bayly▪ Nay truly, I will excuse that fault, the fire is made most in the kitchin. Sur. Then it besmoketh not the hall, as old wor∣thie houses did, whose kitchins smoake sent foorth cloudes of good meate, and showres of drinke for the poore. Bayly. Yea, Sir, that was a comfortable smoke: but Tempora mutantur, & omnia mutantur in illis: no earthly thing continueth constant, but hath his change. Lo, Sir, now you are come to the house it selfe. Sur. Truly, here is a pleasant ascent,The best si∣tuation of a house. neither too steepe, nor too flat, and of a good length. And now we are come to the top of the hill: here is a goodly prospect and pleasant. And these springs I like well. For a house without liuely water, is maymed: and the water is well conueyed, that it cannot annoy the foundation of the house, and yet serueth the most necessarie offices very commodiously: and I see the Conducts are made of earthen pipes,Earthen Conducts. which I like farre better then them of Leade, both for sweetnes,
and continuance vnder the ground. The trees are well placed about the walkes, but that they are som∣what too neere together, their branches confound one the other, they are but twenty foot, and I like better, thirty. It standeth warme and comfortable toward the South-east, to which the best lights are made fitly to serue: but i the ground would haue serued, I like plaine South, the better point for the comfort of the Sunne, at all times of the yeere. And nature hath planted this wood most commodiously in the North side of the house. And it is delicately aduanced vpon the edge of the hill: it is not possible to seate a house more delightfully, for Winter and Summer, in mine opinion. Now, if vpon view of the demsnes, and the rest of the parts, it be not found like vnto a child borne in Chesshire, with a head bigger then the bodie, I shall like it well. Now to our businesse: you are Bayly, take this Precept, and sum∣mon the tenants to make their appearance, accor∣ding to the purport of the same. The forme of the Precept. THese are to will, and in the name and be∣half of the Lord of this Mannor,Beauland Manerium. to require you, to gie notice and warning vnto all and singular the tenants of the same Man∣nor, that they make their personall appea∣rance on Munday next, being the tenth of this instant une▪ at the place where the Lords ourts of this Mannor are vsually kept: And also to warne them, and euery of them, to bring with them all such Deedes, Copies, Leases, & other Euidences, wher∣by they, or any of them do hold or claime
to hold of the Lord of this Mannor any lands, tenements, or hereditaments: And that they then and there shew, or cause the same to be shewed vnto the Lords Suruey∣or, at the Court then and there to be holdē for that purpose, and to giue their further attendance, as occasion of the seruice shall require. Whereof faile you not, &c. Dated the 3. of Iune, in the fourth yeare of the raigne of our Soueraigne Lord, Iames by the grace of God, King of great Brittaine, France, and Ireland, &c. Per I. N. Superuiss. To the Bayly of the Mannor of Beauland, or to his Deputie. Commonly the Lords of Mānors do direct their letters of warrant vnto the tenants, vnlesse the Sur∣ueyor be a knowne Surueyor by patent, and perfor∣meth the seruice, when and where he thinketh most fit for the Lords vse. The order of a Court Baron being perfor∣med (for a Surueyor hath not power to ad∣minister an oath ex officio, vnlesse he be a Surueyor by patent, or by commission out of the Chancerie or Exchequer, Duchie Court, Court of Wards, or such like) by a particular Steward, or by the Surueyor, who for the time may supply the Stewards office and the charge of the Court Baron ended, the Surueyor may proceed to his admoni∣tion and charge, to the effect follow∣ing▪
First, taking note of the names of euery tenant, both Free-holder, Copy-holder, Leaser, & tenant at will in a paper, to whom (after they be sworne) the Surueyor may say: You that haue bene here presently sworn to per∣forme our vttermost duties, in al the things that are & shal be giuen to you in charge, do, or at least you may conceiue, that as the Court Baron (the charge wherof you haue already heard) is with you ordina∣rily twice a yeere, & (if the Lord wil) euery 3. weeks: this kind of Court, which I haue now to admonish you in, tending to the suruey of the Mānor, hapneth not (perchance) in the time of a mans age, thogh the Lord hath power, & (no doubt) occasion to keepe it oftner. You must therfore shew your selues so much the more diligent in this, by how seldome you are troubled therewith. And it behooueth you to call to mind, what by oath you haue assumed to performe, namely, all that shall be giuen you in charge, wherof part hath bene deliuered vnto you alreadie: which being so ordinarie amongst you, it must needs be more familiar, thē the things you haue seldom heard of. And for that this busines of Suruey stretcheth a li∣tle further then the Court Baron, let your du attentiō and examination, and faithfull presentation witnes your true affections to the persons, & ends to which the purpose of our present meeting at this time ay∣meth. The particulars inquirable are many, and of many kinds: but the persons and ends few. The first is God, in whose presence we all stand: who loueth truth frō the inward parts, that is, when the action & the wil concur, & hateth dissimulation. The second is the King, whose we al are, vnder God, whose lawes we are to follow, as well in this busines, as in any o∣ther: for that it tendeth to the seeking and settling of
truth, (the mother of true peace) betweene you and your Lord, in giuing both to you and him, what is e∣quall and iust. The third, is the Lord of the Mannor, whose you are vnder God & the King: and therfore requireth at your hands at this time, equall dealing, neither to discouer for malice, nor to conceale any thing for fauour to either party. The fourth, is your selues, whō you can in no better sort befriend in this action, then to keepe your hearts & lips pure, in cō∣ceiling or vttering: for there is as great a danger in conceiling truth, as in vttering a falshood. And here is no such burden, as the burden of a guiltie consci∣ence, which is laid on no man, but of himself. And lastly, the persons to be considered in this businesse, are your posterities, whom your true or false relatiōs will either helpe or hurt. The ends wherunto it ay∣meth, are first, to explane vnto the Lord of the Man∣nor, what is his by the examination of your estates, rents, & customes, and to establish you in all things that are rightly you: both which being truly found, & duly recorded, cānot but preserue amitie between you and your Lord: which should be the principall end of all indeuors. And sith God is the first and the last, and wil be present in the beginning, in the mid∣dle, and in the end of all your consultations, and will be a witnes for you, or against you, euen in your most secret counsels, set him before the eyes of your harts: so shall you tremble to conceale truth, or vtter fal∣sitie, whether it be with or against your selues, or dea∣rest friends▪ yea, or the Lord of the Mannor himself▪ whose purpose in this seruice is, that the manifest truth might be confirmed, the hidden reuealed, and errors abandoned. And all this lyeth in you, and at your hands it is required to search, and by searching and examination, to find out; and found, to deliuer and present the whole, and not a part of your sin∣cere
knowledges, for from your mouths must that be taken and had, which must be recorded for the direction of your posterities as a perpetuall glasse, wherein the estates of all the particulars within this Mannor, may be at all times seene and confirmed: wherein you shall discharge your duties to God, who commaunds, and commends truth: to the King, who by the sword of his Iustice, maintaines truth: to your Landlord, who desireth only to knowe, & haue his owne: to your selues, who by this meanes shall possesse your owne in peace: and to your posterities, who by this your trauaile, diligence and true infor∣mation, shall partake of your sincere and faithfull seruice, being inrowled, and recorded vnder your names, to your perpetuall commendation: where∣as if you delude me, and abuse the Lord of the Man∣nor that hath sent me, I by your sinister informati∣on may commit error, and leaue it to your posteri∣ties by record: yet shall I be free of the wrong, and you shall answere it. And if you should frame any defence against the seruice, and plead either igno∣rance, or shewe obstinacie, pretending thereby to stand dispenced of your oath, because you doe it not, you deceiue your selues: for the seruice is so insepe∣rably knit to your tenures, and your tenures to the Lord of the Mannor, deny or refuse to doe the one, you forfeit the other: howsoeuer some may say, that they are freeholders, & they are customarie Tenants of inheritance, which in their conceit implyeth a kind of freedome: let them not deceiue themselues, their estates are conditionall, as both by their deeds and copies, they may bee easely resolued, by these words: Habendum sibi et haeredibus suis (in the deed) advoluntatem domini, secundum consuetudinem mane∣rii (in the copie.) In both pro reditu et seruicis inde prius debitiet de iure consuet. And because some of
you doe not (perchance) vnderstand the meaning of the words: thus they signifie, that you are to hold your Tenements, to you and your heires, &c. For such rent, and doing such seruices, as haue beene heeretofore due, & of right accustomed. Is not this a condition? for if you pay not the rent, or denie the seruice, you are at the Lords mercy to be compelled. I doe not thinke therefore that any of you, of any discretion, will aduenture the losse of his intrest, for not performing a seruice at his Lords commaund, that tendeth also to his owne benefite, and to no pre∣iudice at all. The end therefore of all mine admoni∣tion is, to mooue you (being a thing of common right) to shewe your selues like vnto your selues, true and faithfull Tenants vnto the Lord, concur∣ring all in one minde, to doe the Lord this seruice in loue, and the Lord, no doubt, will recompence it with like fauour, although there be no recompence due, for that which dutie bindeth to be done. By this meanes you shal confirme your owne strengths, by gaining & retaining the Lords kind countenāce: and he againe shall bee the more fortified, by your true affections towards him: for what a ioyfull thing is it, for Lord and Tenant to dwell together in vni∣tie? Now hauing thus prepared you to attention vn∣to the matters of your charge: I will heere reade, & explaine vnto you such Articles, as shall be for your instruction, and leaue them with you in writing for your better memorie: for I know, and haue often found, that a bare deliuerie of many words, and of diuers things (as in the charges commonly giuen in Courts Baron, and leet) euen to cares well prepa∣red, may be little effectuall, lesse to him that hea∣reth, and regardeth not: but least of all to him that will not heare at all. Such hearers there are of di∣uine things, but many more of humane of this kind:
but were they matters of carnall pleasure & delight, they would be both heard and practised: And ther∣fore I the more moue you to attend vnto the things which I now am to deliuer vnto you. The substance of the charge of a Court of Suruey, contained in the Articles following. Beauland. Manerium.1 First, as no doubt you all know, that A. B. Knight, the reputed Lord of this Mannor, is the true & vndoubted owner of the same, and of all the lands, meddowes, pastures, and other hereditaments with∣in and belonging to the same: And that you, and euery of you do hold your lands belonging vnto this Mannor of him:Owner of the Mannor if not, who hath the interest and right of the same, to your knowledges? 2 You shall duly and diligently set downe, or shew vnto the Surueyor in his perambulation of the Mannor,Bounds of the Mannor. all the circuit, buttes, bounds, and limits of the same, and vpon what, and whose Mānors, Lord∣ships, lands, and parishes it bordereth on all partes. And whether any confining Lord, or his tenants, do any where intrude or incroche vpon this Mannor, where it is, by whom, & how much is so incroched. As for the bounding of the Mannor, it is fittest to be deliuered vnto the Surueyor, when he treades the circuit, & that the best experienced tenants accompany him for information, and some of the youth, that they may learne to know the bounds in times to come. Mannors intermixt.3 Whether there be any other Mannor or Mā∣nors, lying within the limits or circuit, or extending in part into this Mannor, what are the names of the Manners, and who are owners of them, & how they are distinguished from this Mannor. And whether this Mannor do any way extend into, or lye within any other Mannor.
It is often seene, that one Mannor lyeth within another, and intermixed one with another in such sort, as the true circuits, buttes, and bounds, become confounded: necessarie therefore it is, that their distincti∣ons should be carefully obserued and recor∣ded, for oftentimes one is deuoured, or o∣therwise iniured by the other, when Lords are remisse, and Tenants carelesse, to bring that to certainty, which is or may become doubtfull. 4 What Freeholders there are within, or doe be∣long vnto, and hold their land of this Mannor,Freeholders. what are their names, what land hold they, what rent pay they, by what tenure doe they hold, and what serui∣ces owe they to the Lord? The negligence of Lords in the due conti∣nuance of the substance of this Article, hath bred preiudice to many: for where Free∣holders dwell out of the Mannors, whereof they hold and pay vnto their Lords but a small acknowledgement, as a rose, a pepper corne, a Ielsoflower, or some such trifle: or are to doe some seruice, at times whereof in ma∣nie yeeres hath beene no vse, they haue not beene looked for, neither haue their sutes beene continued for long time, insomuch as they and their tenures haue growne out of memorie, and their seruices out of vse, and other Lords haue intitled themselues to the land, and the right Lord lost all possibi∣lities of estate, wards, marriage, &c. As cō∣mon experience maketh more plaine, by the daily questions and sutes, which rise, when profits apparent, may growe by any of the former casualties.
And therfore it is most necessary to haue al∣waies a true sute roll, whereby the Steward should euery Court call the Freesuters by name, & to expresse what rent he should pay and what seruices he ought to do, & that at the death of euery suter, his heire with the land, rent and seruices, would be inserted in his steade. The profit that will hereby grow vnto the Lord and tenants, is manifest, and this roll is to be made by the Surueyor, and to be indented, the one for the Lord, the o∣ther for the tenants, vpō view of euery Free∣holders land. Felony. Treason.5 Whether you know, that any Free-holder with∣in, or belonging to this Mannor, hath committed any felonie or treason, and hath bene thereof conui∣cted, the Lord not yet hauing the benefit of the for∣feiture: or whether hath any such tenant died with∣out heire generall or speciall: If so, who hath the pre∣sent vse and possession of the land, and by what right▪ what land is it, where lyeth it, how much in quanti∣tie, and of what value? It is a great defect in the Suruey of a Man∣nor, which remaineth to posterities, being inrolled or ingrossed for perpetuall memo∣rie, when the Suruey or doth superficially passe ouer the obseruation of the lands of euery Free-holder, their tenures, quantitie of land, the place where it lyeth, the rent and seruices. For vpon sundrie necessary oc∣casions, the Lord is to seeke in euery of these: and some are worthie, because they loue not to be at charge to find out and con∣tinue that which is not presently profitable. Bastard.6 Whether doth any Bastard hold any land
belonging to this Mannor, as heire vnto any, what is his name, what land is it, and where lyeth it, and what is it yearely worth? A Bastard, though he be knowne to be the son of that father that leaueth him the land, cannot inherit  hareditario, but by con∣ueyance. Neither, if he purchase land in his owne name, can any inherite it after him of his supposed bloud, vnlesse he be maried, and haue children lawfully begotten to in∣herite. Because it is contra formam Ecclesia, as appeareth more at large, Merton. cap. 9. For a Bastard is no mans, or euery mans sonne. 7 What Demeysne lands hath the Lord within or belonging to this Mānor, what & how much woods,Demeysnes. vnderwoods, medow, pasture, arable, moores, mar∣shes, heathes, wastes, or sheepe walkes: And what is euery kind woorth yeerely by acre, how many sheepe may the Lord keepe vpon his walke winter and sommer, and what is a sheepe-gate woorth by yeere, and what is euery acre of wood woorth to be sold? Although this Article, and sundry other hereafter mentioned, be in substance ena∣cted by a Statute made Anno g. Ed. 1. cal∣led extenta Mannerii, to be inquired of by the tenants, yet it is the part and office of a Sur∣ueyor, to see, examine, & iudge by his own experience & knowledge, euery particular, comparing the Iuries presentment with his own opinion: so shall he more truly attaine to the true vnderstanding of the things he seeketh: and the more if he discreetly feele the minds of forraine inhabitants, that are ignorant of the cause of his inquisition.
8 What demeisne Lands hath the Lord lying in the common fields of the Mannor,Demeisne in common fields. howe much in euery field, and euery furlong: And what is an acre of field arable land worth by yeere? The like you are to present touching demeisne meddow, lying in any common meddow within the Mannor. 9 Also you are to present the names of all your common fields: and howe many furlongs are in euery field,Common fields, and common meddowes. and their names, and the common meddowes, and their names. And what beasts, and sheepe, eue∣rie Tenant ought to keepe vpon the same, when the corne and hay is off. And what a beast gate, and sheep gate is worth by yeere. Also at what time your field; and common meddowes are layd open: and howe are they, or ought to be vsed. And whether is it lawfull for the Tenants, to inclose  part of their common fields or meddowes, without the licence of the Lord, and consent of the Tenants. This Article is duly to bee considered, first in setting downe in certainty, what euery man is to keepe vpon the fields, and com∣mon meddowes, because iniury is daily done by some of greatest abilitie, to the meaner sort, in oppressing the fields, with a greater number of Cattle, then according to a true proportion will fall vnto their share, which is very etortion, and a pun∣nishment is to be inflicted vpon the offen∣ders. Also inclosures of common fields, or meddowes in part, by such as are most po∣werfull and mighty, without the Lords li∣cence, and the Tenants , is more then may be permitted: the reason is, that the rest of the Tenants loue  much right  the same,
when the corne is off, as he hath that en∣closeth the same. Bayly. But Sir, if they lay it open at Lammas, or at such time as custome requi∣reth, I think he doth neither Lord nor te∣nants wrong. Sur. Yes: for first, be depriueth thē both of the feed, of as much as his hedges, ditches and enclosures take: besides, whether is it as conuenient for passe and repasse for cattle at one little gappe or two, as when there is no estoell at all? Bayly. You like not enclosures then. Sur. I do, and I thinke it the most bene∣ficiall course that tenants can take, to in∣crease their abilities: for one acre inclosed, is woorth one and a halfe in Common, if the ground be fitting thereto: But that it should be generall, and that Lords should not de∣populate by vsurping inclosures. 10 What Commons are there within the Lord∣ship,Commons. which do properly belong to the Lord and te∣nants of this Mannor, and how are the tenants stin∣ted, whether by the yard-land, plow-land, oxegang, acres, or rent: how many may euery tenant keepe, after either proportion or rate. In this, the like consideration is to be had, as of the former: but that this kind of pasture is called in the Statute of extenta Manerii 3. E. 1. pastura forinsica, forraine herbage or pa∣sture, because no part of it is proper in any sort to any peculiar tenāt, no not to the Lord himselfe, as are the common fields & cōmon meddowes. This kind of Common or pastura forinsica is in three sorts: the one is, where a Mannor or towne-ship hauing and holding
their land in seueraltie, haue by consent ly∣mited a certaine parcell of ground, to lie common among them, and from the be∣ginning haue stinted euery man according to a proportion betweene them agreed, and that is commonly by the acre, which the pasture containeth. Another maner of such kind of common pasture is, where certain waste groūds, one, two or more lie within the Mānor or town∣ship, and the Heard of the whole Towne is guided and kept by one appointed by the Tenants, and at their generall charge, to fol∣lowe their Cattle: in which kind of pasture, there is also a limitation or stint both of the number, and kinds of Cattle. A third kind of this pasture, or common feeding is, in the Lords own woods, that lie common to the Tenants: as also common Moores or heathes, that were neuer arable. In all the former cōmons of pasture, there should bee a certaine stint and allotment, both to the Lord and his Tenants: but in this latter, it seemeth that the Lord should not be limited, because all these latter com∣mons are supposed his owne, and the Te∣nants haue no certaine parcell thereof layd to their holdings, but only bit of mouth with their Cattle. But the Tenants ought to bee stinted in all sorts of common, lest, as I sayd before, the rich deuour the poore: for the one can prouide sheepe, and other Cattle for the summer, and haue inclosed pasture for the winter, or can sell againe, when the forraine pasture is gone: but the poore can∣not doe so.
11 Whether hath any man, to your knowledges, incroched any part of the Lords waste, by inclosure, or adding any part thereof to his owne land:Incroching the Lords waste. present who hath so done, where, how much, and how long it hath continued. This kind of incrochment is not rare, espe∣cially where great wastes and mountanous grounds are, where the Lord nor his officers walke not often, and where Tenants, for fauour or affection, will wincke at euill do∣ers, or for their owne priuate lucre, commit the same error themselues, with hedges, ditches, pales, walls, shed is, &c. 12 Whether hath the Lord any Parke,Parke, de∣meisne woods. or de∣meisne wood, which by stocking may turne to the Lords better benefite, by pasture, Arable, or med∣dowe: and what is an acre worth, one with another the stocking, and how many acres is the wood, and what will an acre of the wood be woorth, and what will an acre of land be worth by the yeere to be let, when the ground is stocked and cleared. Although it be the part of the Iurie, to yeeld their opinions in this case: yet it behooueth the Surueyor to haue so much iudgement, in euery of these points, as hee may be able to satisfie himselfe and his Lord, by suffici∣ent reasons, lest hee be deceiued, and the Lord abused, either through ignorance or parciality. And aboue all it behooueth the Surueyor, to looke into the nature of the soile of the wood: for there are some wood grounds that are good for no other vse, as a drie or cold grauelly ground, whose vertue and disposition may be easely obserued by the herbage. 13 Also you must present the names of all custo∣marie Tenants, within or belonging vnto the Man∣nor,
what mesuages, Tenements or lands they hold, & what euery mesuage or Tenement is called, what rent it payeth: and what profit ariseth to the Lord, by the death of any such customarie Tenant, or by the death of any freeholder,Customary Tenants. by fine, heriot, or reliefe by the cutome of the Mannor. Cōmonly these customary tenants, vpon death & alienatiō do pay a fine, which in som places is certain, & in some, euen in the most they are at the Lords will: and in most pla∣ces they are also heriotable. Bayly. In this maner there be some cu∣stomary tenants heriotable, and some not, how comes that? can there be two custo in one Mannor? Sur. There may be so. And the reason may grow by the escheating of a Mannor, that had in this point a contrary custome to the Mannor, to which it was escheated and annexed: and so the customes of either may hold vnder one Court. Bayly. Your reason in good: and I take it, it may also be, that these that pay no he∣riots, are tenements of a newer erection, & so vpon their first grants, the heriots were omitted. Sur. That is not so likely: for that if any such new erections were, they were granted in such forme as other tenements, with these words: Habindū, &c. ad voluntatem Dom. se∣cundum consuet. Manerii: which words do im∣ply all duties & seruices, which the most an∣cient tenements are bound vnto. There is also a copy-hold estate, called an∣cient demeisne, & the tenāts,Briton sol. 165. Skemains, wher∣of some are of frank-tenemēt, & some of base
tenure. Tenants of Base tenure, are they that hold by verge at the will of the Lord, & the Franktenement therof is in the Lord. It is to be noted, that Copy-hold lands are very ancient, before the Conquest, in the Saxons time, who called this kind of land, Folkland, and their Charter lands were called Bokeland. 14 How doth the Customary land of this Mannor,Descent of customary land. by your custome, descend after the death of an Aun∣cestor, to the younger or elder sonne? And whether will the custome of the Mannor allow an intaile by copie, and whether doth it beare widowes estate, or whether may she haue it during her life, though she marry: and whether may a man hold by the curte∣sie? Sundrie differences there are in sundrie Mannors, touching the substance of this Article. The custome of some Mannors is,Heyre. that the youngest sonne shall inherite, as in Bur∣rough English: if he haue not a sonne, his yon∣gest Brother, as at Edmunton in Middlesex. The custome of some Mannors is, that al the sonnes, and all the daughters shall inhe∣rite alike▪ as in Gauelkind at Islington neere London. The custome of some Mannors is, that if the tenant die seized of fiue acres or vnder, then the yongest sonne shall inherite, but if aboue, then all the sonnes shall inherite, as in Gauelkind. . The custome of some Mannor is, that neither the wife shall haue dowre, neither the husband hold by Curtesie. And the cu∣stome of some other Mannor is, that shee
shall haue the third part of the rent, as at Bu∣shie in Middlesex, and no part of the land in dowre. In some Mannors, the wife being a virgin at the time of her mariage, shall haue all the Copy-hold land for her franckbanck, wher∣of her husband died seized. And many such. 15 Whether are there any customari tenements that are heriotable dismembred,Heriotable tenements dismembred and diuided into parcels, to the weakening of the tenement, and who be they, that haue these heriotable parcels, & what quantitie hath euery of them? Although there be no immediate profite can accrue vnto the Lord, by the presentmēt of the substance of this Article, yet it beho∣ueth the Lord to know, who be the tenants to any part of the land, belonging to an he∣riotable tenement, because euery part con∣tinueth heriotable, and draweth vnto the Lord the best goods of the teneme of such land deceasing, though the land, in regard whereof he payeth it, be but an acre, and he haue elsewhere free or copie, that main∣taineth hors, or other cattle of great value, the Lord may seize the best for his heriot. Fines.16 Whether are not the Fines for admittances, of a new customarie tenant, being heire, or cōming in by purchase, or vpon Surrender at the will of the Lord, or are the Fines alwaies certaine▪ This is an Article, whereat some close-hearted tenants will seem to stagger, being the nature of all men to fauour themselues, and their posterities, and o worke so, as they will (if it be possible) make the Fines cer∣taine, by looking back  past, wher∣in they haue found by old Rcords▪ stand by
report of tenants before, that the fines haue bene certaine, and so they may be in some places, though in few at this day▪ And it may be, former times did affoord such fauor, vntill land became of more value: but of late yeeres, that course hath bene broken, and Fines become arbitrable. Wherein I wish, that Lords and their ministers would vse a meane in exacting. 17 How,Forfeiture of Copy-hold and by what meanes may a customary tenant forfeit his Copy-hold tenement? whether for fel∣ling of timber trees, plowing vp ley grounds, or meddowes neuer tilled before, or for suffering his houses to decay, or for pulling downe any houses, or for committing any other wilfull waste, or deui∣sing his customarie tenement or lands, for longer terme, then the custome of the Mannor will beare: Or for committing any other act, contrarie to the custome of the Mannor? And whether hath any te∣nant of the Mannor offended in any of the former things? who it is, and wherein is any such offence committed? Diuers Acts there be, whereby a tenant in one Mannor may forfeit his Coppy-hold tenement, which Act is no forfeiture in an∣other Mannor. For Customes are very dif∣ferent in diuers Mannors: for in some Mā∣nors a man may cut downe wood and tim∣ber trees vpon his Coppy-hold land, & sell them at his pleasure, which in some mannors is a forfeiture. Some Mannors do allow the customary tenants of the same, to let their land for 3. yeeres, some for more without the Lords li∣cence: and in some Mannors to let the same aboue a yeere and a day, is a forfeiture.
In some Mannors a man may let fall all his customarie houses, which in some other Mannors is a forfeiture. In some Mannors a man may not plow vp or sow his Coppy-hold meddow, or ley ground, that hath not bene vsed to be tilled, in some Mannors contrarie. So that these kinds of forfeitures are ac∣cording to the custome of euery Mannor. Customes.18 What are the customes of the Mannor in generall, both in the behalfe of the Lord, to perform or suffer to the benefit▪ of his tenants, and of the te∣nants to performe to the seruice of the Lord. In euery mannor there hath bene such a mutuall concurrence of ayde between the Lord and tenants, as through the force of time hath bred a Custome. And the Lord may exact it of his tenants by law▪ if they de∣ny the performāce of the things to be done, in the right of their Customarie lands. And these customes are of diuers kinds, & diuersly to be performed. Some in the course of inheriting of land, some in the way of womens dowries, some in the estates of land, some in matters of forfeitures, some in works, some in rents, some in fines, some of the Lords beneuolence in allowing his te∣nants meate, drinke, mony, &c. in time of their works: as these customes in seuerall Mannors, seuerally are allowed. And because it behoueth euery tenant to know whereunto he is bound by custome, if there be no ancient Custome roll to leade them, it behooueth the Surueyor to renew the same, wherein he is to set downe euery tenants name, his tenements, lands, med∣dowes,
pastures, &c. the rent and seruice due for euery of them,Custom roll. and whether workes be turned into rent, and to indent the same, that the Lord may haue the one part, and the tenants another. The neglect whereof hath bred many inconueniences, both to Lords and tenants. 19 Whether is there within this Mannor any villaine or niefe, namely,Villaines, & Nieffes. any bondman or bondwo∣man: if there be, what are their names, what land do they hold and keepe, and what is the same yeer∣ly woorth. Although this kind of tenure be in man∣ner worne out of vse, yet some there are (no doubt) though conceiled in some Mānors, neuer infranchized, or manumized. 20 Whether hath any tenant or other person within this Mannor stocked vp any hedge-rom, plowed vp any Baulke or land-share, remooued any Meere stone,Remouing of Meeres or bounds. land-marke, or other bound betweene the Lords de∣meisnes, & the tenants Free-hold, or customary lād of inheritance, or between his Free-hold and custo∣mary land, or between this and another Mannor or Lordship, where is any such offence committed, by whom, and where ought the same bound so remo∣ued, altered, taken away, or displaced, to stand. This is a necessarie Article to be duly considered, because that by this meanes of remouing or taking away Meere-stones and land-markes, the Lord oftentimes incurreth great preiudice: for that when a Leassee of the Lords demeisnes being either a Free-holder, or a customary tenant of inheri∣tance, hath land of his owne adioyning vnto the demeisnes or intermixt, & he take
away the markes of diuision, leaueth the matter doubtfull which is the Lords, especi∣ally where a long lease or patent is, whereby the Tenant hath time to make alteration: and it is no new or strange thing, to attach some by name and place, that are culpable, and haue yeelded to reformation, being found out before their intents were fully ripe. And aboue al, such are most worthy to be punished, for altering any such knowne markes, vnder whatsoeuer pretence of ease or necessitie, which is the common cloake of the mischiefe, vsed most in the Kings lands, where long Patents are granted. 21 What customarie Cotages are there within this Lordship,Cotages. tostes, croftes, or curtelages: what are the Tenants names, what rent pay they, and what seruices doe they. It is to be vnderstood, that the word Ctagi∣um, signifieth as much as casam, a little house or a place of abode only, or a little dwel∣ling, whereunto little ground belongeth but an Orchard garden, or some small toft, croft, or Curtelage: but Cotages of them∣selues are not ancient, as I take it. 22 Whether are there within this Mannor, any new erected Tenements or Cotages, barnes, Walls, sheddes, Hoells, Hedges, Ditches, or such like erected, set vp, or made: or any Watercoarses, or Ponds, dig∣ged vpon any part of the Lords waste, without the Lords licence: where is it, and by whom was it done, and by whose licence, and vpon what considera∣tion. The ouermuch libertie of too many newe erections, breedeth sundry inconueniences, not only to a Mannor, and the Lord, and
Tenants thereof, but to a whole Common-wealth, and therefore not to be permitted without good consideration: although it is most conuenient, that the poore should haue shelter & places to shroud them in, if they be found honest, vertuous, painfull, and men of abilitie, to gaine their owne and their families reliefe. But it is obserued in some parts where I haue trauelled, where great and spacious wastes, Mountaines, and heathes are, that many such Cotages are set vp, the people giuen to little or no kind of labour, liuing very hardly with Oaten bread, sowre whay, and Gotes milke, dwelling farre from any church or chappel, & are as ignorāt of God, or of any ciuil course of life, as the very Sal∣ages amongst the Infidels in maner, which is lamentable. 23 What Tenants are they within this Man∣nor, that doe hold any lands or Tenements by In∣denture of lease; what are their names,Indentures. what land hold they, for what rent, vnder what conditions and co∣uenants, for what termes of yeeres, or liues. This Article is most especially to bee obser∣ued, touching the couenants by view of the Tenants leases, but the Iurie is to find the names, and to present them with the land and rent. 24 Whether hath or doth the Lord imploy any land to Iustment,Iustments. as in taking in cattle to pasture and herbage: who hath the disposing of the same, what quantitie of land is so disposed, and how many cattle will it pasture, & what is a Cowe, Oxe,
Horse or sheepe-gate woorth by the yeere, or by the weeke. Much land is thus vsed in Yorkshire, and other places Northward very beneficially. 25 Whether hath the Lord of this Mannor any customarie Water-mill,Custome mil. Wind-mill, Horse-mill, Griest-mill, Mault-mill, Walk-mil, or Fuling-mill▪ Whether is there within this Mannor any other Mil, Iron-mil, Furnace, or Hāmer, Paper-mill, Sawing-mil, Shere-mil, or any other kind of Mill: what is it woorth by yeere, and in whose occupation is it? Where sufficient riuers, brooks, stagnes, ponds, or water-courses are, there are com∣monly some kinds of Mils, or other profita∣ble deuices, that humane wit and inuention hath set vp for necessarie vses, for the benefit of man, and for the Lords profit of the Man∣nor, where such deuices are erected. And yet all kinds of deuices are not conuenient in all places: as where no Lead or Tinne is, there is no need of the vse of water, to moue a wheele, to blow the fire for the melting & trying thereof: yet there may be like vse for Iron oare: and where neither of them is, there may be vse of Walk-milles, or Ful∣ling-milles; and where those are not, yet there may be vse of Corne-milles, and such like. And in some places the force of water-courses is vsed, to raise water out of one place into another, where the naturall cur∣rent denyeth the comming, and mounting thereof: with infinite other deuices, accor∣ding to the situation of the place, and neces∣sitie of the thing required. Which, al∣though
they be not all Mils to grind corne, yet may they bring profit to the Lord, which is the thing the Surueyor should couet, not onely to obserue what is alreadie, but must haue also some iudgement to erect some, if the water-course will conueniently affoord the same. To the Corne-mils, which are custome milles, doth belong a kind of duty from the tenants, that is, that they are bound to grind their corne at the Lords mill: and that kind of custome is called Socome.Socome. Bayly. Must a customary tenant of a Mannor, where such a mill is, be forced to grind al the corne he spendeth in his house, at the Lords mill? Sur. Of necessitie, if it grow vpon the Mannor: or else the Lord may amerce him for his default. Bayly. What if he be forced to buy it in the market? Sur. Surely then it is a question, whe∣ther he be bound to grind it there or not. But I take it, he is at his liberty, to grind it where he will, euen where he finds himself best serued. For there is bond-Socome, that is, where the tenant is bound by custome, and lone-Socome, where he grindeth of free-will. Bayly. We that are tenants would be glad, if you could tell vs, what toll our Miller may take: for we are much abused in it, as we thinke, & because we be bound by custome, we cannot conueniently leaue the mill, and yet we find no remedy of the millers abuses▪
Sur. As touching Tll, (which word commeth of the verbe tll, to take away, as it seemeth) there are so many differences, by grants made by Lords of Mannors, that the certaintie in generall can hardly be de∣clared. Some Millers take a twentith, some foure and twentith part: tenants at wil shuld pay a sixteenth part, and a bond tenant a twelfth part, and some are toll-free. But howsoeuer the toll be, feare not, the Miller will be no loser. And for his abuses, you haue your remedie in the Lords Court, or at the common law. Fishing.26 Whether hath the Lord of the Mannor any peculiar fishing within any riuer, brook, mere, stagne, pond, or other water: where, and how far doth it ex∣tend, and what is it yeerely woorth, and who be Far∣mers thereunto, & what common fishings are there∣in, and waters within the Mannor, and how is the same vsed? As this Article is little needfull to be pro∣pounded in Mannors where no riuers or sufficient waters are for fishing, so is it very necessarie to be examined, where such wa∣ters are. For it is daily obserued, that many abuses are committed against the Lord him∣selfe, by such has vsurpe his peculiar fishing, and against the Common-wealth, in destroy∣ing fish, as appeareth by the punishment or∣dained against ofendors therein, 25. He. 8. cap. 7. and 31. Hen. 8. cap. 2. Therefore it behooueth the Surueyor to be more carefull in seeking the meane how to raise a profite vnto the Lord by his fishing, then to find the present abuses which are inquirable, and punishable at euery Leete, although, if any
apparant offendors be found, he is to aduer∣tise the Lord for reformation: but it is no part of the matter inquirable, and to be in∣rolled in his booke of the Suuey. For no∣thing is therein to be inserted, but matter of perpetuitie, in recommending the present state of the Mannor vnto posterities, and for the Lords immediate vse. And therefore be∣sides the ordinarie fishing in smal land riuers, brookes and ponds, there must be also re∣membred what profite may arise by fishing in the sea, if the mannor be nere it, or any creek thereof, in oysters, muscles, cockles, crabs, creuishes, and such like. 27 Whether hath the Lord of the Mannor any Fowling within this Mannor,Fowling. by meanes of any moores, marshes, waters, brookes, reedes, or such like: as of Ducke, Mallard, Widgine, Teale, Wild∣geese, Busterd, Plouers, Bitters, Swans, or such like foule: or any woods wherein do breed any He∣rinshoes, Shoutlers, Storke, or such like: or any Pib∣ble, Peach, or Sea-bank, wherin breed sea-Pyes, O∣liues, Pewets, or such, who taketh the profit of them, and what are they woorth by yeere. These kinds of commodities are not in e∣uery Mannor: and therefore as in all other things it behooueth the Suruey or to consider of these particulars, and giue no more vnto the Iurie to be inquired of, then he either knoweth to be inquirable, or likely by exa∣mination to be found in the Mannor he in∣tendeth to suruey. 8 Whether hath not the Lord of this Man∣nor (time out of mind) had and receiued all waiues,Wayues, estrayes.
estrayes, felons goods, treasure found, within the Mā∣nor, and such like profits, and whether hath he bene answered of them from time to time truly, or not, and who is the officer that doth ouersee, and take no∣tice of the same to the Lords vse. Although these kind of profites may re∣dound vnto the Lord by prescription, yet most commonly they are confirmed by charter, and therefore the Lords euidences, together with the vse, must be exami∣ned. Mines. Quarries.29 Whether are there within this Mannor, any Tin-mines, Lead-mines, Copper-mines, Cole-mines, Quarryes of stone of Marble, Free-stones, Mil-stones, Lime-stones, Grinding-stones, Marle, or Chalke-pti,  or moorish earth, fit for soyling of land, or any Potters cla, clay for Bricke or Tile, or any Fullers earth, or any sand, or grauel-pits, or such kind of commo∣ditie, and what is euery such kind woorth to the Lord, or may be made woorth by yeere. These are casualties, and seldome or ne∣uer at all happen in any Mannor, and few Mannors but haue some or one of them. 30 Whether hath the Lord of the Mānor any Turff, Peates,Turffes and Peates. Heath, Broome, Furz, or Flagge, which are, or may be yeerely sold within the Mannor, & what may they yeeld the Lord by yeere. These things are not in euery coun∣try, much lesse in euery Mannor: for I think Essex can affoord little of them, vnlesse it be of Turffes and Peates, if they were sought in some low grounds, in some creeke of the
sea▪ Northumberland, Westmerland and those wild fields, yeeld store of peates and turffes: so doth Yorkshire some, and other places, many. Bayly. What meane you by Turffes and Peates? are they not heath Turffs you meane? Sur. There are heath-Turffes, which are also meant in this Article, but the Turffe and Peate is of another kind: for they are ta∣ken in bogges, and such rotten grounds as cattle cannot feed vpon. And those that are first cut vp, are called Turffes of the vpper part, and such as are taken downward, are called Peates. Bayly. How meane you downward? Sur. Vnder the first cut: for you may cut a speares length deepe in some places in the summer time, and that kind of earth will burn very excellently. And if it be cut neuer so deepe, it will fill againe in few yeeres, and then may it be digged againe. Bayly. Then it is beneficiall ground. Sur. So it is: and I thinke there be many grounds would serue to this purpose, if they were sought out, where scarcitie of other fewell is. Bayly. You spake of Furze, I take that to be no good fewell, but to brew or bake withall. Suruey. Yes: it is good fire-wood in De∣uonshire and Cornwal, where they make great profite in venting it for that vse, in many the greatest townes, and in Excester espe∣cially.
Bayly. Then are they better then our ordinary Furzes about vs. Sur. The countrey people do call them French Furzes, they haue a very great stalke, and grow very high, and their prickle very strong: but that they grow thicke, and the body is commonly bare to the coppe, where is onely a greene bush of the tender and small branches, and seldome elsewhere, so that they easily make them into Faggots. Slate stones. Marking stones.31 Whether is there within the Mannor any Slate-stones for iling, red or blacke Lead, or Oker for marking stones. These kind of Slate stones are full in Cornwall, and the marking stones most a∣bout Darbyshire, and those parts. Deere.32 What Deere hath the Lord of this Mannor in his Parke, red and fallow: how many of Antler, and how many rascall: who is Keeper, and what is his Fee by yeere: whether hath he any Warren of Conies, or Hare, who is Keeper of either of them, and what Fee hath he by yeere, and what is the Warren of Co∣nies woorth by yeere, and what were the Parke woorth by acre to be let by yeere, if the Deere were destroyed, and how many acres is there within the A Parke for Deere is more for the plea∣sure then for the profit of the Lord, or Com∣monwealth, and yet fit that Princes and men of woorth should maintaine them at their pleasures, yet not so fit, that euery man that listed should maintaine that game, for his priuate pleasure, that depriueth a Com∣monwealth
of more necessary commo∣ties. But men of late are growne more con∣siderate, and haue disparked much of this kind of ground, and conuerted it to better vses. As for warens of Conies, they are not vnnecessarie,Conies. & they require no rich ground to feed in, but meane pasture and craggy grounds are fittest for them. It is therefore in the discretion of a good and circumspect Surueyor, to aduise his Lord▪ how to dispose of these things for his best aduantage. 33 What pentions, portions, payments, or fees are,Reprises and payments. or ought to be yeerely payed out of this Mannor: to whom are they payed, and for what, and what rent or annuitie is there payed, or ought yeerely to be payed out of any Mannor, or by any person, vnto the Lord of this Mannor: and whether hath the same bene duly payed, or discontinued: what is the annui∣tie or rent, by whom ought it to be payed, for what thing, and how long hath it bene discontinued. These things are very duly to be exami∣ned, both which go out of a Mannor, or be payed to a Mannor, although in many pla∣ces they be much neglected, not in calling for, I confesse, but if such payments be de∣nyed, the Lord, to whom such things are due, can hardly say or aow, for what, or in consideration whereof they are due: and by that meanes men  right, both of the pay  of the land, if it escheate, yea whole Mannors. 34 Whether is there within this Mannor any Market weekly,Markets. Faires. or Faire at any time of the yeere
kept, on what day or dayes, who hath the toll and profits of the same, and what is it, or may it be worth vnto the Lord by yeere. Faires and markets are commonly by pa∣tent from the King. Pawnage.35 Whether doth the Lord, or may he take in any ine to pawnage yeerely into his parke or woods, what i the pawnage woorth by yeere. Bayly. Sir, you need little to enquire of that, for Okes and Beech that haue bene formerly ery famous in many parts of this kingdome, for féeding the Farmers ve∣nin▪ are fallen to the ground and gone, and their places are scarcely knowne where they stood. Sur. It is very true: and it is pitty, that Lords of Mānors haue no more care of their posterities. For assuredly there will be grea∣ter want of mber in time to come in this Realme, then may be supplyed with little charge from any part else whatsoeuer. And therefore might Lords and Farmers easily adde some supply of fue hope, in setting for euery twenty acres of other land, one a∣cre of Acoes, which would ome to be good timber in his sones age, especially where there is, and like to be more want. Bayly. The course ere good, but you : for Okes are  it will be long ere they come to be tiber. Sur. I know in Suffolke, where in twenty yeeres Acornes haue yeelded fruite, already ere as high, as a steeple of ordinary height.
Bayly. Truly it is pitty it were not enioyned to men of abilitie and land to do it. But I thinke men imagine, there will be timber enough to the end of the world. 36 Whether hath any of you any Deedes,Euidence. Eui∣dences, Court-rolles, Rentals, Sute-rolles, Custome-rols, Bookes of Suruey, Accompts, or any other escripts, or miniments, touching or concerning this Mānor. If you haue any such, produce them at this Court for the Lords vse and seruice: or if you know any that haue any such, deliuer their names, that the Lord may procure them to shew the same. 37 Who hath the adouson, nomination,Adouson. presen∣tation and gift of the Parsonage, Vicarage, or Free-chappell whereunto this Mannor belongeth: or whe∣ther is it an impropriation, belonging to the Lord of this Mannor, who is incumbent of the Parsonage or Vicarage, or who hath the impropriation in vse, and what is it woorth by yeere Some haue taken, and set downe, a Par∣sonage or Vicarage to be parcell of a Man∣nor, but I take it otherwise: for a matter of spirituall or ecclesiasticall function, cannot be parcell of a secular liuing. But a Mannor as touching the tythe, may belong to an ec∣clesiasticall charge: neither do I thinke, that an impropriation, though it belong vnto the Lord, yet is it not parcell of his Mannor: because that ab origine, euen from the frt in∣stitutiō, it was dedicated to a spirituall office. And although the profites were afterwards disposed to a secular person, yet are not the profites parcell of the Mannor.
38 Who is the Lords Baylie, what is his name, what yeerely fee hath he, & whether hath he a patent for life,Lords Baylie. Steward. or is at the Lords will: and who is Steward of the Lords Courts: what is his fee, & whe∣ther doth hee hold it by patent or at will: who is also keeper of the lords parke, warrener, or woodward, & what other officers are there within, or belonging to this Mannor, and what are their fees. Sundry Mannors haue sundry officers: some of the Lords election and appointment, & some of the Tenants, among whom they are yeerely chosen, as Hayward, Reeues, &c. 39 Within what Diocesse, and Deanery, within what diuision and hundred lyeth this Mannor:Diocesse, hundred, &c. and to what place are you that are the Tenants, vsually called to doe your seruices, to muster, and to shewe your Armour, and weapons▪ and what Beacons are you appointed to watch and ward at. It were a simple part of a Surueyor, if his Lord should aske him these questions, and hee should answere, I cannot tell: and yet are they things fit for the Lord, to bee ac∣quainted with. Market Townes.40 What Marke Townes are neerest vnto this Mannor, and what commodities are there especi∣ally vented at euery of them. This is also necessary to bee knowne of the Lord, that dwelleth remote from his Man∣nors. Thus much for the charge. andum▪Euery Surueyor is in discretion to order
his owne businesse, and none is tied to this method of charge: yet he must take the sub∣stance of these Articles,Euery Sur∣ueyor is to vse his owne method. or such and so ma∣ny of them, as in his conceit (guided by some foreknowledge of the state of the Mannor which he is to suruey) are fittest to be deliuered vnto the Iurie: and withall he is to explaine vnto them, the sence and meaning of euery Article more at large, then hee will giue them in the letter. And hauing thus finished the charge, I hold it fit to giue the Articles in writing vnto the Iurie, to the end they may answere their knowledges, to euery of them in writing. And because the Iury (perchance) cannot so methodically set downe their owne plaine meanings, as is fit to bee ingrossed in the Lords booke, the Surueyor must correct the former, still keeping himselfe within the compasse of the meaning of the Iurie, & then to reade the same vnto thē distinctly, that they may allow or disallow the same: and because they shall hau sufficient te, to consult and deliberate vpon euery Ar∣ticle, they may haue day giuen them, vntill such time as the Surueyor doth thinke hee shall finish the Perambulation, and view of the Mannor in sort as hee intendeth: and then to take their verdict, and accordingly to ingrosse the same. Immediatly afer the charge thus ended, the Surueyor is to make proclamation, in the name of the Lord of the Mannor, that euery Te∣nant doe presently produce his deedes, copies,
Leases, and other Euidences, to the end that the Sur∣ueyor and his Clarke may enter them roughly in a booke, and afterward inroll them faire in a boke of Parchment for continuance. And if any man make default, he may find it by the catalogue of the names of the tenants, which he must take at the beginning of the Court, and crosse them as they bring their euidences to be entred: the manner of which entries doth briefly follow. Intrationes omnium & singularum chartarum,Beauland Manerium. Copiarum, Indenturarum omniumque aliarum Euident. tenentiū, ibidem factae tertio die Nouemb. Anno Regni▪ Domini nostri Iacobi, Dei gra∣tia, magnae Britanniae, Franciae & Hi∣berniae Regis, fidei Defensors, &c. 4. vt sequuntur. viz. Chartae Liberorum tenentium. W. P. de F. in Co▪. M. Yeoman, per charta  dat. tertio die Martii, Anno re∣gni Henr. 7. secundo, tene libere sibi & haer edibus suis (if it be intailed, then according to the limitation) ex donat. R. S. vnum mensuagium sine tentm. vo∣cat. Whytlocks situat. in quadam ve∣nella vocat, Potters-street,  e∣suag. R. L. ex. str. & quandam viam vocat. Loue-lane ex parte Bor. abutan. fuper magnam communiam vocat.
Hownes Moore in Occiden. & super com. campum, vocat. Beggers Bush∣field in Orientem, & continet in longi∣tudine quadragint. pertic. & in latitu∣dine nouem pertic. & dimid. vnum lm. prati, vocat. Mosse meddow. cont. per estimat. quinque acr. & quinque acr. prat. iac. in commun. prat. vocat. Colliers meade, & tres clausur, terrae arabilis insimul iacent. vocat. Ba∣thyes, cont. in se in to. per estimat. decē act. vnum clm. pastur. vocat. Abbots close, iacent. &c. cont. per estimat. tres acr. Quod quidem mesuagium pred. R. S. nuper perquisiuit, de quodam A. B. habend. &c. per redd. vnius libr. Pipe∣ris, & per seruic. inde debit. & consuet. 1. libr. Pi∣peris. In hac forma ceterae omnes irrotulntr chartae, secundum particularia in eisdem specificata.
Copiae Custumariorum Tenentium. B. C. pecop. Cur. dat. nono die Maii Anno regn Elizabeth. 30. tenet exsur∣sum reddicone W. R. vnum tentm. ia∣cent. in quodam vico vocat. Church-street, int. &c. (according to the buttles) & vnam clm. terrae voc. Haywood,Finis 3. po 6. shill. 8 pe. iac. &c. cont. per estimat. duas acr. vnum pratum voct. Deare meade, cont. quin∣que acr. & decem acr. terr. in com. cā∣pis. Habendum sibi & haered. suis ad vo∣luntatem Domini, secundum consuetu∣dinem Maern, & dedit Domino pro fine 3. pounds, 6. . 8. pence, & red∣dit per annum 2 shil. 6. pence. If the estates be for liues, as in the most Mars in the West, then the entries of the Copies must be according to the words of the copie: and at the foot of the entry of euery copie, it is fit to set downe the ages of the tenant in possession, and of them in re∣uersion. Also it behooueth a Surueyor in the entry of all Deeds and Copies, to set downe the names of all mesuages and tenements, and the names of euery particular close, and par∣cell of land, as they are set downe in the Co∣pie. And not only the present tenants name, but the former tenants, for two, three, or foure descents, if it be expressed in the co∣pies.
It is a fault in some Stewards, that in ma∣king out Copies, do set onely downe the name of him that surrenders, and the name of him to whom the surrender is made, with∣out further relation of any former tenants name, and do also set downe the mesuage, without setting downe the particular par∣cels of land belonging vnto it▪ vsing onely generall words, which in all things import incertaintie. Whereas, if he did well, he should obserue and set downe euery parcell both in qualitie and quantity: namely, what is meddow, pasture, arable wood, &c. with the principall buttes and bounds, by the Surueyors booke. De intratione dimissionum, siue Indentu∣rarum, in quibus ea quae sequuntur, obseruanda sunt. Dies mensis & annus. Partes inter quas facta est Indentura. Consideratio concessionis. Particularia, quae per Indenturam traduntur. Habedum, cum termino annorum aut vita∣rum, pro quo aut quibus conceduntur. Redditus, & tempora solutionis. Clausa districtionis, at forisfacturae. Conuentiones, & Prouisiones breuiter. Quomodo obligatur ad warrantizandu Concessor, &c.
This suffiseth for the forme of the entry of Deedes, Copies, and Leases. Bayly. Is this all that is required in the ma∣king vp of a booke of Suruey? Sur. Some thinke it sufficient to come into a Mannor, and to call the tenants, and to cause them to shew their euidences, and to enter them, and so to giue the Lord a booke of the estates, end thinke they haue done a great worke. Which is as much as if a Caterer should prouide meate, and the Cook to send it to the table raw for his Lord to eate. The Caterers office doth as much towards the Lords diet, as the bare knowledge of the estates of a Mannor, doth towards the performing of an absolute Suruey. Yet is the Caterers office, a good inducement, and without this prouision the Cooke can do nothing: & without the knowledge of the estates, a Surueyors trauail: is to little purpose. Bayly. Yet you will enter euery mans particu∣lar lands againe: will you not, notwithstanding the entring of their Euidences? Sur. It must be so, after the view had, and made of all the Mannor. Bayly. What else require you at my hands to be dne then at this time? for I perceiue you haue giuen the Iurie their charge, and limited them a day to bring in their verdict: and you haue séene and entred all the Déeds, Copies and Leases of the t∣nants which haue appeared. What will you now do in the meane time?Tenāts must accompany the Surueyor in his perā∣bulation. Sur. I must now command you (the Lords Bai∣ly) to appoint me some sufficient enants, to accom∣pany me in the perambulation and description of the Mannor.
Bayly▪ What, will you make a plot of the Mannor? Sur. It is very expedient and necessary for ma∣ny causes,A plot of a Mannor ne∣cessary. which I shewed you in our first confe∣rence. Bayly. Will you do it by instrument? Sur. Yea. Bayly. Then you néed the lesse helpe, for you will vse no chaine. Sur. I will, and it behooueth to vse the chaine, notwithstanding the instrument. Bayly. I haue heard some of your profession say, they could plot out a Mannor, and neuer vse line or chaine, with the instrument. Sur. A Painter can by his art delineate the pro∣portion of any creature, without vsing perspectiue glasse, or a compasse, euen by the eye and serious obseruation: so may a man, hauing the true vse of any topographicall instrument by rules geometricall, describe a Mannor in a kind of forme, without line or chaine, or other measure. But if he will say he doth, or that he can truly delineate a Mannor with all the members, as euery street, high-way, lane, riuer, hedge, ditch, close, and field, in forme with true cur∣nings, angles, lengths, and bredths, so that by the plot which he so maketh, a stranger by scale & com∣passe may truly find the quantities of the particulars, I will then say he is rara auis, he is to be admired, be∣cause I must needes speake as I find, that it is a mat∣ter both vnnecessary and vnprofitable: vnnecessary, because it is as if a man should build a house, without pinne or nayle, by ingenuous excellent
geometricall conclusions, to magnifie the art, when with more certainty it may be done by the ordina∣ry ayd of pinns, and nailes: and it is vnprofitable, because it will require a tenne-fold time more then the ordinary course of the instrument and chayne. And yet when curiosity hath done all that it can in this behalfe, he shall find (though the conclusions be true) the worke false. Bayly. vainglorious Artists.Then I perceiue, there be some vainglo∣rious of your profession: for I haue seene one come into a field, & set his instrument in the middle, or in some part thereof, and hath taken vpon him im∣mediatly to say, the content is thus much. Sur. He that so assumeth vnto himselfe admira∣tion, may be more admired for his presumption, then for his truth in performance: for a peece of ground cannot lie in any such form, as he with an in∣strumēt at one station can find the quantity, though he may aime at it at two station▪ but a peece of land may so lie as he shall erre, let him ake as many stati∣ons as he can, and yet hee must measure betweene his first two stations at the least, and toile himselfe and his companions, more then if he went the true course of art and reason. Baylie. What you meane by stations, I am not acquainted, but I hold the plainest way, the truest way in all conclusions, if art and reason bee not against them: and sith the chaine, I perceiue, is necessary to bee vsed with the instrument, I will prouide you helpe, both for your aid in that behalfe, and for your information, hoping that you will not bee against me to view your manner of working, and if I doe aske you a question now and then, for my better satisfaction, you will not be curious in aduising. Sur. I will not only not be curious, but I will gladly
impart my poore skill vnto you, if you be willing: & I will bestowe demonstration, if you will afford at∣tention and practise. Baylie. What call you this instrument? Sur. Some call it the plaine table. Baylie. Is there no other instrument vsed in plotting of ground? Sur. Yes, according as men of skill doe fan∣sie. Baylie. But which doe you approoue most? for as there be diuers, so men diuersely affect them?As instru∣ments are diuers, so men diuerse∣ly affect them. Sur. Affection is often blind, and it may mislead a man, but reason seldome or neuer: and therefore he that can maintain the credite of that he affecteth by reason, I hold that a fit instrument for his vse: there are but two principall instruments, fit indeede for the plotting of grounds, and that is this that hath the name of a plaine table, and the Theodelite which sometimes I vse. Baylie. But I haue seene many, and diuers formes of instruments, and are they all comprehen∣ded vnder these two names? Sur. No, they haue sundry names,All instru∣ments haue one ground. but they are all grounded vpon like principles: & as a man may make sundry kinds of clockes, one differing in a kind of forme, from other, and call them by diuers names, yet they are all found vpon one ground; and as euery clocke bringeth foorth like effects, as to strike and to distinguish times: So these instrumēts, though they differ in forme and name, yet they pro∣duce like effects, if they tend to this part of Geo∣metry, which is most principally called planimetry:Plani∣metria. namely, the measuring of the length, and bredth of any thing, as of a Mannor, and of all sorts, and formes of grounds. Baylie. But I haue heard of an instrument called
a Circumferentor, which some do vse about this businesse. Sur. It is true, it is a new name giuen to the ve∣ry Theodelite, vsed in a sort otherwise then the Theo∣delite, but not contrarie. For as the working vpon the Theodelite, is performed by reducing the needle alwayes vpon the point North, as it is marked in the boxe, the Index turning to the degree, and poin∣ting out of the line of opposition: So the Circumferentor hauing his Index fixed, pointeth to the opposite, and the needle falleth at aduenture vpon some degree marked in the boxe: And the difference is onely in the protraction: for where the one protracteth the worke, by the degrees, found by the fall of the wandring Index: so the other protracteth from the degree, whereupon the needle falleth. Bayly. This differs as much, as if the bell should strike the hammer to make it strike: where it is more ordinary, that the hammer should strike the bell: but if the sounds be like certaine, and sencible, it makes no great matter whether do strike the o∣ther. And if either of these instruments will per∣forme the worke, let men vse whether they list. But I pray you, let vs proceed in our intended businesse: we haue company sufficient both for your instru∣ction of euery mans land, and to ayde you to carry the chaine: as for your instrument, I will carry. Is it much materiall where you begin? Sur. Where o begin to de∣scribe a Mannor.Truly no: yet I hold it most fit to beginne a∣bou the middle of the Mannor, and then to take a course, as the conuenient lying of the land will moue vs, or at one end or side, all is one. Bayly. Then I thinke here is a conuenient place to begin the busines: here is a spacious waste, and neere about the middle of the Mannor. Sur. I pray you then set down your instrumēt there.
Baylie. What will you doe with that paper▪ Sir. Sur. I must fasten it vpon the table, that as I goe, I may drawe out the forme of euery particular. Bay. But what is that brase Ruler, that you haue taken out of the ase? Sur. It is the Index of the plaine table. Bay. Wherefore strike you that line vpon the paper, throughout the table, at aduenture? Sur. It is a meridian line, vpon which, at euery station, as you shal see, I lay the Index, obseruing to lay it alwaies alike, lest I mistake the North point for the South, and the contrary. Bay. Wherefore serueth this great box, and néedle vpon the middle of the Index. Sur. It directeth to set the table alwaies precisely vpon one point. Bay. Must it stand alwaies one way, and direct alwaies to one point? how then can you find the true curuings of the angles? Sur. When the needle of the Index standeth true, as I take it now it doth: Looke vpon it.The mannor of descri∣bing. Bay. Indeede, it is right ouer the line. Sur. Then I pray you, let me haue one to goe be∣fore me, alwaies to stand with a marke at uery an∣gle. Bay. There is one gone. Sur. I see him: Loe, I stirre not the table, now it is truly rectified, and vpon this line I make a pricke, which is the very station where the instrument is supposed to stand: and now from this pricke, laying the Index hard vnto it, I, by the sights of the Index, lay it vnto the mark, which is set vp in yonder angle, let him not remooue it till I come to it: & then as you see, I draw a line frō the prick by the index as it lieth,
truly and firmely to the marke. Come on with the line. How many stickes is it? Baylie. Sir, it is 25. stickes. Sur. That is 75. pole. Baylie. Is your chaine thrée pole? Sur. Yea. Baylie. Oh Sir, what do you now with your compasses, that you first laid to your Index, and after to the paper? Sur. I lay out the true distance, which is from the place where we begun, to the place where the marke stands. Bayly. How do you know whether you strike that line too long, or too short? do you ayme at it, as a man would diuide a thing in diuers parts by his eye? Sur. No, there is in all arts sundry parts, and e∣uery part hath his seuerall practise. A man is not pre∣sently a Musician, as soone as he can say his Gamma∣th. There are steppes and degrees to euery perfe∣ction. But this little note that you take hold of, is not the least of the practise in this facultie. Bayly. What call you it? For as Arts haue di∣uers parts, so euery part hath his seuerall denomi∣nation. Sur. The vse of the scale.And this whereof we are now in hand, is called The vse of the scale. Bayly. I pray you, if I trouble you not too much, let me see the demonstration. Sur. You see in this Index diuers inches, diuers∣ly diuided:The diui∣ding of the scale. one you see, is diuided into 16▪ equall parts, another into 20. another into 60. these are called scales of ascending, or descending, to a higher or lower computation and extention, according to
the number of perches found betweene station and station. This (as you see) is 75. pole, and the scale or diuided inch, which I haue chosen, is 20. as you see the inch so diuided. Bail. But how can you take 75. out of 20. for that you say is your scale? Sur. I cannot take a greater out of a lesser:How to find the number of perches in the scale. therefore you see me apply my compasses to more inches then one, though some of them be diuided more or lesse, I must conceiue euery inch in the whole Index to be 20. Then I lay the one foot of my compasse ouer 3. inches, which maketh 60. thē I lacke 15. to make 75. Therefore I set the other foote of my compasse into the scale of 20. and re∣duce it onely to 15. which 15. and the three inches next adioyning, being imagined 20. a peece, makes 75. And as you see the compasse thus spred, I apply it without altering, to the line, which I drew from the first pricke, and where the other foot of the com∣passe falleth, there is the second station: namely, the place where this marke stood. Bail. Truly, Sir, I thanke you, I conceiue it well for I perceiue, I must alwaies accompt the inches, not as they are in themselues diuided, but euery of them 20. And if it be vnder 20. then I must reerre me to the very scale it selfe, which is di∣uided 20. and take the number out of it: and if it be aboue 20. I must take the next inch or inches to the scale, and take the odde out of the scale it selfe. Sur. If your sudden apprehension haue as strong a retention, you will do well: but commonly quic∣kest conceits do soonest forget.Quick con∣ceit soone forget. Therefore must you often chew it in your mind, and apply it to your
memory, and as we passe in this busines, you may make some practice. Bai. Sir, I thanke you. Sur. What call you this common? Bai. Ye that are Tenants, and are sworn, in∣forme the Surueyor. Iurie. Sir, it is called, Water-hurst common. Sur. So, you that carry the marke, I pray, goe to the next angle, and set vp your marke, and stirre it not till I come. Master Baily, set downe the instru∣ment againe, heere where the marke stood. Bai. I perceiue you lay the Index vpon the line againe: and then you turne the table, till it be by direction of the néedle, North and South, as be∣fore. Sur. I doe so. Bai. But why doe you now lay the Index, and by it looke backe againe? Sur. Only to try whether the needle be right: for if the Index from this last pricke, doe fall truly vpon the first station, then may I be bold that I shal make the next angle true. Bai. Nowe you lay the Index, to the yonder marke before you, & the line that you haue striken from the last pricke, is the line that directeth to it: but because you knowe not yet how many pole it will be, you omit, applying your compasses to the scale, vntill you come to the marke, and knowe the number of petches. Sur. I must doe so: now come on with the chayne. How many pole is it in the whole? Bai. 37. pole: I see you take almost 2. inches for this nūber, namely one intire inch▪ for 20. & 17. parts of ye scale of 20. which in ye whole maketh 37. & I sée truly, as 37 is ye half almost of 75. so is this
last line, the answerable half of the first, and the angle falleth out in the paper, iust alike vnto the angle of the field. Surely this is a perfect way, and I conceiue the doing of it very plainely. Sur. Then we may go on the faster: for this doth a little hinder our businesse: but if you thinke fit to aske any question, do it freely, and I will answer you willingly. Bayly. When I come to any doubt, I will be bold. Sir: now we haue gone round about the Com∣mon of Water-burst, and you haue closed it vp as rightly like it in forme, as one forme may be made like another. Whither will you go next? Sur. Into the next field. What field call you this? Iury. Oxe-leaze. Sur. Whole is it? Iury. Thomas Turners. Sur. How doth he hold it? Iur. He holds it by Copy of Courtroll. Sur. It is meddow. Iury. Yea. Baylie. I perceiue you write the names of the Commons and closes you take, and the name of the owners and occupies, and the qualitie of the ground, and how it is held in euery particular close. Sur. I must of necessitie do so for: memory may not be trusted to retaine so many things, as are to be noted in this businesse. Bayly. I pray you proceed to the rest. Sur. What riuer call you this? Bayly. Will you haue the names of the riuers too?The names of all parti∣culars, are to be set downe. Sur. Yea, and the name of euery other parti∣cular else whatsoeuer: for it is very materiall, whe∣ther
it be riuer, Brooke, lane, high way, crosse, tree, pond, hill, hedge, corner, gate, stile, grauell, or sand-pit, meerestones, baulkes, land, shares, or any matter or thing memorable, because they are often mentioned in records: butts, boundaries, deedes, copies, leases, and to distinguish betweene land, and land, Mannor, and Mannor, parish, and parish, & such like. Bay. In deede, I perceiue it is very needfull to remember them all: this riuer indeede is called Otter brooke, and is indeede the bounds betweene this Mannor of Beauland, and the next Man∣nor. Sur. What call you the next Mannor, on the other side the riuer? Bay. The Mannor of Littleton. But will you obserue the names of all the Mannors, that border vpon this our Mannor? Sur. Yea, of necessitie, and whose Mannor it is: for it were a simple part in me,Confing Mannors are to be noted. to take the circuit of this Mannor, and if the Lord should aske me what Mannors lay about it, I should answere, I cannot tel: it is fit the Lord should knowe who were his neigh∣bour Lords, and what Mannors were neere him. Whose is the Mannor of Littleton? Bay. The kings Mannor: and therefore whe∣ther you may boldly set it downe, you may be ad∣uised. Sur. There is no feare, where is no purpose of offence: and in this it is not only not offensiue, but expedient that the true bounds, meeres, & markes of diuision betweene Mannor, and Mannor, should be obserued and set downe, that either may knowe how farre his owne extendeth. Bai. It is, I confesse, very necessary. But Sir,
how will you doe nowe? heere is a great pond, through which you cannot measure. how can you find the bredth of it, that when you come to the o∣ther side, you may take the lust distance? for as I conceiue, if you should lay it downe by your scale, as you cal it, too farre, or too short, you should bring all the land neere it out of rule, making it either too much or too little. Sur. I perceiue you vnderstand well, for you say truly. Therefore if you obserue what I doe, you shall find that I will not commit that error. Bai. How, I pray you? Sur. You see howe the instrument standeth,How to take a distance. tru∣ly erected as before, & you see a little Mole-hill vp∣on the further bancke of the pond: I lay (as you see) the Index vpon it, and take it for my marke iust in the middle of it, and from this last station I strike a line at aduenture, in the extention, but truly vpon the marke: then without moouing the instrument, I turne the Index from this station, where the in∣strument stands, vnto the staffe which the marke-bearer hath set vp yonder, and strike likewise a line to it, as you see: now I measure from this stati∣on to the staffe, and I find it is 16. perches, that you see how I take it with my compasses vpon the scale, as I shewed you before, and where the foote of my compasse falleth, there is the place where the staff standeth. Nowe see, I erect mine instrument againe, and then I place my Index vpon this place measu∣red vnto, and turne the same vnto the middle of the former Molehill: and you see, that the Index doth crosse the first line, & I drawe a third frō the place of
the stae, to the Mole-hill, and it crosseth it, you see, at this place, then I find, that the very point of the crosse lines is the place of the Mole-hil. Bayly. But how know you by this, how farre the riuer or pond is ouer? Sur. I will tell you presently. Lo, I lay the one foot of the compasse vpon the first station, and the o∣ther vpon the prick of the Mole-hill: and now mark, I lay the compasse, without stirring the feete, vnto the scale, and as you see, it taketh three inches and a halfe: therefore I lay the compasse so, as the one foot may rest vpon the scale, which I haue chosen, which is the inch diuided into twenty parts, and that, you see, is iust in the middle of the inch, which is ten per∣ches, and the other three whole inches, are twentie apeece: so the whole bredth of the pond is 70. per∣ches, deducting as much on either side, as is between the brincke of the pond, and the markes on either side, because I could not plant mine instrumen so neere he water, but that some space must be of ne∣cessity betweene. Baily. I vnderstand this well: and I sée, that by this rule a man may take the distance of a place arre off, and neuer measure to it. Sur. So may you, and to tell how farre di∣stant diuers things are one from another, though nei∣ther of them be neere you. But for these things, if you couet more instruction, you may referre you to diuers in London, or elsewhere, that are practizers & teachers of these Geometricall conclusions: for now time will not serue vs, neither for me to teach, nor you to vnderstand the things at full, which are requi∣red in the Mathematickes, whereof this is but a pr.
Bayly. I thanke you for your present willing∣nesse: when better your oportunitie and leasure wil permit you, I will be bold o trouble you further, & I will be thankfull. I will not now let you: I pray you procéed. Sur. What house is this? Bayly. These men of the Iury will tell you bet∣ter then I▪ for I am but a stranger here to speake of, and I dare not be too bold to speake either by gesse, or by report, of things which must be recor∣ded to posterities. Sur. You do better to forbeare, and to be silent indeed, then to speake what may leade vs into error,They that informe, must know what they say. Raw reports without knowledge, are vnfit to be recorded. Houses are called after the names of Tenants. as many busie and forward fellowes do, to the hurt sometimes of the Lord, sometimes of the tenant. And some Surueyors ouer credulous, will take their raw reports for matter of record, and so leaue doubts or vntruths to them that shall come after. But what say you that haue bene sworne? Iury. The name of the house is Fullers: but why it is so called, we cannot tell. Sur. It is so called (no doubt) of some former tenant of that name: for houses and farmes are often∣times called after sundry names, according to the va∣rietie of the tenants names: and it is a good course to set downe all the ancient names of a farme, be∣cause in ancient records, names are found both of farmes, and closes, and such like, that are out of knowledge, for want of the continuance of expres∣sing them in their Copies, Deedes, Leases, Rentals, fute Rols, and custome Rols. But whose is the house now? Iury. It is now in the renure of W. Sands. Sur. How doth he hold it?
Iury. By Lease for 21. yéers. Sur. When I come to any of the land that be∣longeth to this house, let me vnderstand it: for it is conuenient to mention, in setting down euery peece of ground, to what house, farme or tenement it be∣longeth. Bayly. Here you are now come to the Lords wood. Sur. What call you this wood? Bayly. I take it, it is called Frith-wood. Sur. It is parcell of the Lords demeisnes, is it not? Iury. It is so, Sir. Sur. Here are good timber trees, we will num∣ber them. Bayly. To number trees.Number them? how is it possible to nū∣ber them, they are so many, and stand so thicke? Sur. I confesse (especially if it be thicke of bushes and vnderwoods) there is difficultie in num∣bring them: yet if you will follow my direction, we will come neere the number. Bayly. How, I pray you? we will all giue any ayde we can. Sur. Then go you along by this hedge, and whē I bid you stand, stand you still: and let another go vp this path, and when he comes right against you, let him stand: likewise another must stand here at the end of the wood, and must not moue, vntil I call him to remoue: and I and my man will accompt the nū∣ber of the trees, that are within the square, which you three and the corner of the wood doth make. Sirra, go you along by the hedge, and let your eye be alwayes vpon the trees that are betweene vs, and as you see me moue, so moue you: and I will number the trees as I go. So, now call away the  that
stands at the end of the wood, and place them again in another square, and do as before: and so from place to place, till all the wood be viewed, and the trees numbred. Bayly. To what end is this? what is the Lord the better, to know the number of the trees? Sur. Howsoeuer the Lord be pleased to thinke of the seruice, a Surueyor ought to know it,A Surueyor should seeke to know the number of timber trees. that whē he shall be demanded of the Lord, what he thinketh the wood to be woorth to be sold, he may be able to answer it; and giue a reason for that he saith, and not to speake at randon or by gesse, without some ground of reason or proofe. For how can a man va∣lue a wood, when he knowes not what crop it bea∣reth? For a wood may haue an hundred trees in an acre, some woods not twenty, some not fiue: and therfore it were great negligence in a Surueyor, that would passe by a wood of the Lords, and would not take note of the trees, yea, and of the reasonable va∣lue of them one with another, that he may be readily able to satisfie the Lord, when he shall demaund the Surueyors opinion, though he cannot answer pre∣cisely, yet neere. Bayly. You say truly: But what if there be no trees at all in the wood, as here is a wood adioyning, called Buckes-groue, that hath the name of a wood, but hath no trées at all? Sur. Then is it vnderwood,Difference betweene timber trees and vnder∣wood. which must be con∣sidered in another kind: for there is difference be∣tweene timber trees, and vnderwoods: for an acre of timber trees may be woorth forty pounds, and far more, or much lesse, when an acre of vnderwoods
can not lightly exceed fiue pounds, and may not be woorth twenty shillings. Therefore must the Sur∣ueyor be heedful, I say, to note what trees are among the vnderwoods, and must also haue skill to iudge of the values of the trees: namely, to iudge what a tunne of timber, or a loade is worth, and how ma∣ny loades a tree will make. And because this is not alike in all places, he must be carefull to obserue the plentie or scarcitie, the vse and little vse of timber or fire-wood in the place where he is to deale, and ac∣cordingly in discretion to iudge of the values of that he hath in hand, else may he deceiue himself and his Lord much,The place to be cōsidered. if he prize wood in the wield of Sussex, as it is woorth about Salisburie plaine. Bayly. Sauing your spéech, the like is to be con∣sidered in the letting and sale of land. Sur. It is true: we haue had a good walke be∣tweene these two stations, and a long discourse of woods. But me thinkes, I see a quarry of very good stone here. Bail. Yea Sir, here is both excellent frée-stone and good Marble, and as we shall go, you shall find diuers sorts of minerals and earths: which you can not note vpon your plot, because they are things hidden vnder the earth. Sur. To note spe∣ciall places of profit.Yea, but I will (for so I ought) set downe in the plot, the places where euery of these commo∣dities are found. But for the matter and substance, and the profite and value, I know, the Iurie will bring in, in their verdict: for they are all giuen them in charge. Bail. It is true: these things are necessarily giuen them in charge. But here is a Mill, Sir, will
you take note of it vpon your plot? Sur. In any case: for it is not the least ornament of a Mannor, a faire streame and a well conditioned,A good Wa∣ter-Mill, an ornament to a Mannor. and well wrought Mill vpon the same. In whose vse or occupation is this Mill? Bayly. It is one G. Iohnsons. Sur. By what right? Bayly. Let them of the Iury speake. Iury. He holdeth it fréely for a pepper corne a yéere. But it was parcell of the Lords demeisnes, but he sold it: and it was a custome Mill very pro∣fitable. Sur. He that perswaded the Lord to sell away his custome Mill,Not good for a Lord to aln his Cu∣stome-Mill. had little respect to the Lords pro∣fit or royaltie: the profite comes easily, and the cu∣stome confirmeth the antiquitie of the Mannor. And such a member of a Mannor, I would wish none to put away. But humor and necessitie,Humor and Necessitie, two Empe∣rors oppo∣site. are two opposite Emperors; the one commands, willeth, and doth what he listeth, the other forced to do what it would not. And therefore men that may do what they list, and will do what they may, if they erre to their own hurt, are not to be lamented. But they that are constrained to do what they would not, to their pre∣iudice, I pitty them. But I take it, we haue neere tro∣den the whole Mannor. Bayly. Almost indéed. Here are some few closes more, and then an end. Sur. But here are certaine cottages, me thinkes, builded vpon the Lords waste.Cottages on the waste. Bayly. Yea, but let them passe, neuer meddle with them: for they are onely shelter for poore peo∣ple, and yéeld the Lord little or no commodity, and
therefore spare labor of obseruing them. Sur. Nay, it is a parcell of my taske, I must o∣mi nothing, that may informe or benefite the Lord. Bayly. Be it then as you will. Sur. What are we now at an end? Baylie. Yonder corner is the last: for it is the place where you began in Water-hurst com∣mon. Sur. So, then we will retire. Baylie. What will you then command to be done? Sur. Cause the Tenants all to appeare, and let the Iury bring in the verdict. Bayly. The Tenants are at the Court house, and the Iury ready with their verdict. Sur. I will go with you and take it: call the Iury by poll: make proclamation. Baylie. They all appeare. Sur. You sworne men of the Court of Suruey, haue you agreed vpon the Articles that were giuen you in charge, and are you prouided with answer vn∣to euery of them in writing? Iury. Yea Sir, here it is fairely written. Sur. You haue well done in your indeuors, though peraduenture, there may be defects in the forme of your answers, yet if you haue kept the main ayme, which is the seeking out, and deliuering the truth, you haue discharged the parts of honest Te∣nants, and men fearing God. And because that it may be somethings may be omitted, which you may now instantly call to mind: blush not to declare it here, before you be depriued of that you haue writ∣ten▪ for this paper I must haue, and that vnder your hands.
Iurie. What néede we set to our hands? Sur. Because if I erre from it, your hands shall testifie against me: if you haue erred,Th Iury must sub∣scribe their verdict. and I erre through you your hands shall iustifie me. Iur. The thing is reasonable, we will subscribe. Sur. Now will I reade the Articles of your charge, and to euery Article your answer, that you may yet correct or adde what shall be thought fit, and there∣fore I pray you listen. Iur. Reade you Sir. Sur. You agree to all these things willingly, whereunto you haue set your hands. Iur. We do so, and do here confirme it by the de∣liuery thereof, by our foreman in the name of vs all, to the behoofe of our Lord. And what you else require at our hands, we are ready to performe. Sur. You do kindly, and like dutifull Tenants, and be you assured, that your forwardnesse herein shall not be concealed from the Lord, but with true report of your indeuors for the furthering of the bu∣sinesse, which cannot but draw a kind consideration from the Lord againe to you. Which both to gaine for you, and to retaine it, I will truly do my best: and so for this time, I will leaue to trouble you further, vntill I haue set my other collections, which I haue taken in the perambulation of the Mannor, in some order, then will I be bold to trouble you againe, to the end that you may all approue, what is done, whe∣ther I haue truly set downe the particulars: namely, the Lords demeisnes, the free, copy, and leased lands, vnder their true names and due owners: if not, that by your helpe I may reforme it, before I ingrosse it, to continue to your children. For what we do, will be hereafter a light vnto them that shall come after you: and if it should be erronious, it would be preiu∣diciall to your posterities.
Sur. I pray you therefore, let there be an exa∣mination, and we will gladly giue both our atten∣dance and best ayde to perfect it. Bail. I shall then make an Oyes, and adiourn the Court, vntill they haue notice againe. Sur. Do so. Bai. You will now kéepe your chamber, vntill you haue made your collections perfect, and cast vp the land. Sur. I purpose so. Bayly. I would gladly sée the manner of your casting vp of the acres as you do it: for the rest, I shal sée, when you haue done. For the Iuries examina∣tion, I will leaue you till the morning, and then will I come to your chamber. Sur. Do so. The end of the third booke.
The Surueyors Dialogue, shewing the maner of casting vp o sundry fashions of land, with the scale and compasse, with Tables of computation for ease in ac∣compting. The fourth Booke. Bayly I Sée you are busied, and I perceiue you are casting vp the quantitie of this square péece of land. Sur. So I am. Bayly. This, I take it, is plain and easie to be mea∣sured. Sur. I pray let me see your skil, what containeth it? Bayly. I thinke, if I were vpon the ground, I could tell you: but vpon the plot I cā∣not, because I remember, you do it by your scale: I would gladly sée the vse of it, and how you apply your scale to the perches: and if I saw it once, I thinke I could then gesse at it. Where is your scale? Sur. This that you see like a ruler diuided.
Bayly. If you will giue me leaue, and if I trou∣ble you not, I will try how neere I can come to it. I apply the compasse to the ene side of the figure of the close, and then letting the compasse stand, I lay the compasse to the scale, & I find it is iust one inch, which is▪ third part  of the whole scale: and as I remember, you made your scale twenty perches to an inch. Sur. You say right. Bayly. Then is the one side 20. perches. And hauing layd my compasse to the rest of the sides, I find them twenty of each side. What now is to be done? Sur. Multiply the one side by the other. Bayly. Then I must say twenty times twenty, that makes foure hundred perches. But now am I at a sand againe, how shall I know how many a∣cres is in this figure? Sur. You must know, that there go 160. perches to one acre, 80. perches to halfe an acre, 40. perches to one roode,The parts of an acre. on fourth part  of an acre, ten day-works to a rood, foure perches to a day-worke, 18. foote and a halfe to a perch. Bayly. Then I perceiue, that as many times as I find 160. perches in 400. perches, so many acres the péece is, and if the ouerplus come to 80. perches, it makes halfe an acre more, it to forty, one roode, it is foure perches, a day worke: and so ac∣cording to the  perches, it maketh parts of an acre, Sur. You take it rightly. Bayly. Then I diuide 400 by 160. and I find 160. twice in 400▪ and 80. ouer: so it amounts to two acres and a halfe. Sur. It is well done: but I would haue you ob∣serue,
a forme in setting downe your quantities: for as the parts are foure, so set them downe in foure co∣lumnes: as for example: 2-2-0-0: the first is acres, the second is roodes, the third is day-workes, and the fourth perches. Bayly. I thanke you Sir, I pray let vs see some other forme. Suruey. This forme following is also a square, let me see how you will cast it vp. Bai. I haue laid the cōpasse to the sides, as before, and by the scale▪ all the sides are twēty perches a pce, as were ye first,  I find no difference in the quantitie. Sur. But you shall find you are in an error: for it is not the length o the sides that iustifies the quantitie: but the angles must be considered:Peeces of e∣quall sides, may make vnequall quantities. for you see there is great difference betweene the angles of the first figure, and the angles of this: for the angles of the first are all right angles, but this hath two sharpe or acute angles, and two blunt or obtuse angles, which maketh difference in the quantity, though the sides be equall euery way to the former. Bay. I pray you shew me the reason. Sur. Your eye may discerne, there is inequalitie in the bignesse of these two: but you shall proue it thus: the first is a iust square of twenty perches euery way, which maketh the Area and content as big as possible like sides may make: but this last, by bening two sides, makes the 2 angles vnequall to the other,
and must be measured by drawing a line from the two sharpe angles, and then raysing a perpendicular from that base, to one of the obtuse equall angles: multiply the base,How to cast p a triangle which is 34. by halfe the perpen∣dicular, , and that maketh in the whole 2-0-0-3. the base and both the perpendicu∣lars being equall. Bai. This is almost two parts of an acre lesse then the former. And by this reason there may be a peece of land 20. perches euery side, that shall not containe aboue two parts of an acre. Sur. It is true. Bai. I sée in your plot a crooked péece of land to be measured as I take it, and I thinke it be the Lords wood, called Frith-wood. Sur. This is that you see, and it is troublesome to measure indeed: and without a Geometricall in∣strument, it can very hardly be measured, because there are woods about it, and the wood it selfe thick of trees and bushes. Bai. You haue indéed laid it out in his true forme: but it hath so many angles and curuings, that I dare not aduenture to measure it vpon your plot. I pray what course take you in the casting vp of such a péece of land? Sur. The truest course, for that it is so irregular, is, to put it into as many triangles as you cōueniently
may, making no more then necessitie requirech: and if you can do this, you may do any other forme. Bai. I pray you shew me the manner. Sur. I will make a demonstration vnto you, and marke it: you see the figure: there are contained within this figure 7. triangles, and one long square: the base of the first triangle is 22. perches, the halfe perpendicular thereof is two perches, and that con∣taineth 0-1-1-0. The second triangle hath his base 37. perches, the halfe perpendicular, two and a halfe, which maketh 0-2-3-1. The third hath the base 37. the halfe perpendicular 6▪ which maketh 1-1-5-2. The fourth hath the base 21. the perpendi∣cular 3. maketh 0-1-5-3. The fifth is in the base 12. perp. two and a halfe, and maketh 0-0-7-2. The sixth base 12. perp. 2 maketh 0-0-6-0. The long square 6 in length, and 4 in breadth, 0-0-6-0. The two last are equall triangles, base 8. perp 1. and a halfe, 0-0-3-0. All which seuerall summes being added together, do amount vnto 3-0-8-0. Bai. But which do you call the base, and which the perpendicular lines? Sur. The longest line in any triangle is the base, and the perpendicular is a line imagined to rise from the base to the obtuse or blunt angle:Base & per∣pendicular, quid. as in the exam∣ple following.
Bai. That which is done with prickes, you call the perpendicular,Base and perpendicu∣lar questi∣ons. and the lower line, you call the base, as in this figure. Sur. So it is. Bai. But how loe you cast vp the quantity, by a triangle thus? you cannot as I take i, by multiplying the base by the perpendicular, find the content: for it is by that computation, more itē indeede the triangle containeth.The base multplied by the per∣pendicular. Sur. You say true, if you multiply the whole base, by the whole perpendicular: but you must multiply the one, by the halfe of the other. Bai. Doe you imagine that the truest measure, i by triangles? Sur. Triangles surest mea∣suring.Yea, where you find many angles in one field: there are other kinds, and manners of measu∣ring, but this is speedy and certaine. Bai. How if a peece of land lie directly round? I thinke you measure it round, and then cast it into a square, as if the circle be 40 perches round, it ma∣keth 10 square. Sur. Indeede, many vulgar measurers doe vse to measure many sorts of land round, and cast the whole into a square, which is for the most part false. But for a round, and circular peece of land, you must indeede measure it round,A circular forme. and take the halfe of the number of perches for the length: then take the semidiamiter, namely, as many perches, as are from the Center, to the extreame, and multiply the halfe of the circle by the semidiamiter. And for a halfe circle, multiply halfe the halfe circuit, by the Se∣mdiamiter, and deuide as I shewed you. Bay. I thanke you Sir: I keepe you from your
busines, yet I pray you let me aske you one questi∣on more for my learning: how are hils, and valleys measured? Sur. There is indeede some difficultie in them, without great industrie: for commonly, hills,Measuring hilles and valleyes. and valleyes lie very irregularly, sides, heights, and depthes, very vnequall. And therefore, to demon∣strate any certaine rule for these kind of contents, many haue indeuoured to doe, to whom as vnto vn∣certainties I refer you: but for such kind of grounds, there must speciall diligence be had, in bringing them into certaine parts, distinguishing the parts by markes, and so by degrees to bring these parts into a certaine content generall, and that vpon the ground: otherwise I see not,Irregular formes must be measured by regular parts. howe by measuring a whole irregular circuit together, as irregular heights or depths, and applying the numbers to a generall computation, according to the rules of arithmatike, a certainty may be procured: although the rules be true, yet in regard of the inequalitie of formes, the working may faile, vpon a plaine plot. Bay. Sir, loth I am to bee troublesome vnto you, for that I know you haue much busines, and the casting vp of the particulars of this whole Mannor, will be very laborious: for to cast vp euery particular angle of a ground by arithmaticke, will be very tedious. Sur. But I haue certaine tables of ease, which yeeld more speedier dispatch, then to cast vp euery con∣tent with the pen. Bai. I pray you let me be bold, to craue the sight of those tables. Sur. I haue set them downe in a little booke, and heere it is. Bai. Were these of your owne inuention?
Sur. No truly: many haue indeuored seueral ma∣ners and methods of computation: as one Benese a Canon of Murton Abbey▪Many rules of casting vp contents. Benese, a Canon. neere Mecham in Surrey, who did it by sundry square tables, increasing by ten, as from one, to ten times ten, from one time 20, to ten times twenty, and so increasing by ten, vntill he come to an hundred times 120. that is, from one perch to 75. acres. Bai. Truly, these are very necessary tables, is yours in another forme? Sur. It is in that kind, but it worketh by the in∣crease, from twenty times twenty, from one to forty times forty, frō one to sixty times sixty, eighty times eighty, &c. Bai. This differs not much from the former, yet I take it to be more readie. Sur. So it is. Bai. Who, I pray you, found out this way ▪ Sur. Surely I had certaine papers of that me∣thod, of M. Ran. Agas, but they were imperfect in the due progression:Randolph Agas. Valentine Lea. M. Digges. for they contained the first, wā∣ting the middle, and some of the end of the Tables: that I haue bene forced to calculate them since, to make them perfect. But surely his diligence deserues commendation. Bai. Did M. Agas first containe them so? Sur. So I take it, but M. Valentine Lea, and M. Digges had in manner the like, increasing by the multiplication of greater summes; but of all other, I take this to be the most readie. Bai. Is this the booke, and are these the Tables? Sur. These are they: but that I haue set them into this forme, because they may the better fall into leaues of a portable booke, being before in long and troublesome rolles, and in another forme.
Tabulae primae, pars prima.   1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 1 1 2 3 1 1 1 1 2 1 3 2 2 1 2 2   2 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 3 2 4 4 2 5   3 2 1 3 3 3 4 2 5 1 6 6 3 7 2   4 4 5 6 7 8 9 1   5 6 1 7 2 8 3 1 1 1 1 1 2 2   6 9 1 2 1 2 1 3 2 1 5   7 1 2 1 1 4 1 5 3 1 7 2   8 1 6 1 8 2   9 2 1 2 2 2   10 2 5
Tabulae primae, pars secunda.   11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 1 2 3 3 3 1 3 2 3 3 4 4 1 4 2 4 3 5 2 5 2 6 6 2 7 7 2 8 8 2 9 9 2 1 3 8 1 9 9 3 1 2 1 1 1 1 2 1 2 3 1 3 2 1 4 1 1 5 4 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 1 8 1 2 2 5 1 3 3 1 5 1 6 1 1 7 2 1 8 3 2 2 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 3 2 5 6 1 6 2 1 8 1 9 2 2 1 2 2 2 2 4 2 5 2 2 7 2 3 2 3 7 1 9 1 2 1 2 2 3 2 4 2 2 6 1 2 8 2 7 3 3 1 2 3 3 1 3 5 8 2 2 2 4 2 6 2 8 3 3 2 3 4 3 6 3 8 1 9 2 4 3 2 7 2 7 1 3 1 2 3 3 3 3 6 3 8 2 1 2 1 2 3 1 3 10 2 7 2 3 3 2 2 3 5 3  2 1 1 2 2 1 1  2 1 1 11 3 1 3 3 3 5 3 3 8 2 1 1 1 1 4 1 6 3 1 0 2 1 1 1 1 1 5   12 3 6 3 9 1 2 1 5 1 8 1 1 1 1 1 4 1 1 7 1 2   13 1 2 1 1 5 2 1  3 1 1 2 1 1 5 1 1 1  2 1 2 1 3 1 2 5   14 1 9 1 1 2 2 1 1 6 1 1 9 2 1 2 5 1 2 6 2 1 2   15 1 1 6 1 1 2 1 2 3 3 1 2  2 1 3 1 1 1 3 5   16 1 2 4 1 2 1 3 1 3 6 2   17 1 3 2 1 1 3 6 2 2 3 2 5   18 2 1 2 5 2 2 1   19 2 1 1 2 2 5   20 2 2
Tabulae secundae, pars prima.   21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 1 5 1 5 2 5 3 6 6 1 6 2 6 3 7 7 1 7 2 2 1 2 1 1 1 1 2 1 2 1 2 2 1 3 1 3 2 1 4 1 4 2 1 5 3 1 5 3 1 6 2 1 7 1 1 8 1 8 3 1 9 2 2 1 2 1 2 1 3 2 2 2 4 2 1 2 2 2 3 2 4 2 5 2 6 2 7 2 8 2 9 3 5 2 6 1 2 7 2 2 3 3 3 3 1 1 3 2 2 3 3 3 3 5 3 6 1 3 7 8 6 3 1 2 3 3 3 4 2 3 6 3 2 3 9 1 2 1 2 1 3 2 1 5 7 3 6 3 3 8 2 1 1 1 2 1 3 3 1 5 2 1 7 1 1 9 1 1 3 1 1 2 2 8 1 2 1 4 1 6 1 8 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 4 1 1 6 1 1 8 1 9 1  1 1 9 2 1 1 1 3 1 1 4 1 1 6 1 1 1 8 2 1 2 3 1 2 3 1 2 5 1 1 2 7 2 10 1 1 2 2 1 1 5 1 1  2 1 2 1 2 2 2 1 2 5 1 2  2 1 3 1 3 2 2 1 3 5 11 1 1 7 3 1 2 2 1 2 3 1 1 2 6 1 2 8 3 1 3 1 2 1 3 4 1 1 3 7 1 3 9 3 2 2 2 12 1 2 3 1 2 6 1 2 9 1 3 2 1 3 5 1 3 8 2 1 2 4 2 7 2 1 13 1 2 8 1 1 3 1 2 1 3 4 3 1 3 3 2 1 1 2 4 2 2 7 3 2 1 1 2 1 4 1 2 1 7 2 14 1 3 3 2 1 3 7 2 2 2 4 2 7 2 2 1 1 2 1 4 2 2 1 8 2 2 1 2 2 2 5 15 1 3 8 3 2 2 2 2 6 1 2 1 2 1 3 3 2 1 7 2 2 2 1 1 2 2 5 2 2 3 3 2 3 2 2 16 2 4 2 8 2 1 2 2 1 6 2 2 2 2 4 2 2 8 2 3 2 2 3 6 3 17 2 9 1 2 1 3 2 2 1 7 3 2 2 2 2 2 6 1 2 3 2 2 3 4 3 2 3 9 3 3 1 3 7 2 18 2 1 4 1 2 1 9 2 2 3 2 2 2 8 2 3 2 2 2 3 7 3 1 2 3 6 3 1 2 3 1 5 19 2 1 9 3 2 2 4 2 2 2 4 1 2 3 4 2 3 8 3 3 3 2 3 8 1 3 1 3 3 1 7 1 3 2 2 2 20 2 2 5 2 3 2 3 5 3 3 5 3 1 3 1 5 3 2 3 2 3 3
Tabulae secundae, pars secundae.   31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 1 7 3 8 8 1 8 2 8 3 9 9 1 9 2 9 3 1 2 1 5 2 1 6 1 6 2 1 7 1 7 2 1 8 1 8 2 1 9 1 9 2 2 3 1 3 1 2 4 2 4 3 2 5 2 2 6 1 2 7 2 7 3 2 8 2 2 9 1 3 4 3 1 3 2 3 3 3 4 3 5 3 6 3 7 3 8 3 9 1 5 3 8 3 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 3 3 1 5 1 6 1 1 7 2 1 8 3 1 1 6 1 6 2 1 1 9 2 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 1 4 1 1 5 2 1 1 7 1 1 8 2 1 2 7 1 1 4 1 1 1 6 1 1 7 3 1 1 9 2 1 2 1 1 1 2 3 1 2 4 3 1 2 6 2 1 2 8 1 1 3 8 1 2 2 1 2 1 2 6 1 2 8 1 3 1 3 2 1 3 4 1 3 6 1 3 8 2 9 1 2 9 3 1 3 2 1 3 4 1 1 3 6 2 1 3 8 3 2 1 2 3 1 2 5 2 2  3 2 1 10 1 3 7 2 2 2 2 2 5 2 7 2 2 1 2 1 2 2 2 1 5 2 1 7 2 2 2 11 2 5 1 1 1 2 1 3 2 1 3 2 2 1 6 1 2 1 9 2 2 1 3 2 2 4 2 2 2 7 1 2 3 12 2 1 3 1 6 2 1 9 2 2 2 2 2 5 2 2 8 2 3 1 1 3 4 2 3 7 3 13 2 2 3 2 2 2 2 7 1 2 3 2 2 3 3 3 3 7 2 1 3 3 2 3 6 3 3 1 14 2 2 8 2 2 3 2 2 3 5 2 2 3 9 3 1 2 3 6 3  2 3 1 3 3 1 6 2 3 2 15 2 3 6 1 31 3 3 7 2 3 1 1 1 3 1 5 3 1  3 3 2 2 2 3 2 6 1 3 3 16 3 4 3 8 3 1 2 3 1 6 3 2 3 2 4 3 2 8 3 3 2 3 3 6 4 17 3 1 1 3 1 3 2 1 3 2 4 3 2 8 3 3 3 3 3 3 7 1 4 1 2 4 5 3 4 1 18 3 1 9 2 2 3 2 8 2 3 3 3 3 3 7 2 4 2 4 6 2 4 1 1 4 1 5 2 4 2 19 3 2 7 1 3 3 3 6 3 4 1 1 4 6 1 4 1 1 4 1 5 2 4 2 2 4 2 5 1 4 3 20 3 3 2 4 4 5 4 1 4 1 5 4 2 4 2 5 4 3 4 3 5 1
Tabulae secundae, pars tertia.   21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 21 2 3 1 2 3 5 2 3 3 3 6 3 1 1 1 3 1 6 2 3 2 1 3 3 2 7 3 3 2 1 3 3 7 2   22 3 1 3 6 2 3 1 2 3 1 7 2 3 2 3 3 2 8 2 3 3 4 3 3 9 2 4 5   23 3 1 2 2 3 1 8 3 2 3 3 3 2 9 2 3 3 5 1 4 1 4 1 6 3 4 1 2 2   24 3 2 4 3 3 3 3 6 4 2 4 8 4 1 4 4 2   25 3 3 4 1 4 2 2 4 8 3 4 1 5 4 2 1 1 4 2 7 2   26 4 9 4 1 5 2 4 2 2 4 2 8 2 4 3 5   27 4 2 2 1 4 2 9 4 3 5 3 5 2 2   28 4 3 6 5 3 5 1   29 5 1 1 5 1 7 2   30 5 2 5
Tabulae secundae, pars quarta.   31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 21 4 2 3 4 8 4 1 3 1 4 1 8 2 4 2 3 3 4 2 9 4 3 4 4 3 9 2 5 4 3 5 1 22 4 4 1 6 4 2 1 2 4 2 7 4 3 2 2 4 3 8 5 3 2 5 9 5 1 4 2 5 2 23 4 8 4 2 4 4 2 9 3 4 3 5 2 5 1 1 5 7 5 1 2 2 5 1 8 2 5 2 4 1 5 3 24 4  6 4 3 2 4 3 8 5 4 5 1 5 1 6 5 2 2 5 2 8 5 3 4 25 4  3 5 5 6 2 5 1 2 2 5 1 8 3 5 2 5 5 3 1 1 5 3 7 2 6 3 3 6 1 26 5 5 8 5 1 4 2 5 2 1 5 2 7 2 5 3 4 6 2 6 7 6 1 3 2 6 2 27 5 9 5 1 6 5 2 2 3 5 2 9 2 5 3 6 1 6 3 6 9 3 6 1 6 2 6 2 3 1 6 3 28 5 7 5 2 4 5 3 1 5 3 8 6 5 6 1 2 6 1 9 6 2 6 6 3 3 7 29 5  4 5 3 2 5 3 9 1 6 6 2 6 1 3 3 6 2 1 6 2 8 1 6 3 3 2 7 2 3 7 1 30 5  2 6 6 7 2 6 1 5 6 2 2 2 6 3 6 3 7 2 7 5 7 1 2 2 7 2 31 6 6 8 6 1 5 3 6 2 3 2 6 3 1 1 6 3 9 7 6 3 7 1 4 2 7 2 1 1 7 3   32 6 1 6 6 2 4 6 3 2 7 7 8 7 1 6 7 2 4 7 3 2 8   33 6 3 2 1 7 2 7 8 3 7 1 7 7 2 5 1 7 3 3 2 8 1 3 8 1   34 7 9 7 1 7 2 7 2 6 7 3 4 2 8 3 8 1 1 2 8 2   35 7 2 6 1 7 3 5 8 3 3 8 1 2 2 8 2 1 3 8 3   36 8 4 8 1 3 8 2 2 8 3 1 9   37 8 2 2 1 8 3 1 2 9 3 9 1   38 9 1 9 1 2 9 2   39 9 2 1 9 3   40 10
Tabulae tertiae, pars prima.   41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 1 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 3 1 2 1 2 1 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 2 1 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 2 3 2 2 4 2 4 2 2 5 3 3 3 3 1 2 3 2 1 3 3 3 3 3 3 4 2 3 5 1 3 6 3 6 3 3 7 2 4 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 1 7 1 8 1 9 1 1 5 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 2 1 1 2 3 1 1 5 1 1 6 1 1 1 7 2 1 1 8 3 1 2 1 2 1 1 1 2 2 2 6 1 2 1 2 1 2 3 1 2 4 2 1 2 6 1 2 7 2 1 2 9 1 3 2 1 3 2 1 3 3 2 1 3 5 7 1 3 1 3 1 3 3 2 1 3 5 1 1 3 7 1 3 8 3 2 2 2 2 1 2 4 2 5 3 2 7 2 8 2 2 2 4 2 6 2 8 2 1 2 1 2 2 1 4 2 1 6 2 1 8 2 2 9 2 1 2 1 2 1 4 2 2 1 6 3 2 1 9 2 2 1 1 2 2 3 2 2 2 5 3 2 2 8 2 3 1 2 3 2 2 10 2 2 2 2 2 2 5 2 2 7 2 2 3 2 3 2 2 2 3 5 2 3 7 2 3 3 2 2 3 5 11 2 3 2 3 3 3 5 2 2 3 8 1 3 1 3 3 3 3 6 2 3 9 1 3 1 4 3 3 1 7 2 3 2 1 12 3 3 3 6 3 9 3 1 2 3 1 5 3 1 8 3 2 1 3 2 4 3 2 7 3 3 13 3 1 3 1 3 1 6 2 3 2 9 3 3 2 3 3 2 6 1 3 2 9 2 3 3 2 3 3 3 6 3 3  1 4 2 2 14 3 2 3 2 3 2 7 3 3 2 3 3 4 3 3 7 2 4 1 4 4 2 4 8 4 1 1 2 4 1 5 15 3 2 5 3 3 3 7 2 4 1 1 4 5 4  3 4 1 2 2 4 1 6 1 4 2 4 2 3 3 4 2 7 2 16 4 4 4 8 4 1 2 4 1 6 4 2 4 2 4 4 2 8 4 3 4 3 6 5 17 4 1 4 1 4 1 8 2 4 2 2 3 4 2 7 4 3 1 1 4 3 5 2 4 3 9 3 5 4 5 8 1 3 1 2 1 18 4 2 4 2 4 2 9 4 3 3 2 4 3 8 5 2 2 5 7 5 1 1 2 5 1 6 5 2 2 5 2 5 19 4 3 4 3 4 3 9 2 5 4 1 9 5 1 3 3 5 1 8 2 5 2 3 1 5 2 8 5 3 2 3 5 3 7 2 20 5 5 5 1 5 1 5 5 2 5 2 5 5 3 5 3 5 6 6 5 6 1
Tabulae tertiae, pars secunda.   51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 1 1 2 3 1 3 1 3 1 1 3 2 1 3 3 1 4 1 4 1 1 4 2 1 4 3 1 5 2 2 5 2 2 6 2 6 2 2 7 2 7 2 2 8 2 8 2 2 9 2 9 2 3 3 3 8 1 3 9 3 9 3 1 2 1 1 1 1 1 2 3 1 3 2 1 4 1 1 5 4 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 3 1 1 4 1 1 5 1 1 6 1 1 7 1 1 8 1 1 9 1 2 5 1 2 3 3 1 2 5 1 2 6 1 1 2 7 2 1 2 8 3 1 3 1 3 1 1 1 3 2 2 1 3 3 3 1 3 5 6 1 3 6 2 1 3 8 1 3 9 2 2 1 2 2 2 2 4 2 5 2 2 7 2 8 2 2 1 7 2 9 1 2 1 1 2 1  3 2 1 4 2 2 1 6 1 2 1 8 2 1 9 3 2 2 1 2 2 2 2 1 2 2 5 8 2 2 1 2 2 4 2 2 5 2 2 8 2 3 2 3 2 2 3 4 2 3 6 2 3 8 3 9 2 5 4 3 2 3 7 2 3 9 1 1 2 3 3 3 3 6 3 8 3 1 2 3 1  3 3 1 5 10 3 7 2 3 1 3 1 2 2 3 1 5 3 1 7 2 3 2 3 2 2 2 3 2 5 3 2 7 2 3 3 11 3 1  1 3 2 3 3 2 3 3 3 2 3 2 3 3 1 1 3 3 4 3 3 6 3 3 3 9 2 4 2 1 4 5 12 3 3 3 3 3 6 3 3 4 2 4 5 4 1 4 1 1 4 1 4 4 1 7 4 2 13 4 5 3 4 9 4 1 2 1 4 1 5 2 4 1 8 3 4 2 2 4 2 5 4 2 8 2 4 3 1 3 4 3 5 14 4 1 8 2 4 2 2 4 2 5 2 4 2 9 4 3 2 2 4 3 6 4 3 9 2 5 3 5 6 2 5 1 15 4 3 1 1 4 3 5 4 3  3 5 2 2 5 6 1 5 1 5 1  3 5 1 7 2 5 2 1 1 5 2 5 16 5 4 5 8 9 1 2 5 1 6 5 2 5 2 4 5 2 8 5 3 2 5 3 6 6 17 5 1 6 3 5 2 1 5 2 4 1 5 2 3 3 5 2 9 2 5 3 3 3 5 3 8 6 6 2 6 1 3 6 1 5 18 5 2 9 2 5 3 4 5 3 8 2 6 6 7 2 6 1 2 6 1 6 2 6 2 1 6 2 5 2 6 3 19 6 2 1 6 7 6 1 1 2 6 1 6 2 6 2 1 1 6 2 6 6 3 3 6 3 3 2 7 1 7 5 20 6 1 5 6 2 6 2 5 6 3 6 3 5 7 7 5 7 1 7 1 5 7 2
Tabulae tertiae, pars tertia.   41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 21 5 1 5 1 5 2 2 5 2 5 3 5 3 1 5 3 6 1 6 1 2 6 6 3 6 1 2 6 1 1 1 6 2 2 2 22 5 2 3 2 5 3 1 5 3 6 2 6 2 6 7 2 6 1 3 6 1 8 2 6 2 1 6 2 9 2 6 3 5 23 5 3 5 3 6 1 2 6 7 1 6 1 3 6 1 8 3 6 2 4 2 6 3 1 6 3 6 7 1 3 7 7 2 24 6 6 6 1 2 6 1 8 6 2 4 6 3 6 3 6 7 2 7 8 7 1 4 7 2 25 6 1 6 1 6 2 2 2 6 2 8 3 6 3 5 7 1 1 7 7 2 7 1 3 3 7 2 7 2 6 1 7 3 2 2 26 6 2 6 2 6 3 3 6 3 9 2 7 6 7 1 2 2 7 1 9 7 2 5 2 7 3 2 7 3 8 2 8 5 27 6 3 6 3 7 3 2 7 1 1 7 1 7 7 2 3 3 7 3 2 7 3 7 1 8 4 8 1 3 8 1 7 2 28 7 7 7 1 4 7 2 1 7 2 8 7 3 5 8 2 8 9 8 1 6 8 2 3 8 3 29 7 1  1 7 2 4 2 7 3 1 3 7 3 9 8 6 1 8 1  2 8 2 3 8 2 8 8 3 5 1 9 2 2 30 7 2 7 2 7 3 5 8 2 2 8 1 8 1 1 2 8 2 5 8 3 2 2 9 9 7 2 9 1 5 31 7 3 7 3 8 5 2 8 1 3 1 8 2 1 8 2 8 2 8 3 6 2 9 4 1 9 1 2 9 1  3 9 2 7 2 32 8 8 8 1 6 8 2 4 8 3 2 9 9 8 9 1 6 9 2 9 3 2 10 33 8 1 8 1 8 2 6 2 8 3 4 3 9 3 9 1 1 1 9 1 9 2 9 2 7 3 9 3 6 10  1 10 1 2 2 34 8 2 8 2 8 3 7 9 5 2 9 1 4 9 2 2 2 9 3 1 9 3 9 2 10 8 10 1 6 2 10 2 5 35 8 3 8 3 9 7 2 9 1 6 1 9 2 5 9 3 3 3 10 2 2 10 1 1 1 10 2 10 2 8 3 10 3 7 3 36 9 9 9 1 8 9 2 1 9 3 6 10 5 10 1 4 10 2 3 10 3 2 11 1 11 1 37 9 1 9 1 9 2 8 2 9 3  3 10 7 10 1 6 1 10 2 5 2 10 3 4 3 11 4 11 2 3 1 11 2 2 2 38 9 2 9 2 9 3 9 10 8 2 10 1 8 10 2 7 2 10 3 7 11 6 2 11 1 6 11 2 5 2 11 3 5 39 9 3 9 3 10 2 10 1 9 1 10 2 9 10 3 8 3 11 8 2 11 1 8 1 11 2 8 11 3 7 2 12 7 1 40 10 1 10 2 10 11 11 1 11 2 11 3 12 12 1 12 2
Tabulae tertiae, pars quarta.   51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 21 6 2 7 3 6 3 3 6 3 8 1 7 3 2 7 8 3 7 1 4 7 1 9 1 7 2 4 2 7 2 9 3 7 3 5 22 7 2 7 6 7 1 1 2 7 1 7 7 2 2 2 7 2 8 7 3 3 2 7 3 9 8 4 2 8 1 23 7 1  1 1 7 2 4 3 7 3 2 7 3 6 1 8 2 8  3 8 1 3 2 8 1 9 1 8 2 5 24 7 2 6 7 3 2 7 3 8 8 4 8 1 8 1 6 8 2 2 8 2 8 8 3 4 9 25 7 3 8 3 8 5 8 1 1 1 8 1 7 2 8 2 3 3 8 3 8 3 6 1 9 2 2 9 8 3 9 1 5 26 8 1 1 2 8 1 8 8 2 4 2 8 3 1 8 3 7 2 9 4 9 1 2 9 1 9 2 3 2 9 3 27 8 2 4 1 8 3 1 8 3 3 3 9 4 2 9 1 1 1 9 1 3 9 2 4 3 9 3 1 2 9 3 8 1 10 5 28 8 3 7 9 1 9 1 1 9 1 8 9 2 9 3 2 9 3 9 10 9 10 1 3 10 2 29 9 9 3 9 1 7 9 2 4 1 9 3 1 2 9 3 8 3 10 6 10 1 3 1 10 2 2 10 2 7 3 10 3 5 30 9 2 2 2 9 3 9 3 7 2 10 5 10 1 2 2 10 2 10 2  2 10 3 5 11 2 2 11 1 31 9 3 3 1 10 3 10 1 3 10 1 8 2 10 2 6 1 10 3 4 11 1 3 11 9 2 11 1 7 1 11 2 5 32 10 8 10 1 6 10 2 4 10 3 2 11 11  8 11 1 6 11 2 4 11 3 2 12 33 10 2 3 10 2 9 10 3 7 1 11 5 2 11 1 3 3 11 2 2 11 3 1 11 3 8 2 12 6 3 12 1 5 34 10 3 3 2 11 2 11 1 2 11 1 9 11 2 8 2 11 3 6 12 4 2 12 1 3 12 2 1 2 12 3 35 11 6 1 11 1 5 11 2 3 3 11 3 2 2 12 1 1 12 1 12 1 8 3 12 2 7 2 12 3 6 1 13 5 36 11 1 9 11 2 8 11 3 7 12 6 12 1 5 12 2 4 12 3 3 13 2 13 1 1 13 2 37 11 3 1 3 12 1 12 1 1 12 1 9 2 12 2 8 3 12 3 8 13 7 1 13 1 6 2 13 2 5 3 13 3 5 38 12 4 2 12 1 4 12 2 3 2 12 3 3 13 2 2 11 1 2 13 2 1 2 13 3 1 14 2 14 1 39 12 1 7 1 12 2 7 12 3 6 3 13 6 2 13 1 6 1 13 2 6 13 3 3 3 14 5 2 14 1 5 1 14 2 5 40 12 3 13 13 1 13 2 13 3 14 14 1 14 2 14 3 15
Tabulae tertiae, pars quinta.   41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 41 10 2 1 10 3 2 11 3 11 1 1 11 2 1 1 11 3 1 2 12 1 3 12 1 2 12 2 2 1 12 3 2 2   42 11 1 11 1 1 2 11 2 2 11 3 2 2 12 3 12 1 3 2 12 2 4 12 3 4 2 13 5   43 11 2 2 1 11 3 3 12 2 3 12 1 4 2 12 2 4 1 12 2 5 1 12 3 6 13 1 7 2   44 12 4 12 1 5 12 2 6 12 3 7 13 8 13 1 9 13 3   45 12 2 6 1 12 3 7 2 13 8 3 13 2 13 5 1 1 14 2 2   46 13 9 13 2 2 13 3 2 14 3 2 14 1 5   47 13 3 2 1 14 4 14 1 5 2 14 2 7 2   48 14 1 6 14 2 8 15   49 15 1 15 1 2 2   50 15 2 5
Tabulae tertiae, pars sexta.   51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 41 13  3 13 1 3 13 2 3 1 13 3 3 2 14 3 3 14 1 4 14 2 4 1 14 3 4 2 15 4 3 15 1 5 42 13 1 5 2 13 2 6 13 3 6 2 14 7 14 1 7 2 14 2 8 14 3 8 2 15 9 15 1 9 2 15 3 43 13 2 5 1 13 3 9 14 9 3 14 2 2 14 3 1 1 15 2 15 1 1 3 15 2 3 2 15 3 4 1 16 5 44 14 1 14 1 2 14 2 3 14 3 4 15 5 15 1 6 15 2 7 15 3 8 16 9 16 2 45 14 1 3 3 14 2 5 14 3 6 1 15 7 2 15 1 8 3 15 3 16 1 1 16 1 1 2 16 2 3 3 16 3 5 46 14 2 5 2 14 3 8 15 9 2 15 2 1 15 3 2 2 16 14 16 1 5 2 16 2 16 3 8 2 17 1 47 14 3 4 1 15 1 1 15 2 2 8 15 3 4 2 16 6 1 16 1 8 16 2 9 3 17 1 2 17 1 3 1 17 2 5 48 5 1 15 2 4 15 3 6 16 8 16 2 16 3 2 17 4 17 1 6 17 2 8 18 49 5 2  3 15 3 7 16 9 1 16 2 1 2 16 3 3 3 17 6 17 1 8 1 17 3 2 18 2 3 18 1 5 50 15 5  2 16 1 16 2 2 2 16 3 5 17 7 2 17 2 17 3 2 2 18 5 18 1 7 2 18 3 51 16 1 1 16 2 3 16 3 5 3 17 8 2 17 2 1 1 17 3 4 18 6 3 18 1 9 2 18 3 2 1 19 5   52 16 3 6 17 9 17 2 2 17 3 5 18 18 2 1 18 3 4 19 7 19 2   53 17 2 2 1 17 3 5 2 18 8 3 18 2 2 18 3 5 1 19 8 2 19 2 1 3 19 3 5   54 18 9 18 2 2 2 18 3 6 19 4 2 19 2 3 19 3 6 2 20 1   55 18 3 6 1 19 1 19  3 3 19 3 7 2 20 1 1 1 20 2   56 15 2 4 19 3 8 20 1 2 20 2 6 21   57 10 1 2 1 20 2 6 21 1 21 1 5   58 21 1 21 5 2 21 3   59 21 3 1 22 5   60 22 2
Tabulae quartae, pars prima.   61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 1 1 5 1 1 5 2 1 5 3 6 1 1 6 1 1 6 2 1 6 3 1 7 1 7 1 1 7 2 2 3 2 3 1 3 1 2 3 2 3 2 2 3 3 3 3 2 3 4 3 4 2 3 5 3 1 5 3 1 6 2 1 7 1 1 8 1 8 3 1 9 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 1 2 2 4 1 2 1 1 2 2 1 2 3 1 2 4 1 2 5 1 2 6 1 2 7 1 2 8 1 2 9 1 3 5 1 3 6 1 1 3 7 2 1 3 8 3 2 2 1 1 2 2 2 2 3 3 2 5 2 6 1 2 7 2 6 2 1 1 2 2 1 3 2 1 4 2 2 2 6 2 1 7 2 2 1 9 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 2 2 2 5 7 2 2 6 3 2 2 8 2 2 3 1 2 3 2 2 3 3 3 2 3 5 2 2 3 7 1 2 3 9 3 3 3 2 2 8 3 2 3 4 3 6 3 8 3 1 3 1 2 3 1 4 3 1 6 3 1 8 3 2 9 3 1 7 1 3 1 9 2 3 2 1 3 3 2 4 3 2 6 1 3 2 8 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 5 1 3 3 7 2 10 3 3 2 2 3 3 5 3 3 7 2 4 4 2 2 4 5 4 7 2 4 1 4 1 2 2 4 1 5 11 4 7 3 4 1 2 4 1 3 1 4 1 6 4 1 8 3 4 2 1 2 4 2 4 1 4 2 7 4 2 9 3 4 3 2 2 12 4 2 3 4 2 6 4 2 9 4 3 2 4 3 5 4 3 8 5 1 5 4 5 7 5 1 13 4 3  1 5 1 2 5 4 3 5 1 1 1 5 1 4 2 5 1 7 3 5 2 1 5 2 4 1 5  7 2 14 5 1 3 5 1 7 5 2 2 5 2 4 5 2 7 2 5 3 1 5 3 4 2 5 3 8 - 6 1 2 6 5 15 5 2  3 5 3 2 2 5 3 6 1 6 6 3 3 6 7 2 6 1 1 1 6 1 5 6 1 8 3 6 2 2 2 16 6 4 6 8 6 1 2 6 1 6 6 2 6 2 4 6 2 8 6 3 2 6 3 6 7 17 6 1 9 1 6 2 3 2 6 2 7 3 6 3 2 6 3 6 1 7 2 7 4 3 7 9 7 1 3 1 7 1 7 2 18 6 3 4 6 3 7 3 2 7 8 7 1 2 2 7 1 7 7 2 1 2 2 2 6 7 3 2 7 3 5 19 7 9 3 7 1 4 2 7 1 9 1 7 2 4 7 2 8 3 7 3 3 2 7 3 8 1 8 3 8 7 3 8 1  2 20 7 2 5 7 3 7 3 5 8 8 5 8 1 8 1 5 8 2 8 2 5 8 3
Tabulae quartae, pars secunda.   71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 1 1 7 3 1 8 1 8 1 1 8 2 1 8 3 1 9 1 9 1 1 9 2 1 9 3 2 2 3 5 2 3 6 3 6 2 3 7 3 7 2 3 8 3 8 2 3 9 3 9 2 1 3 1 1 3 1 1 1 4 1 1 4 3 1 1 5 2 1 1 6 1 1 1 7 1 1 7 3 1 1 8 2 1 1 9 1 1 2 4 1 3 1 1 3 2 1 3 3 1 3 4 1 3 5 1 3 6 1 3 7 1 3 1 3 9 2 5 2  3 2 1 2 1 1 1 2 1 2 2 2 1 3 3 2 1 5 2 1 6 1 2 1 7 2 2 1 8 3 2 2 6 2 6 2 2 2 8 2 2 9 2 2 3 1 2 3 2 2 2 3 4 2 3 5 7 2 3 7 2 3 5 2 3 7 3 4 1 3 6 1 7 3 3 9 2 3 1 1 1 3 1 3 3 1 4 3 3 1 6 2 3 1 3 1 3 2 8 3 2 3 2 4 3 2 6 3 2 8 3 3 3  2 3 3 4 3 3 6 3 3 3 4 9 3 3 5 3 4 2 4 4 1 4 6 2 4 8 3 4 1 1 4 1 3 1 4 1 5 2 4 1 7 3 4 2 10 4 1  2 4 2 4 2 2 2 4 2 5 4 2 7 2 4 3 4 3 2 2 4 3 1 4 3 7 2 5 11 3 5 3 4 3 8 2 5 3 5 3 2 5 6 1 5 9 5 1 1 3 5 1 4 2 5 1 7 1 5 2 12 5 1 3 5 1 6 5 1 9 1 5 2 2 5 2 5 5 2 8 5 3 1 5 3 4 5 3 7 6 13 5 3 3 5 3 4 5 3 7 1 6 2 6 3 3 6 7 6 1 1 6 2 3 2 6 1 6 3 6 2 14 6  2 6 1 2 6 1 5 2 6 1 6 2 2 2 6 2 6 6 2 9 2 6  1 6 3 6 2 7 15 6 2 6 1 6 3 6 3 3 3 6 3 7 1 1 7 5 7 8 3 7 1 2 2 1 6 1 7 16 4 7 8 7 1 2 7 1 6 7 2 7 2 4 7 2 8 7 3 2 7 3 6 8 17 2  3 2 6 7 3 1 7  4 2 7 3 8 3 8 3 8 7 1 8 1 1 2 8 1 5 3 8 2 18 3  2 8 4 8  2 8 1 3 8 1 7 2 8 2 2 8 2 6 2 8 3 1 8 3 5 2 9 19 1  1 8 2 2 8 2 6 3 8 3 1 2 8 3 6 1 9 1 9 4 3 9 1 2 9 1 5 1 9 2 20 3 9 9 5 9 1 9 1 5 9 2 9 2 5 9 1 9 3 5 10
Tabulae quartae, pars tertia.   61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 21 8 1 8 5 2 8 1 3 8 1 6 8 2 1 1 8 2 6 2 8 3 1 3 8 3 7 9 2 1 9 7 22 8 1 5 2 8 2 1 8 2 6 2 8 3 2 8 3 7 2 9 3 9 8 2 9 1 4 9 1 9 2 9 2 5 23 8 3 3 8 3 6 2 9 2 1 9 8 9 1 3 3 9 1 9 2 9 2 5 1 9 3 1 9 3 6 3 10 2 2 24 9 6 9 1 9 1 8 9 2 4 9 3 9 3 6 10 2 10 8 10 1 4 10 2 25 9 2 1 2 9 2  2 9 3 3 3 10 10 6 1 10 1 2 2 10 1 8 3 10 2 5 10 3 1 1 10 3 7 2 26 9 3 6 2 10 3 10 9 2 10 1 6 10 2 2 2 10 2 9 10 3 5 2 11 2 11 8 2 11 1 5 27 10 1 1 3 10 1 8 2 10 2 5 1 10 3 2 10 3 8 3 11 5 2 11 1 4 1 11 1 9 11 2 5 3 11 3 2 2 28 10 2 7 10 3 4 11 1 11 8 11 1 5 11 2 2 11 2 9 11 3 6 12 3 12 1 29 11 2 1 11 7 2 11 1 6 3 11 2 4 11 3 1 1 11 3 8 2 12 5 3 12 1 3 12 2 1 12 2 7 2 30 11 1 7 2 11 2 5 11 3 2 2 12 12 7 2 12 1 5 12 2 2 2 12 3 12 3 7 2 13 5 31 11 3 2 3 12 2 12 8 1 12 1 6 12 2 3 3 12 3 1 2 12 3 9 1 13 7 13 1 4 3 13 2 2 2 32 12 8 12 1 6 12 2 4 12 3 2 13 13 8 13 1 6 13 2 4 13 3 2 14 33 12 2 3 1 12 3 1 2 12 3 9 3 13 8 13 1 6 2 13 2 4 2 13 3 2 3 14 1 14 9 1 14 1 7 2 34 12 3 8 2 13 7 13 1 5 2 13 2 4 13 3 2 2 14 1 14 9 2 14 1 8 14 2 6 2 14 3 5 35 13 1 3 3 13 2 2 2 13 3 1 1 14 14 8 1 14 1 7 2 14 2 6 1 14 3 5 15 3 3 15 1 2 2 36 13 2 9 13 3 8 14 7 14 1 6 14 2 5 14 3 4 15 3 15 2 2 15 2 1 15 3 37 14 4 1 14 1 3 2 14  2 3 14 3 2 15 1 1 15 1 2 15 1 9 3 15 2 9 15 3 8 1 16 1 2 38 14 1 9 2 14 2 9 14 3 8 2 15 8 15 1 7 2 15 2 7 15 3 6 2 16 6 16 1 5 2 16 2 5 39 14 3 4 3 15 4 2 15 1 4 1 15 2 4 15 3 3 3 16 3 2 16 1 3 1 16 2 3 16 3 2 3 17 2 2 40 15 1 15 2 15 3 16 16 1 16 2 16 3 17 17 1 17 2
Tabulae quartae, pars quarta.   71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 21 9 1 1 3 9 1 8 9 2 3 1 9 2 8 2 9 3 3 3 9 3 9 10 4 1 10 9 2 10 1 4 3 10 2 22 9 3 2 9 3 6 10 1 2 10 7 10 1  2 10 1 3 10 2 3 2 10 2 9 10 3 4 2 11 23 10 8 1 10 1 4 10 1 9 3 10 2 5 2 10 3 1 1 10 3 7 11 2 3 11 8 2 11 1 4 1 11 2 24 10 2 6 10 3 2 10 3 8 11 4 11 1 11 1 6 11 2 2 11 2 8 11 3 4 12 25 1 3 3 11 1 11 1 6 1 11 2 2 2 11 2 8 3 11 3 5 12 1 1 12 2 2 12 1 3 3 12 2 26 1 2 1 2 11 2 11 3  2 12 1 12 7 2 12 1 4 12 2 2 12 2 7 12 3 5 2 13 27 1 3 9 1 12 6 12  2 3 12 1 9 2 12 2 6 1 12 3 3 12 3  3 13 6 2 13 1 3 1 13 2 28 1 1 7 12 2 4 12 3 1 12 3 8 13 5 13 1 2 13 1 9 13 2 6 13 3 3 14 29 12 3 4 3 13 2 13 9 1 13 1 6 2 13 2 3 3 13 3 1 13 3  1 14 5 2 14 1 2 3 14 2 30 13 1 2 2 13 2 13 2  2 13 2 5 14 2 2 14 1 14 1 7 2 14 2 5 14 3 2 2 15 31 13 3 1 13 3 8 14 5 3 14 1 3 2 14 2 1 1 14 2 9 14 3 6 3 15 4 2 15 1 2 1 15 2 32 14 14 1 6 14 2 4 14 3 2 15 15 8 15 1 6 15 2 4 15 3 16 33 14 2 5 3 14 3 4 15 2 1 15 1 2 15 1 3 3 15 2 7 15 3 5 1 16  2 16 1 1 3 16 2 34 15  2 15 1 2 15 2 2 15 2 15 3  2 16 6 16 1 4 2 16 2  3 16 3 1 1 17 35 5 2 1 15 3 15 3 8 1 16 7 2 16 1 6 1 16 2 5 16 3  3 17 2 2 17 1 1 1 17 2 36 5 3 9 16 8 16 1 7 16 2 6 16 3 5 17 4 17 1 3 17 2 2 17 3 1 18 37 6 1 6 3 16 2 6 16 3 5 1 17 4 2 17 1 3 3 17 2 3 17 3 2 1 18 1 2 18 1 3 18 38 6 3  2 17 4 17 1 3 2 17 2 3 17 3 2 2 18 2 18 1 1 2 18 2 1 18 3 2 1 39 17 1 2 1 17 2 2 17 3 1 3 18 1 2 18 1 1 1 18 2 1 18 3 3 19 2 19 1 1 19 2 40 17 3 18 18 1 18 2 18 3 19 19 1 19 2 19 3 20
Tabulae quartae, pars quinta.   61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 41 15 2 5 1 15 3 5 2 16 5 3 16 1 6 16 2 5 1 16 3 6 2 17 6 3 17 1 7 17 2 17 3  2 42 16 2 16 1 1 16 2 1 2 16 3 2 17 2 2 17 1 3 17 2 3 2 17 3 4 18 4 2 18 1 43 16 1 5 3 16 2 6 2 16 3 7 1 17 8 17 1 8 3 17 2 9 18 1 18 1 1 18 2 1 3 18 3 2 2 44 16 3 1 17 2 17 1 3 17 2 4 17 3 5 18  6 18 1 7 18 2 8 18 3 9 19 1 45 17 6 1 17 1  2 17 2 8 3 18 18 1 1 1 18 2 2 2 18 3 3 3 19 5 19 1 19 2 7 2 46 17 2 1 2 17 3 3 18 4 2 18 1 6 18 2 7 2 18 3 9 19 1 2 19 2 2 19 3 3 2 20 5 47 17 3 6 3 18  2 18 2 1 18 3 2 19  1 3 19 1 5 2 19 2 7 1 19 3 20 1 3 20 2 2 2 48 18 1 1 18 2 4 18 3 6 19 8 19 2 19 3 2 20 4 20 1 6 20 2 8 2 49 18 2 7 1 18 3  2 19 1 1 3 19 2 4 19 3 6 1 20  2 20 2 3 20 3 3 21 5 1 21 1 7 2 50 19 2 2 19 1 5 19 2 7 2 0 20 1 2 2 20 2 5 20 3 7 2 21 1 21 2 2 2 21 3 5 52 19 1 7 3 19 3 2 20 3 1 20 1 6 20 2 8 3 21 1 2 21 1 4 1 21 2 7 21 3  3 22 1 2 2 52 19 3 3 20 6 20 1 9 20 3 2 21 5 21 1 8 21 3 1 22 4 22 1 7 22 3 53 20 8 1 20 2 7 2 20 3 4 3 21 8 21 2 1 21 3 4 22 7 22 2 1 22 3 4 1 23  2 54 20 2 3 2 20 3 7 21 1 2 21 2 4 21 3 7 22 1 1 22 2 4 22 3 5 23 1 1 2 23 2 5 55 20 3 8 3 21 1 2 2 21 2 6 1 22 22 1 3 3 22 2 7 3 23 1 1 23 1 5 23 2 8 3 24 1 2 56 21 1 4 21 2 8 22 2 22 1 22 3 23 4 23 1 8 23 3 2 24 6 24 2 57 21 1 9 1 22 3 2 22 1 7 3 22 3 2 23 6 1 23 2 2 23 3 4 3 24 9 24 2 3 1 24 3 7 2 58 22 4 2 22  9 22 3 3 2 23 8 23 2 2 2 23 3 7 24 1  2 2 2 6 25 2 25 1 5 59 22 1 9 3 22 3 4 2 23 9 1 23 2 4 23 3 8 3 24 1 3 2 24 2 8 1 25 3 25 1 7 3 25 3 2 2 60 22 3 5 23 1 23 2 5 24 24 1 5 24 3 25 5 25 2 25 3 5 26 1
Tabulae quartae, pars sexta.   71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 41 18  3 18 1 8 18 2 8 1 18 3 8 2 19 8 3 19 1 9 19 2 9 1 19 3 9 2 20 9 3 20 2 42 18 2 5 2 18 3 6 19 6 2 19 1 7 19 2 7 2 19 3 8 20 8 2 20 1 9 20 2 9 2 21 43 19 3 1 19 1 4 19 2 4 3 19 3 5 2 20 6 1 20 1 20 2 7 3 20 3 8 2 21 9 1 21 2 44 19 2 1 19 3 2 20 3 20 1 4 20 2 5 20 3 6 21 7 21 1 21 2 9 22 45 19 3 8 3 20 1 20 2 1 1 20 3 2 2 21 3 3 21 1 5 21 2 6 1 21 3  2 22 8 3 22 2 46 20 1 6 2 20 2 8 20 3 9 2 21 1 1 21 2 2 2 21 3 4 22 5 2 22 1 7 22 2 8 2 23 47 20 3 4 1 21 6 21 1 7 3 21 2 9 2 22 1 1 22 1 3 22 2 4 3 22 3 6 2 23  1 23 2 48 21 1 2 21 2 4 21 3 6 22 8 22 2 22 3 23 4 23 1 6 23 2 24 49 21 2 9 3 22 2 22 1 4 1 22 2 6 2 22 3 8 3 23 1 23 2 3 1 23 3 5 2 24 7 3 24 2 50 22  2 22 2 22 3 2 2 23 5 23 1 7 2 23 3 24 2 2 24 1 5 24 2 7 2 25 51 22 2 5 1 22 3 8 23 1 3 23 2 3 2 23 3 6 1 24 9 24 2 1 3 24 3 4 2 25 7 1 25 2 52 23 3 23 1 6 23 2 9 24 2 24 1 5 24 1 8 25  1 25 1 4 25 2 7 26 53 23 2 1 23 3 4 24 2 1 24 2 2 24 3 3 3 25 1 25 2 1 25 3 3 2 26 6 3 26 2 54 23 3  2 24 1 2 24 2 5 2 24 3 25 1 2 2 25 2 6 25 3  2 26 1 26 2 6 2 27 55 24 1 6 1 24 3 25 3 3 25 1  2 25 3 1 1 26 5 26 1 8 2 26 3 2 2 27 6 1 27 2 56 24 3 4 25 8 25 2 2 25 3 6 26 1 26 2 4 26 3 8 27 1 2 27 2 6 28 57 25 1 1 3 25 2 6 26 1 26 1 4 2 26 2 9 3 2  3 27 1 1 1 27 3 1 2 28 5 3 28 2 58 25 2  2 26 4 26 1 8 2 26 3 3 27 7 2 27 2 27 3 6 2 28 1 1 28 2 9 2 29 59 26 7 1 26 2 2 26 3 6 3 27 1 1 2 27 2 6 1 28 1 28 1 5 3 28 3 2 29  1 29 2 60 26 2 5 27 27 1 5 27 3 28 5 28 2 28 3 5 29 1 29  5 30
Tabulae quartae, pars septima.   61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 61 23 1 1 23 2 5 2 24 3 24 1 6 24 3 1 1 25 6 2 25 2 1 3 25 3 7 26 1 2 1 26 2 7 2   62 24 1 24 1 6 2 24 3 2 25 7 2 25 2 3 25 3 8 2 26 1 4 26 2 9 2 27 5   63 24 3 2 1 25 8 25 2 3 3 25 3 9 2 26 1 5 1 26 3 1 27 6 3 27 2 2 2   64 25 2 4 26 26 1 6 26 3 2 27 8 27 2 4 28   65 26 1 6 1 26 3 2 2 27 8 3 27 2 5 28 1 1 28 1 7 2   66 27 9 27 2 5 2 28 2 28 1 8 2 28 3 5   67 28 2 1 28 1 9 28 3 5 3 29 1 2 2   68 28 3 6 29 1 3 29 3   69 29 3 1 30 7 2   70 30 2 5
  71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 61 27 2 3 27 1 8 27 3 3 1 28 8 2 28 2 3 3 28 3 9 29 1  1 29 2 9 2 30  3 30 2 62 27 2 2 27 3 6 28 1 1 28 2 7 29 2 2 29 1 29   2 30 32 2  2 31 63 27 3 8 1 28  4 28 2 4 3 29 5 2 29 2 1 1 29 3 30 1  3 30 2  2 31 4 1 31 2 64 28 1 6 28 3 2 29 3 29 2 4 30 30 1 30 3 31 5 31 2 32 65 2 3 3 3 29 1 29 2  1 30 2 2 30 1  3 30 3 5 31 1 1 1 31 2  2 32 3 2 32 2 66 29 1 1 2 29 2 30 4 2 30 2 1 30 3 5 2 31 1 4 31 3 2 32 32 2  2 33 67 29 2 9 1 30 6 30 2 2 3 30 3 4 2 31 1 6 1 31 3 32  3 32 2 6 2 33  1 33 2 68 30 7 30 2 4 31 1 31 1 31 3 5 32 1 1 32 2 33 33 2 3 34 69 30 2 4 3 31 2 30 1 9 1 31 3 6 2 32 1 3 3 32 3 1 33  1 33 2 5 2 34 2 3 34 2 70 31 2 2 31 2 31 3  2 32 1 5 32 3 2 2 33 1 33 3  2 34 34 2 2 2 35 71 3 2 1 31 3 32 1 5 3 32 3  2 33 1 1 1 33 2 34 6 3 34 2 4 2 35 2 35 2   72 32 1 6 32 3 4 33 1 2 33 3 34 8 34 2 6 35 4 35 2 36   73 33 1 2 1 33 3 2 34 8 3 34 2 7 35 5 1 35 2 3 2 36 1 3 36 2   74 34 9 34 2 7 2 35 6 35 2 4 2 36 3 36 1 2 37   75 35 6 1 35 2 5 36 3 3 36 2 2 2 37 1 1 3 2   76 36 4 3 2 3 37 2 37 2 1 38   77 37 2 1 37 2 1 2 38 3 38 2   78 38 1 38 2 2 39   79 39 1 39 2   80 40
Bay. Surely this is a necessarie booke for him that is imployed in matters of great quantitie. For if it should bee all cast vp with the pen, it would aske much labour, and waste much paper: and yet I know,Countrey land measu∣rers will cast by memory. simple Countrey fellowes will cast it vp very spéedily, euē by their memories, by money; as one penny to a Perch, foure perches to a day-worke▪ ten day-workes one Roode, foure Roode one Acre, thrée shillings foure pence, is for∣tie pence, and forty Perches, one Roode, one hun∣dred & thréescore pence, make thirtéene shillings and foure pence, or a Marke of money,Casting by the parts of money. and one hundred and thrée score Perches one Acre. So that twenty pound makes thirtie Acres, fortie pound threescore Acres, a hundred pound one hundred and fiftie Acres; and so forth. But this kinde of casting is troublesome, when it riseth to great portions, and many parcels. And there∣fore for my part, I could willingly imbrace these tables for my ease, and leaue this accompt by money, vnto such as haue not the vse of learning to ayde their memories. Sur. I haue obserued, that many vnlearned men haue better and more retentiue memories, then haue some Schollers. Bay. So haue I noted, and I know some,All Schol∣lers haue not best me∣moryes. that will by memorie do very much, and no doubt, the reason is, because Schollers doe commit their memories to the pen▪ where such as haue not the vse of the pen, must vse the memorie only, which being fed with continuall pondering the things they delight in, becomes as a Calender of their accounts.Admirable memories of some great persons. King Cirus could name al his souldiers by memory. And Pliny reporteth of Methridates, that hauing vnder his gouernment 22. king∣domes, or nations, could speake all their langua∣ges,
and vnderstand any tongue without an in∣terpreter. And Scipio could remember the names of the soldiours of all the Romane armie. Sur. Vse memory, & haue the vse of memory, either Schollers or vnlearned; if they vse not their memories, they cā make little vse of their memo∣ries. On the other side, he that imprinteth too ma∣ny things in his memory, shal, & some haue oftē∣times wished,Some would forget, and cannot. they could not remember so well, & that they had the art of forgetting, to cleare the memory of yt they would not retaine in memory: for many tmes a fresh & free memorie heapeth vp so many things in his thought, that it breedeth such cōfusion, that what it should indeed retaine, is oftē cōfounded with that which it would forget. Bay. I wish therefore that my memorie could retaine according to occasion, to forget things whereof I haue no necessarie vse, and to remem∣ber things expedient: yet surely, although the thought can apprehend but one obiect at one in∣stant, the memorie may well apprehend and retaine many things. But Sir, omitting this, I entreat you to shewe mee the vse of these Ta∣bles which you haue shewed me. Sur. The vse is very plain & easie: propoūd you a nūber of perches,The vse of the former Tables. the lēgth & bredth of a groūd. Bay. If a péece of ground be in length fiftie two Perches, and in bredth twenty sixe, where, and how shall I finde the content in the Tables? Sur. Looke the third Table, the fourth part of the Table, in the vpper ranke, whereof in the third Collum, you shall finde 52. then looke in the first Collum for 26. then referre your finger and eye towards the right hand, till you come right vnder 52. and that square answeres the con∣tent to be thus
Bay. What meane you by making the figures in the angles of the square? Sur. Because the 4. angles doe demonstrate the acres & parts of an acre. The vpper angle on the left hand sheweth the Acres, the vpper angle on the right hand, the roodes; the lower angle on the left hand, the day works, and the lower angle on the right hand, the odde perches. Bay. This is very easie. But I sée there are no figures in the 2. angles on the right hand, nei∣ther aboue nor below. Sur. When it falleth so out, that there are none of the denominations found in the num∣ber, then his place is left blanke. Bay. Then this abouesaid quantitie is 8. acre and 5. day-works, which is twenty perches, and twenty perches is ½ Roode. Sur. You are right. Bay. Then if the number of perches bee lesse, I must seeke them in the lesser Tables; if grea∣ter, in the greater. Sur. You must do so. Bay. Yet there resteth one scruple in my mind, which if it should happen before I bee resolued, would breed a great doubt, and therefore I am bold to aske it. That is, if the length of a ground be more perches, then is expressed in any of the Tables, how shall I find it, when no Ta∣ble reacheth so farre?How to finde the quantity, when the number of perches ex∣ceede any table in the booke. Sur. You doe well to cast all doubts. If the length be more then the tables will yeeld, where∣of indeed the most is foure score perches: Take first 80. perches out of the whole summe, and then seeking the bredth in the Table as before is shewed, you shall finde the content of that part. Then if the bredth be more then the remanent of
the length let the bredth bee the length, and the remanent of the length, the bredth. And seeke them likewise in the Tables, and what ariseth of both the numbers, adde together: As for example: A ground is 119. perches in length, and 67. in bredth: the whole length is not in the Tables to bee found▪ then I find 80. and that is the length, and 67. the bredth, which the Table sheweth to be 33-2-0-0. There remaineth of the whole length 39. which is a lesser number then the bredth: therefore I make 39. the bredth, and 67. the length, which the Table sheweth to bee 16. 1-3-1. which added to the first number 33-2-0-0. maketh in the whole 49-3-3-1. Bay. I sée, this Table will serue for the finding of the quantitie of any summe, and I doe vnder∣stand it well. But I pray you what Table is that you haue here? Sur. A necessarie Table for some purposes. It sheweth how to lay out a iust Acre of land, the length, or bredth being giuen. Bay. Indéede it is a necessarie Table: for euery man can not vpon the suddaine: for I take, it is very hard without Arithmeticke, to lay out a iust acre to euery length or bredth. Sur. This can indeed hardly be done by gesse, it requireth arte. Bay. This is the Table, I pray you shew me the vse of it.
Bredth.   Length of an Acre. Perches broade.   Perches long, and their parts. Feete, & their parts. 1   160   2   80   3   53 ¼ 1 ½ 4   40   5   32   6   26 ½ 3 7   22 ¾ 1 11/12 8   20   9   17 ¾ 6 10   16   11   14 ½ 9 12   13 ¼ 1 ½ 13   12 ¼ 1 14   11 ¼ 3 15   10 ½ 3 16   10   17   9 ¼ 2 /12 18   8 ¾ 1 19   8 ¼ 3 20   8   Bredth.   Length of an Acre. Perches broad.   Perches long, & their parts. Feete, & their parts. 21   7 ½ 2 2/12 22   7 ¼ /12 23   6 ¾ 3 2/12 24   6 ½ 2 8/12 25   6 ¼ 2 6/12 26   6 2 7/12 27   5 ¾ 3 28   5 ½ 3 29   5 ½ 4/12 30   5 ¼ 4/12 31   5 2 7/12 32   5   33   4 ¾ 1 8/12 34   4 ½ 3 4/12 35   4 ½ 1 2/12 36   4 ¼ 3 2/12 37   4 ¼ 1 3/12 38   4 3 5/12 39   4 1 8/12 40   4  
Bredth.   Length of an Acre. Perches broade.   Perches long, and their parts. Feete, & their parts. 41   3 ¾ 2 7/12 42   3 ¾ 1 ⅓ 43   3 ½ 3 /12 44   3 ½ 2 ¼ 45   3 ½ 11/12 46   3 ¼ 3 7/12 47   3 ¼ 2 ½ 48   3 ¼ 1 ⅓ 49   3 ¼ ¼ 50   3 3 1/6 51   3 2 ¼ 52   3 1 ¼ 53   3 ⅓ 54   2 ¾ 3 3/12 55   2 ¾ 2 /12 56   2 ¾ 1 9/12 57   2 /4 11/12 58   2 /4 1/6 59   2 ½ 3 5/12 60   2 ½ 2 ⅔ Bredth.   Length of an Acr▪ Perches broade.   Perches long, and their parts. Feete, & their parts. 61   2 ½ 2 1/6 62   2 ½ 1 ⅓ 63   2 ½ 2/3 64   2 ½   65   2 ¼ 3 5/12 66   2 ¼ 2 1/15 67   2 ¼ 2 ¼ 68   2 ¼ 1 2/3 69   2 ¼ 1 1/6 70   2 ¼ 7/12 71   2 ¼ 1/12 72   2 3 ⅔ 7   2 3 ¼ 74   2 2 ⅔ 75   2 2 2/6 76   2 1 ⅔ 77   2 1 ⅓ 78   2 11/12 79   2 ⅓ 80   2  
Sur. The vse of this Table is onely to bee re∣quired, when a man is suddenly to set foorth an acre of land lymited in length or bredth, how far it shall extend. As for example. There is a peece of land containing many acres, and there are to be set out of this 1 2, 3.4. or more acres. First, the length must be considered. If the length be 77. perches: finde that in the first Collum of the Table, and right against it, you shall finde the bredth to be two perches, 1. foot, 4. inches, which maketh an acre. Bay. But where you say, I shall finde the length in the first Collum of the Table, it is in the head of the Collum noted for the bredth. Sur. It is so in deed: for that Collum may bee reputed to containe both the length and bredth. Bay. How can that be? Sur. Vntill the bredth do exceed the length, it may be saide the Collum of bredth. But when the bredth surmounteth the length, the length may be said the bredth. Bay. I vnderstand you: reason will obserue that, without serious instruction. But this Ta∣ble, I see, extendeth but to the length and bredth of one acre: if a man bee occasioned to lay out more, he is as farre to seeke, as if he had no Table at all. Sur. Not so: for if you obserue it, you are to double, treble or quadreble, the length or bredth, as you haue occasion. As for example:How to lay out many acres by the former Ta∣ble. If you would lay out 3. Acres, and admit your length be 48. perches, which to make one Acre, is to haue in bredth 3. perches, and a quarter, 1. foote and foure inches, which three perches, ¼ 1. foote, and ⅓ being taken three times, make nine perches, ¾ and foure foote. And thus of
length and bredth, how many Acres so euer are to be set out. Bay. I see in déed, this Table may serue by due obseruation for the laying out of any quantitie. But now Sir, there is one thing which wil breed some difficulty:Perches dy∣uers in di∣uers Coun∣treys. for the difference of the quantities of Acres, is great in diuers Countries, by the custome of the Countryes▪ for by the custome of some Countryes, their measure is 24. foote to the Pole, in some 20. in some 18. and yet the statute alloweth onely 16 ½ foote. Sur. You say truely. Yet, when a Surueyor vn∣dertaketh to lay out the land in any of these, he is to measure it by the standard chaine: that is, by the chaine of 16 ½ foote. Bay. But the Country people, peraduenture will be obstinate, & will haue the custome mea∣sure, because they will haue the content of their land seeme the lesse: and so shall they rent their ground the more easily, hauing it by the greater measure. Sur. That is but a conceit that they shal haue it the cheaper: for admit that an acre were as big as the Cornish acre,A Cornish Acre. neere 140. statute Acres: will any man thinke a Lord or his officers so simple as to grant the same, because it hath but the name of an acre, as he would let the statute Acre? It is nothing to the Lord what measure they take:The great or small mea∣sure all one to the Lords. ood mea∣sure. for he must, & will apportion the price, according to the quantity and qualitie, bee the Acre great or little. Bay. But woods are alwayes measured with the Pole of 18. foote. Sur. It is as the Buyer and Seller agreeth: for there is no such matter decreed by any statute, neither is any bound of necessitie.
Bay. Why is it then in vse Sur. I take it,Why woods are measu∣red with the 18 foote pole.  they are they that are thus measured for  they haue in many places▪ sundry void places & glles, wherein groweth little or no wood, or very thin. And to supply these defects, the buyer claymeth this supply by measure. Bay. The difference is but a foote, and ½ in a pole, which is nothing. Sur. Yes, it is some thing,Great diffe∣rence be∣tweene the 18. and 16 ½ pole. Whence an Acre taketh name. for in euery 5 ½ Acre, it gayneth aboue an Acre▪ Bay. So might I haue béene deceiued. For truely, I did not thinke it had gotten so much. But I pray whence is the word Acre deriued? Sur. As I take it, from the Latine word, Actus. A deede: a dayes worke of a plowe, in tilling the ground. Bay. It may be so. For a plow will ayre an Acre a day. Sur. We reade in 1. Sam. 14.14. that halfe an Acre of land was as much as 2. oxen could plow; And that is it which the Burgundians; & others in France doe call Iournaux, which I take, is as much as Ingerum in Latine, which containeth as much, as two Oxen or Horse can till in a day: in length 240. foote, and in bredth 120. which seemeth neere to agree with our Acre. Bay. We haue 4. or 5. horses, or 2 or 3. yoke of Oxen to till an Acre a day, where the former Ingerum hath but 2. But the French haue ano∣ther kinde of Acre, which they call an Arpent,An Arpent, or French Acre. which amongst them differeth in quantity, as ours doe differ in seuerall kindes of Poles: And their Arpent is 100. Pole, howsoeuer the Poles do differ. One Pole they haue, which containeth 22. foote, and that is called The Kings Arpent,The kings Arpent.
and vsed most in measuring of : another of 20 foote, another of 19 ⅓ foote, another of 18. foote. So that in dde, their Arpent doth little differ in his seuerall quantitie, from our Acre. Sur. I obserue one thing by the way, because you speake of the Kings Arpent in France, and o∣ther measures there. I haue seene in ancient Re∣cords, and bookes of Suruey of great antiquitie, which doe shewe, that the Lords demeisnes were measured with a Pole of 20. foote, which was cal∣led maior mensura,Maior & minor men∣sura. & the customary by a Pole, cal∣led mensura minor: which I take to bee but 16 8/2 foote, though in some places the Tenants claime the 18. foote Pole. Bay. Then, let me aske you another question: You shall shortly come into a Mannor of my Land-lords, where the Copyes doe speake of an Acre ware, or warr: which I neuer could finde, or heare what it truely meant, nor what quanti∣ty it containeth. But the Tenants make good vse, in their conceites, of the name: for vnder that title, they will carry away 2.3.6.10. Acres, though they lie in 20. parcels, it is all but an Acre warr: and yet I haue séene some, vnder that title not 3. Roodes of ordinary measure. Howe comes it to passe, thinke you? Sur. To speake truely, I cannot precisely tell you: for I haue seene the like, especially in Suff. Norff. and Essex: But as I coniecture, it is a measu∣red acre, as an Acre by warrant. Acre warre, an approued Acre: and the true sence being lost by time, they make it like a finger of waxe, to drawe it more or lesse, as will best serue their purpose. Bay. I haue also séene Land, vnder the name of Molland,Molland. and I haue heard much disputation about the etimon of the word: Some holde it to
be de Mollendo, of custome grinding at the Lords mill. Some otherwise, and leaue it vn∣certaine. Sur. There is no difficultie in it:Molland and Fenland contrary. for Molland is vp-land, or high ground, and the contrary is Fenland, low groūd, a matter ordinary, where they vse to distinguish betweene these two kindes. But we will leaue these ambiguous words, and so take my leaue, and betake me to my taske. Bay. Sir, I will not be troublesome vnto you: onely, when you haue cast vp your particulars, and finished your businesse of this Suruey, I wil bee bold to trouble you againe, to sée what euery man holdeth, and the value both of the customa∣ry leased lands, and the Lords demaynes. May I be so bold? Sur. It is a thing which I seldome consent vn∣to; for I must tell you this,A Surueyor must be se∣cret for his Lord. he is no true Surueyor for the Lord, that will make the same knowne to strangers. I haue vndertaken the busines for the Lord, not for strangers: And as he putteth me in trust, so will I bee secret in these things, & there∣fore I pray you in this pardon me. Bay. You shewe me reason, and I was too rash. But by your leaue, how shall the Iurie giue their allowance to your doings (as you say, you will acquaint them with them) vnlesse you deliuer euery particular playnly? Sur. You must thinke, there are some things which may be publique, as the names of grounds, the owners, their estates, buts, boūds, & such like, & their answers to the Articles; And some things priuate, & to be concealed, as the quantities, and supposed yeerely values. These are for the Lord. Bay. I thought I should haue seene the whole method of your collections and obseruations, to the end, that seeing I haue waded thus farre in∣to
the Art, I might be somewhat instructed, how to haue marshialed and ingrossed my Booke, when such a worke were done. Sur. Euery man in that case, may vse his owne method: yet if you bee desirous to see an exact course, in that kinde, I must referre you to the most commendable worke of Master Valentine Leigh,M. Leas booke of Surueying. whom in that if you imitate, you shal tread the right way to the marke. Bay. Then, I shall onely rema thankefull vnto you, for your patience, and puyn: and bee studious euermore, to doe you any seruice. Sur. I thanke you, I haue a desire to haue some communication with you, when I haue past ouer this little worke in hand. Bay. Willingly, Sir, I will giue my diligent attendance. But I pray you, Sir, in what es∣pecially do you purpose to conferre wih me? to pose me, I feare, whether I haue forgotten that you taught me. Sur. Not so: but you being Bayly of this Man∣nor (about which I haue, as you see, taken a seri∣ous perambulation) haue not, as I perswade me, bene so carefull & prouident for the Lords profit, as you may: for there bee diuers grounds, which good and industrious husbandry would be much bettered, as I will tell you further, at our next lea∣surable meeting. For this time, fare you well. The end of the fourth Booke.
The Surueyors Dialogue, shewing the different natures of grounds, how they may be im∣ployed, how they may be bettered, reformed, and amended. The fifth Booke. Bai. I Perceiue, Sir, you are now at some lea∣sure, you are walking abroad to take the ayre, after your long and tedious sitting, & I thinke indéed you are wearie. Sur. I am somewhat wearie: but a man that vn∣dertaketh a businesse, must apply it, and not be wea∣rie, or at least, not to seeme to be so. Bai. But me thinkes, you apply it too hard, you might sometimes ease you, and giue your selfe to some game for recreation. Sur. They that are idle, may take their pleasures in gaming:Labour that lawfully gets is a game of delight. but such as are called to liue by their la∣bors, and haue a delight therin, & (as all men ought) take pleasure, and thinke it a pleasing sport, to get meanes by their lawfull labors to liue. Bai. You say truth indéed: for the old Prouerbe is, Dulcis labor cum lucro. But I pray you, whither walke you? Sur. Into this next peece of ground. Bai. Nay, it is an ill ground to walke in: for it is full of bogges, a very moorish plot, ouercome with wéedes, and indeed, is of no vse. Sur. I therefore go to see it, and worthily to at∣tach you the Lords Baily, of remisnesse & negligent looking vnto the Lords profit, suffering such a peece of ground as this, to lye idle and waste, and to foster
nothing but bogges, Sedges, Flagges, Rushes, and such superfluous and noysome weedes: where, if it were duly drained, and carefully husbanded, it would make good meddow in short time. Bayly. I thinke that impossible: for there be many such plots you see in this leuell, and in many mens occupations, and some of them thinke them∣selues good husbands, I can tell you: and they sée, that it is a matter of difficulty and charge, and ther∣fore they thinke, and so do I, that it is to no purpose to begin to amend it. Sur. I thinke they haue more land, then they, or you haue experience how to conuert to best vse, they their owne, and you your Lords. Bayly. If you be so skilfull, I pray tell me for the Lords profite, how it may be amended. Sur. If you be ignorant how to amend it, and simply desire to learne, it were a fault in me to con∣ceale from you the meanes how to do it. But if you be carelesse or wilfull, it were good to leaue you in your ignorance, and to informe the Lord of your vn∣fitnesse, that a more skilfull might take the place. Bayly. That is the woorst that you can do. But I trust I may be a Bayly good inough, & yet want one part of that, which my place requireth to per∣form. Sur. Euen as well as a horse may be said to trauell well inough, and yet lacke one legge. Bai. I would be sorie, that comparison should hold: for than I could not but confesse, that I were a same officer, as there be in other kinds, uen of your owne profession many. But, I am not onely not wilful, but I am willing to learne: and I do not thinke any man so absolute in his place and calling, but he may learne some point of his function, if at least he will confesse his owne imperfections.Al men may learne.
Sur. Whether he verbally confesse them or not, the execution will bewray them, and the world will obserue them in him. And therefore it behooueth all such as vndertake, and enter into any office or fun∣ction, to examine the duties appertaining to such an office: and finding his fitnesse or vnfitnesse, to per∣forme it: so to leaue or take, (though few stagger at any:) If his abilitie be weake, reason and duty may moue him to seeke expedient knowledge, lest he shame himselfe, and slander the place he is in. And therefore I wish you to aske aduice, not onely in this case, but in all other belonging to your charge. For as it is commendable to know more and more: so is it no shame to aske often. Bay. I pray you then tell me, Sir, how must this péece of ground be handled, to be made meddow (as you say it will be made) or good pasture. Sur. It must be drained. Bayly. If that be all, I thinke, I can say it is to little purpose: for I haue made trenches to that end, as you may sée where and how. But it be∣came little or nothing the better, and therefore I thinke, cost will be but cast away vpon it. Sur. It is a true Prouerbe:Ignorance enemy to art Ignorance is an enemy to art and experience. What you did, it may be, you had good will to do the Lord seruice in it: but the course you tooke, was not in the right kind. It is not enough to make such ditches, as appeareth you haue done, they are too few & too wide. Neither did you rightly obserue the fall of the water. Baylie. That were hard to be done in such a place as this, where the water hath no fall at all, neither is ye water séene much, as you sée, but it is the moist∣nes of the earth, that arres the land. Sur. But the moisture comes by water, and the water is swallowed vp in this spunge ground, and
lyes vnseene: ye if you marke it well, you may ob∣serue, which way it reles: for as you see, though this plot of ground be very leuell in apparence, yet if it were tried by a true leuell, it would be found decli∣ning towards yonder forlorne brooke, which you see is stop vp with weedes, that i permitteth not the water conuenient passe. Therefore the first worke is, to rid the sewer or chiefe water-course, and then shall you see, that the grounds neere the cleansed brooke, will become more drie, by the moisture soking into the sewer: then make your other draines, vsing dis∣cretion therein, namely, in cutting them streight, from the most boggie places, to the maine brooke, euery of them as it were paralelly: then cut you some other draines sloping, which may carry the water in∣to these first draines, which againe will conuey it into the maine. Bayly. You see the ditches that I made, they were broade enough and deepe, fit to conuey much water, yet they did no good: can you prescribe a better forme▪ Sur. Your ditches, for the forme, were too broad, and (as it seemes) too deepe, and that makes the wa∣ter to stand in them, and being broad aboue, and narrow in the bottome, makes the loose earth to fall in and choake the ditch. But if you will make profita∣ble draines, you must first obserue, how the water will runne in them: for so will it appeare presently, and to make them as narrow aboue, as at the bot∣tome, which at the most must not be aboue one foot and a halfe broad, and the crust of the earth will hold, that the earth fall not in againe. So will it in short time make it appeare, that the moisture will decay, and the grounds become more drie, and as it becomes, freed of the superfluous moisture: so wil the weedes that are nourished by it, beginne
to wither, as they are depriued of their nouriture, which is too much water, which breedeth too much cold:Cold ground breedes weedes. and too much cold is the life of such weeds as increase in this ground: and therefore the weedes should be often cut downe in the spring time, and by that meanes they will consume, and better grasse come in their steade: and the better, if cattle feed the ground, vpon the draining, as bare as may be. Bayly. But the raines you speake of, may be dangerous for cattle, especially for shéepe and lambes. Sur. Not, if they be kept alwaies cleansed, and open, that sheepe and cattle may see them:Bridges ouer draines. for the bigger sort may steppe ouer them, and the lesser may haue little bridges of the same crust, by vndermining the earth some three or foure foote, that the water may passe vnder. Bail. Indéed, if the crust of the earth will hold it, this course is necessary. But there is much land in England lost for want of draining, as the Fennes and low grounds in Lincoln-shire, Cambridg-shire,The Fennes. Northfolke, and other places, which I did thinke impossible euer to be made dry▪ by the art or indu∣stry of man. And yet as I heare, much of it is made lately firme ground,Captaine Lo∣uell. M. William Englebert. by the skill of one Captaine Lo∣uell, and by M. William Englebert an excellent In∣genor. And truly it is much to their owne commen∣dation, and to the common good of the inhabitants néere. But these grounds are not drained by such meanes as you speake of. Sur. Indeed, the draines are of vnlike quantitie, but like in qualitie: one and the same rule of reason doth worke both the one and the other. But to say truly vnto thee, the people of those countries (espe∣cially
the poorer sort) where this kind of publike be∣nefite is thus gotten, had rather haue the want by their Fathers error, then to reape good, and more plenty by other mens art and charge. And in their conceits they had rather catch a Pike, then feede an Oxe. Bayly. They are either very vnwise, or very wilful. But (no doubt) authority is aboue such coun∣try wilfulnesse, and doth or may inioyne them, for the common weale, to consent and yeeld all ayde in the businesse. But if they will needes fish and foole, and refuse rich reléefe, we will leaue them to their wils, till reason in themselues, or compulsion bring them to a more generall desire of so great a blessing. Sur. Let it be so: What Alders are in the next ground? Baylie. They are the Lords too, Sir: but the ground is so rotten, that no cattle can féed in it. Sur. The Alder treee enemy to al groundsThe Alder tree is enemy to all grounds where it growes: for the root thereof is of that nature, that it draweth to it so much moisture to nourish it selfe, as the ground neere it, is good for no other vse. Baily. Do you thinke this ground would be good, if the trées were gone? Sur. Yes: for commonly the ground is good e∣nough of it selfe, onely it is impaired by this kind of wooe: and therefore if the cause were taken away, the effect would die. Bayly. Then will I cause them to be stocked vp. Sur. Nay, first it behooueth you to consider, whether it be expedient or not: for although this tree be not friendly to pasture, meddow, or arable land,
yet it yeelds her due commodity too, without whose ayde, in some places where other wood is scant,The Aldr necessary for many purpo∣ses. men can hardly husband their lands without this. For of it they make many necessary implements of husban∣drie, as Ladders, Rayles, Hop poles, Plow-stuffe, and Handles for many tooles, besides fiering. Bayly. If it be so commodious, it is not onely not good to stocke them, but expedient to cherish them, and where none are, to plant. Sur. There is great difference betweene neces∣sitie and the super abundance of euery necessarie.Necessity a cōmander. For want is a great commander, & inforceth oftentimes: and in many places they desire and search for that, which will in the time of plentie meerely neglecteth. And therefore where none of this kind of wood groweth, (the place destitute of other meanes, and fit for this kind of commoditie) wil may be forced to giue place to occasion: as in other things. Bayly. I haue heard, that this kind of wood is also good to make the foundations of buildings, in riuers, fennes, and standing waters, as also piles for many purposes in moorish and wet grounds. Sur. It is true: this kind of wood is of greater continuance in watry places, then any other timber:Alder good to make piles for it is obserued, that in these places it seldome or neuer rots. Bayly. It loued the water and moisture well in growing, and therefore it brooketh it the better, being laid in it.Firre tree lien in the ground since the floud. But I thinke the Firre-tree is much or the same nature: for I haue seene infinite many of thm, taken out of he earth in a moorish ground in Shropshire, betweene the Lordships of Owestry,
and Elsemere, which (as is supposed) haue lien in the moist earth euer since the Floud, and being daly taken vp, the people make walking-staues & pikes of them, firme and strong, and vse the chips in stead of candles in poore houses: so fat is the wood to this day, and the smell also strong and swéet. Sur. I know the place well, where I saw pales made of an Oke taken out of the same ground, of the same continuance, firme and strong, blacke as Ibony, and might haue fitly bene employed to better vses: and I take it, that most wood will last long vnder the earth, where it neuer taketh the open ayre. But the wood now most in vse for the purposes abouesaid, is Alder and Elme. Bayly. May a man sow the séedes of the Alder? Sur. Alder hath no seede.It beareth a kind of seed, yet some haue af∣firmed the contrarie. But the seeds will hardly grow by art, though by nature they may. The branches of the tree and the rootes, are aptest to grow, if they be set so, as the water & moisture may be aboue the plant: for it delighteth only in the moistest grounds. Is not this next close the Lords, called Broad-med∣dow? Bayly. It is for I perceiue you haue a good me∣mory being but once, and to long since, vpon the ground. Sur. It is most necessary for a Surueyor to remē∣ber what he hath obserued, and to consider well the natures and qualities of all kinds of grounds, and to informe the Lord, of the meanes how to better his e∣state by lawfull meanes, especially in bettering his own demeisnes. So shall he the lesse need to surcharge his tenants by vncharitable exactions. And foras∣much as of all other grounds,Meddowes. none are (of their own nature) so profitable, and lesse chargeable, as med∣dow grounds, which are alwaies readie to benefite
the owner, summer and winter, they especially are to be regarded. Bail. That is true indéede, and peraduenture it take the name of the readinesse: for we call it in Latine Pratum, as if it were semper paratum, either with the fleeze for ay, or with the pasture to féede:Pratum, quasi sem∣per paratū▪ and this meddow wherein now we are, is the best meddow that I know: and I thinke, for swéetnesse and burden, there is not a better in England. Sur. You do well to aduance the credite of the Lords land, and you speake, I thinke, as you con∣ceiue, because you are not acquainted with the med∣dowes, vpon Due-banke, in Tan Deane,Best med∣dowes in En∣gland. vpon Sea∣uern-side, Allermore, the Lords meddow, in Crediton, and the meddowes about the Welch-poole, and many other places, too tedious to recite now. Bai. These he like are made so good by art, but naturally, I thinke, this may match the best of them. Sur. Indeed, meddowes very meane by nature, may be made excellent by charge: but they will de∣cay, vnlesse they be alwaies releeued. But these that I speake of, require little or no helpe at the owners hand, onely the ayde of these riuers ouerflowing, do feed them fat, giues great burden, and very sweet. Bayly. These yearely ouerflowings of fat wa∣ters after flouds, no doubt, are very beneficiall,Riuers ouer∣flowing good as appeareth by the annale and yearely ouerflowing of the riuer Nilus in Egypt,Nilus in E∣gypt, Ios. 3.15. which maketh the adiacent grounds so fat and fruitfull, as they be famous through the world for their fertility, and was al∣lotted to Iosephs brethren in Egypt. Sur. You speake of a matter wonderfull in the conceits of some, that the riuer should so ouerflow in the summer, and yet it neuer raines in those parts at any time of the yeare.
Bai. So I haue heard indeede: and that the flouds grow in the heate of the yeere about haruest, betwéene Iulie, and September, with the snowe melting, that falls in the winter time, among the Mountaines. Sur. The Lauent and the Leame.We haue in England matter more strange, as the riuer neere Chichester in Sussex, called the La∣uent, which in the winter is drie, and in the driest Summer, fll to her banckes: So is the Leam, a riuer in Barkeshire, neere Leambourn. Baily That is strange indéede: one studious in naturall Philosophie, could tell the cause of this. Sur. I take it to bee, because they are only fed with springs, which runne only, when springs are at the highest. And that also is the reason, why many bournes breake out of the earth in sundry places,Bournes. as we may reade it hath done somtimes neere Mergae, in Hartfordshire, corruptly called Market, and neere Croydon in Surrie, neere Patcham in Sussex, and in many other places in this Realme: which breaketh foorth suddenly out of the driest hills, in Sum∣mer. Bay. Water smel∣ling like vio∣lets.Because you speake of Angleton, I can assure you, there is a Well, that sometimes yeldeth water, which when you wash your hands with, it smelleth like violets. Some would (no doubt) giue much for such excellent water. Sur. Though the smell be sweete, I hold not the water so wholesome: for we doubt it is in it selfe, Le∣uis putredo,Leuis pu∣tredo. a kind of light putrifaction, whih pas∣sing lightly by the sence of smelling, deceiueth the sence, which if it tooke a more serious note of it, would find t a kind of stincke: as your purest muske and Cuet,Sence decei∣ued. the more neerer the sence it commeth, and the more the sce chargeth it selfe with the
whole sent, the more lothsome it will prooue. But these are things comming into our talke by the way: let vs returne to our matter of meddowes, the cause of whose goodnes is the soyle, and ouerflowing, with the most muddy water. Bay. No doubt,Boggie grounds helps by ouerflow∣ing. it is an admirable helpe vnto them: nay, I by small experience that I haue found, can tell you a pretie paradoxe, how say you to this? Boggy and spungy ground, whereof we discoursed before, though in it owne nature it be too moist, yet, if it be ouerflowed with water often, it wil settle and become firme: which howsoeuer in my poore vnderstanding, it should seeme opposite to reason, that water should helpe watery ground, yet experi∣ence findeth it so. Sur. All ouerflowing waters doe bring a slymy and fat substance with them, and leaue it behind them: which together with the working of the wa∣ter, thorowe the spungie ground you speake of, worketh that effect in all grounds, where it comes. Bai. But water cannot be brought into all kinds of boggy grounds, nor into all kinds of med∣dowes. Sur. No, for there are two sorts of meddowes,Two sorts of meddowes. lowe & moist, and vpland, and dry meddowes, of these kinds the lowe is commonly the best: because they are aptest to receiue these falling and swelling waters, which for the most part brings fatnes with it: and besides, it moistneth the ground, and makes the grasse to growe cheerefull: yet howsoeuer fat & fruitefull they be, continuall moouing yeerely with∣out intermission, may weaken them and impaire their goodnes, and will require some helpe, vnlesse they be such meddowes as I recommended vnto you ye while, that are so fed with fat ouerflowing wa∣ters,
as do still maintaine them in strength. Bai. Then must the vpland meddow, by often and continuall sheering, needes decay. Sur. The vpland meddowes haue but the name of meddowes:Vpland med∣dowes haue but the name for indeed, they are but the best pa∣sture grounds, laid for hay. And to distinguish be∣tweene that kind of meddow and pasture ground, or betweene pasture and arable, is friuolous: for that kind of meddow is most properly pasture, and all pa∣sture grounds may be tilled. For when we say arable, it is as much,Hard to di∣stinguish grounds. as if we said, it is subiect to the plow, or land which may be plowed: and why then may not a man say, that which is now pasture, is arable? that is, conuenient to be tilled. And on the contrarie, that which is now tilled, may be pasturable: namely, apt to graze, and to feede cattle? Bai. You prooue, that it is superfluous in manner, to distinguish the qualities of grounds. Sur. I confesse, a Surueyor may note the quality of euery kind, as he findeth it in the time of his per∣ambulation and view. But peraduenture, the next yeere, he that comes to distinguish them, may en∣ter them cleane contrarie to the former. And there∣fore it is not amisse, in all such entries, to adde the word (now:) as to say, now tilled, or now pasture, now vsed for meddow: vnlesse it be low meddow al∣wayes mowne. But he that shall enter a peece of vp∣land ground, (though it be sometimes mowne) vn∣der the name of meddow, erreth in his entry. But for that, let all men follow their owne fancies. But be∣cause we speake of vpland meddowes, we will ac∣cept all mowable grounds in that sence.Meddow of different na∣tures. And of such I will first speake. They are either of a clay soile, and so naturally fat, or stiffe: or a sandy earth inriched
and made fat by industrie: and both of these by mouing yearely without intermission, and supply of helpe, may be so impaired, as it will yeeld little be∣nefite to the owner. The nature therefore of euery ground must be considered: for the vpland and high ground, may be also watrie, and consequently cold and moist, which kind of grounds are generally clay: for a sandy and grauelly ground lying high, and de∣pending, is seldome or neuer found moist by nature, but drie, and consequently hot. So that all vpland grounds are commonly either too cold and moist, o too hot and drie: either of which must haue his seue∣rall helpe. For as the constitution of a mans bodie, is found by the effects of fatnesse, leanenesse, heate and cold: So do the earths discouer their natures by their fruite, which nature causeth them to bring foorth in infinite kinds. The cold and watry grounds yeeld long, but foure and vnprofitable grasse, rushes, and rancke Mosse: which kind of ground must be cured, if need require, with draines, but commonly these grounds are of clay: and clay will neuer giue way, or euacuation to the water, because the ground is hard and stiffe, contrarie to the open and spungy ground, which is thin and open. And therefore the hottest chalk or lime, is best to kill the foure grasse, & vnpro∣fitable mosse. So is cole-dust ashes, & chimney foote, if sufficient quantity could be gotten: & after these things thus laid, it is expediēt to giue it a tilth or two, & then to let it lie againe, if it be to be vsed for med∣dow or pasture. And for the other grounds which are hot and drie by nature, the contrary is to be vsed, by vsing meanes to coole the heate; and to moisten the drinesse: and that i by bestowing some fat and slimy Marle vpon them, which will much cherish & reuiue the parched grasse, and kill the hungry mosse, that groweth by the drinesse of the , as a scurfe or
tetter on the body, by the heate that proceedeth of a salt humor. The natures of these two kindes of grounds are also found out, whether they be cold & moist, or hot, and drie, by the quantitie, and quali∣tie of their fruits, as the seasons of the yeere be drie or moist: for that ground that groweth best in a moist yeere,Clay ground. is hot and drie. The clay ground in a moist yeere (if it be not too moist) may be also com∣forted, because in too drie a yeere, the clay becom∣meth so strongly bound, that the tender grasse can hardly make way, through the obdurate earth: whereas moderate moisture molifieth the same, cherisheth the roote, and giues way for the grasse: and if it haue too much moisture, it becommeth so slimie, and the rootes so drenched, as it turneth the grasse into a spirie kind, and that but short, and by the cold that commeth of the too much moisture, it increaseth rushes aboundantly, and thicke mosse: So that it appeareth, that the seasons of the yeere doe either helpe or hinder the increase of all kinds of grounds: which the art or industry of man cannot preuent.Helpes inten∣ded some∣times hinder. For many times the helpes, that man vseth to assist and helpe nature, doe binder it: as where compost and stable soile is layd vpon a drie ground, reserued for grasse, if a drie yeere followe, the heate of the soile and the drinesse of the yeere, doe so im∣pouerish the grasse, that it yeeldeth the owner lesse increase, then if he had bestowed no soile at all: yet men ought not to be remisse, in soiling their lands: for if it preuaile not in one yeere, they shall find it at another time very profitable:Bringing of street water into grounds profitable. and for all seasons, I perswade men to make meanes, where it may bee done, to induce out of streetes, lands, wayes, and ditches, all the water, that by some extraordinarie raine passeth through them, into their grounds, by making some little dam, or barre to drawe them in∣to
to their grounds: for the matter which this water bringeth with it, is commonly so rich and fat, as it yeeldeth a maruailous refection to all the grounds, high or lowe, into which it may be brought: which kind of husbandry is much vsed in Somerset, Deuon & Cornwall, to their admirable aduantage, and in some other place heere, and there, but not so generally, as in prouidence men might. Bay. This is a good course, no doubt, in places where it may be put in execution: but as you say, all men are not so prouident, and painefull, which indéede is a great fault, and wherein I my selfe, I confesse, haue béene culpable: but I will be more carefull aswell in that, as in other things, whereof you haue put me in minde. And truly I thinke, there is much profit▪ wilfully lost in many places by negligence, want of skill, and sparing of some small charge. You haue hitherunto spoken only of vpland meddowe grounds: but you deuided med∣dowes into two sorts: what say you to the second, namely lowe meddowes? for I haue seene and ob∣serued as great defects in them, by reason of their too often moouing without rest, as may require some consideration how to repaire them: for some of these grounds are as much annoyd by too much moisture, as the vpland with the want of it. Sur. For the too much moisture, if it be but in the winter season,How water doth good to meddowes. and continue but vntill the mid∣dle or end of Aprill, it doth not only no harme, but good: for if you marke and obserue it well, you sel∣dome or neuer see bogges, where the water ouer∣flowes, and stands in the winter time. But if it be more permanent, and of longer stay, there must be meanes vsed for the euacuation: for in many places you may perceiue certaine lowe places in meddowe grounds, where if the water once take a standing, it
will cause the ground to sinke more and more, and therefore that kind of water must be vented betimes: for otherwise it killeth the grasse,Water, ow it may be hurtfull to grounds. & makes the place bare in a drie summer, when the water is gone, or else it will cause such a coldnesse to the earth, as it will bring foorth more rushes then grasse. And therefore it must be a principall care, to haue all riuers, sewers, and water draines, well cleansed and scoured, that vpon occasion, when time requireth, when you will conuey the water from the meddowes, it may haue a due current. Bay. But estoples of water courses, do in some places grow by such meanes, as one priuate man or two cannot by force or discretion make remedy. As when sewers be common, sometime betwéene Lordship  Lordship, parish and prish, or betwéene a multitude▪ among whom it is alwaies séene, some wil be peruerse, and wilful▪ and hinder the best pub∣like action that is, though the doing of it be neuer so profitable to themselues, and the omitting, hin∣drance. Besides this▪ you see vpon diuers streame Water-mils,Mils of too high a pitch, pen the water. which by reason of their high pitch, bat backe the water that shuld haue cleere passe: so that sondry mens grounds are drowned, euen vntill, and at the time of haying. And for the most part, thes mils do appertaine to great persons, who rather then they will lose a penny o their profite, will ha∣zard the losse of a pound to poore men. What reme∣die is these for any of these mischiefes? Sur. For euery of them the lawe hath prouided remedie. And the greatest hindrance is either neg∣lect or feare of complaine 2▪ and upon complaint in places, and to persons appointed to reforme neg∣lect of iustice to be executed,  or law-dayes,
generall Sessions, Commissioners of Sewers, and acti∣ons at the common Law, are prouided to right these wrongs: therefore speake no more of this, as mat∣ter of impeachment of the grounds, which of them∣selues are naturally good or euill. But rather seeke the meanes to better and helpe the ground, which, as you obiect, is weakned by oftē cutting.How to a∣mend weak∣ned meddow When a man obserueth such decay in his meddowe, let it lie some few yeeres to pasture, and be eaten very lowe, it will procure some heate againe. If not, take the fattest earth that may be gotten, & let it lie a yeere if you can, to dissolue, and when it is drie and will crumble small, mingle it with good and well fatted dung, and lay them a while in a heape, vntill they be sufficiently incorporated, which will bee in one winter, then carrie it into your meddowe about the beginning of March, or before, and then cast it a∣broad vpon the meddowes, not too thicke, nor the clods too great, it will reuiue the weakned mould, and make the grasse spring againe very freshly. Bai. I thinke this bee good also for barraine pasture. Sur. It is very excellent for pasture, for hee that will bestowe the cost, shall find his recompence in short time. Bayly. I see in some meddowes gaully places,Gauly places in meddows. where little or no grasse at al groweth, by reason (as I take it,) of the too long standing of the water, for such places are commonly low where the water standeth not hauing bent to passe away, and there∣fore meanes must be first made for the euacuation of the water for the continuall standing of the wa∣ter consumeth the grasse, and makes the place bare, and sinketh it. Sur. In such a place therefore,Clauer gras. sow in the Spring time some hay seed, especially the seed of the clauer
grasse, or the grasse hony-suckle, and other seeds that fall out of the finest and purest hay: And in the sowing of it, mingle with it some good earth: But sow not the hony-suckle grasse in too moist a ground, for it liketh it not. Bayly. Is it not good sometimes to ill and sow the meddow grounds? Sur. To till med∣dow groundsYes, vpon good occasion, as you find by the slender croppe of hay it beareth in a seasonable sum∣mer, that the ground begins to faint, as it were vnder the burthen of continuall bearing, fallow it, and let it lie a whole summer, and in the fall of the leafe plow it againe, and at the season sow it with pease or fetch∣es, next with wheat, and lastly with fetches and hay dust, laying it as plaine and leuell as you can. Then seed it the next summer, and after that, hayn it and mowe it, and within a yeere or two, the grasse will be fat, sweet and good. Bayly. I haue séene meddowes, as wel as other arable landes,Meddow ground bur∣ned. namely, the crust of the earth cut in turffes and burned, and so sowne as aforesaid. Sur. This kind of husbandry is neither vsuall nor expedient in all places, especially in meddowe grounds, vnlesse the meddowes bee too much ouer∣growne with mosse, through too much moysture & colde: yet in deed I haue seene it in some part of Shropshire. But I haue thought it rather done for the corne sake, then for reformation of the meddowe. Bay. But I like not this husbandry in any sort, in good meddow grounds. Sur. You need not feare it, for experience hath found, that it hurteth no kind of ground. But I leaue euery man to his owne fancie.
Bayly. Surely, I thinke there needs no helpe to good meddowe grounds,Meddow most benefi∣ciall. for it requireth small tra∣uaile, and lesse charge, and of all grounds (as was sayd in the beginning of our speech, it is most be∣neficiall. Sur. Euery thing hath his time and course, a growing, a perfection, and decay. And the best ground may bee ouercharged, the plowe, and the sithe will weaken, if there bee no helpes by Art, or Nature▪ for though nature wake & worke when we sleepe, and are idle, yet it often faileth, when wit and industry must worke and supply what Nature leaueth. And therefore he that hath best meddow grounds, if he be a good husband, will obserue how they stand in force, or weaknes, and accordingly in∣deuour to helpe the defects: hee must neither sleep for the too much heat in Summer, nor keepe house in Winter for the too much cold: but both Winter and Summer giue such attendance and ayd vnto his land, as in discretion he shall find most behoouefull: for land is like the body: if it be not fed with nurri∣ture,Land like the bodie. and comforted and adorned with the most ex∣pedient commodities, it will pine away, and be∣come forlorne, as the mind that hath no rest or re∣creation, waxeth lumpish and heauy. So that ground that wanteth due disposing and right manurance, waxeth out of kind; euen the best meddowes will become ragged and full of vnprofitable weeds, if it bee not cut and eaten; some will become too moist, and so growe to boggs; some too drie, and so to a hungry mosse. And therefore according to the na∣turall or vrged inclynation, men are to endeuour to prepare preseruations, or reformations, namely, to keepe the good in good case, and to bring the euill to a better state. If it bee too moyst, you must seeke to drie it: if too drie, you must vse meanes
to moysten it. Bayly. What if there bee such places in a meddowe, as neither Art nor charge can conueni∣ently make drie, or fit for grasse, as I know many▪ and (no doubt) so doe you, which will bee vnprofitable, whatsoeuer course be taken, vnles more charge bee layd vpon it, then it can re∣quite? Sur. In such places the best course is to plant willowes red or white,To plant Willowes. namely, in euery voyd plot of low ground that is too moyst, and of little vse to plant them, as also neere vnto, and in hedgerowes: for those kindes of willowes are very profitable, and little hurtfull, and delight most in watrie places, where profitable and sweet grasse likes not: They growe speedily, and beare much, and serue for many vses in husbandrie. Bay In this indeed I can approue your Iudge∣ment by mine owne Art and experience: for a∣bout seuen or eight yeeres since, I set a certaine number of these kindes of Willow poles,Setting of Willowes. shaped and cut for the purpose, and in deed I cut them and set them in a drie time, for I can tell you, although they loue the water well in their growing, wet is an enemie nto them, being cut from the tree: and in the time of their replanting, some I set in the end of Ianuary, some in the beginning of Februa∣ry, when the extremity of the cold is neere gone. I set some in a meddow by a ryuers side, some in a bottome, where the water falls most in the time of raine, and I set euery one of them sixe foote a∣sunder, and for three yeeres space I kept them pruned verie carefully: and at this present time they haue heads and branches of verie great
burden, euery thrée trées néere a loade of wood. And I do not thinke, but euery fiue or sixe yéeres will af∣foord as much and more: for as the body of the tree doth increase, the branches will augment in great∣nesse: and this without losse of much ground, or hin∣drance to the grasse. Nay, I find that vnder these trees, the grasse is most rancke and fruitefull, not onely by reason of the dropping of the boughes, but by the fal of the leafe in Autumne, as also by the cat∣tle sheltring and shadowing vnder them. And more∣ouer, I haue planted an Ozier hope,Ozier hope. (for so they call it in Essex, and in some places an Ozier bed) in a sur∣rounded ground, fit before for no vse, for the too much moisture and ouerflowing of it. And to tell you tru∣ly, I thinke, it yeeldeth me now a greater benefite yeerely, acre for acre, then an acre of best wheate: and that without any great trauell or charge, and the ordinary increase seldome sayling. Onely I find, that this kind of trée brooketh not the shadow of any other tree, but delighteth in the open ayre,Ozier broo∣keth no sha∣dow. and in the Sunne beames: so imperiall or sullen is this little plant. And truly I conceiue, that men that haue such grounds, as befit this kind of commoditie, come short of good husbands, if they plant them not. Sur. You say in this very truly: and it is a great shame for many capable wits, and able bodies, that they hauing liuings and leysure, imploy neither of them to their vttermost profitable ends: for lands is giuen to man, to the end he should till it, manure it, and dresse it: namely, he should set, sow, and plant vpon it, and in due discretion to conuert euery place to his fittest fruite. For I am of opinion, that there is no kind of soile, be it neuer so wild, boggy, clay, or
sandie, but will yeeld one kind of beneficiall fruite or other.All grounds good for some vse. Peaze vpon the beach grow natu∣rally. Bail. Nay, by your leaue, I thinke, the pib∣les or beach stones vpon the sea coast, about Or∣ford Nesse in Suff. the Camber in Sussex, and such like, are good for no vse, especially for any profitable fruite: for I thinke, there is no firm soyle within a speares length of some part of the highes of them. Sur. It is true, and yet haue I eaten of good and nourishing fruite growing euen there, as pease, plea∣sant, holesome, and good, growing of their owne accord, neuer ste oe: but they differ in the ma∣ner of branching, only the blossoms differ not much, but the coles hang in clusters, eight, ten, or twelue in a bunch, and tast as other pease. Bayly. That is strange that they should grow where no firme earth is oure, and without seting or sowing: me thinkes, if they be of any abundance, poore people might make vse of thē, if they be whole∣some and not forbidden. Sur. So do they in the times of dearth. Bayly. haue séene vpon these grounds, store of Pewets, Oliues, and Cobbes breed, owles of great request at most honorable table.Pewets and Oliues, &c. Sur. So haue I: but to allure them, it is good to strew rushes and grasse vpon the beach, wheron to lay their egs, vnlesse there be store of sea-weedes to serue for that purpose. But for your other sorts of ground, as boggie, and hot, and sandy grounds, commonly baren, I see not how they may be employed to any great profit. For the first, namely, your loe & spn∣gie grounds renched,Hoppes. is good for hopps, as Suffolke, Essex, and Surrie, and other places doe find to their
profit. The hot and sandy, (omitting graine) is good for carret rootes, a beneficiall fruite, as Orford, Ips∣wich, and many sea townes in Suffolke:Carret roots. as also In∣land townes, Berrie, Framingham, and others in some measure, in the same shire, Norwich, and many pla∣ces in Norfolke, Colchester in Essex, Fulham, and other places neere London. And it beginnes to increase in all places of this Realme, where discretion and in∣dustrie sway the mindes of the inhabitants: and I doe not a little maruaile, that husbandmen and Far∣mers doe not imitate this, for their owne families, and to  their poore neighbors, as in some pla∣ces they begn, to their great profit. I haue also ob∣serued in many places, where I haue had occasion to trauaile, that many croftes, toftes, pightes, pingles, and other small uillits of land, about farme houses, and Tenements, are suffred to lie together idle: some ouergrowne with nettles, mallowes, thistles, wilde tezells, and diuers other vnprofitable weedes, which are fat and firtile:Many waste grounds might yeeld profite. Hempe. Mustard-seed. where if the farmer would vse the meanes, would growe sundry commodities, as hempe, and mustard seede, both which are so strong enemies to all other superfluous, and vnprofitable weedes, as they will not suffer any of them to growe, where they are sowne. The hempe is of great vse in a far∣mers house, as is found in Suffolke, Norfolke, Sussex, Dorset, and in many places in Somerset, especially a∣bout Burport, and Lime, where the people doe find by it great aduantage, not only for cordage for shipping, but also for linnen, and other necessaries about a house. So is also the flaxe,Flaxe. which is also sowne in many places, where good huswiues endeuour their wits▪ , and hands to that commodious and profitable course, and the flaxe will like well enough in a more light and gentle, and leaner soile, then the hempe. And indeede there is not a place so rude, &
vnlikely, but diligence and discretion may conuert it to some profitable end: and among many other cōmodities, I maruaile, men are no more forward in planting of Apple trees,Apple trees. Peare trees, Crab-stockes, and such like in their hedges, betweene their fields, as∣well as in Orchards: a matter praise worthy, and pro∣fitable to the planter, and to the common wealth, very beneficiall. Bail. Indéed, I haue thought vpon this kind of husbandrie, but I haue bene preuented of mine own desires, by a preiudicate conceit, that these fruites would redound little to my benefit, for that I think they will be stolen, the hedges troden downe, and the trees broken for the fruites sake. Sur. Negligence may easily find excuse: but this obiection is friuolous: for I know in Kent, Worcester∣shire, Shropshire, Glocestershire, Somerset, and Deuon, and many parts in Wales, full of this commoditie, e∣uen in their remote hedge-rowes. And although some few be lost, sith the rest come so easily, so fully, and so freely, a good mind will not grudge at a way-faring passenger, taking for his refection, and to qualifie the heate of his trauell, an apple or a peare: for the remnant will content the well conditioned owner. For I haue knowne, that (all the stolen al∣lowed) the fruite thus dispersedly planted, haue made in some little Farmes, or (as they call them in those parts) Burgaines, a tunne, two, three, foure, of Syder, and Perry, which kind of drinke resembling white wine,Syder. Perry. hath without any further supply of ale, or beere, sufficed a good housholder and his family, the whole yer following, and sometimes hath made of the ouerplus twenty nobles, or ten pounds, more or lesse. Baylie. This surely cannot be but confessed, to be very beneficiall, both for priuate and publike wle. And I myself haue noted, yt Mid. in former
times, hath had regard to this kind of commoditie: for many Apple-trees, Peare trees, Seruice trees, & such like, haue bene planted in the fields and hedge-rowes, especially in the North and East part of the shire, as also in the South part of Hartfordshire, which are at this day very beneficiall to the inhabi∣tants, both for their owne vse and reléefe, as also to vnt diuers wayes at London. But the trees are now for the most part very ancient, and I do not sée such a continuall inclination in the time present, to continue or increase this benefite for the vse of po∣steritie: neither did I euer know much Syder or Perry made in these parts, neither do I thinke they haue sufficient skill or meanes. Sur. I thinke indeed, little Sider is made there, some Perrie there is here and there: but more in the West country and in Kent,Kent. a place very fructiferous of that kind of fruite. Bai. Yet is there not so much Syder made, for all the great abundance of fruite, as there might be but in the Inland. Sur. The reason is, because that neere London, & the Thames side, the fruite is vented in kind, not only to the Fruterers in grosse, but by the country wiues, in the neerest part of Kent, Middlesex, Essex, & Sur∣rey, who vtter them in the markets, as they do all o∣ther vendible things else. Bayly. But aboue all others, I thinke, the Ken∣tishmen be most apt and industrious, in planting Orchards with Pippins and Cherries, especially néere the Thames, about Feuersham, & Sittingburne. And the order of their planting is such, as the form delighteth the eye, the fruite the taste, and the walks
infinite, rereae the bodie. Besides, the grasse and hrbage, nowithstanding the trées, yeldeth as much benefit▪ in manner, as if there were no trées plan∣ted at all, specially for hay. Sur. I is true: and in mine opinion, many men hauing tenements, and time in them, make not halfe the profite, which by due and discreet industrie they might. Bayly. Men vn∣taught, know little.Truly I now so conceiue it: for you haue in mny things, made me sée mine owne in∣discretion & negligence▪ but in many of them feare hath more preuailed with me, then wilfull refusall. And so I thinke it doth in other men, who also with my self, ar ignorant of many points of prouidence, and good husbandry: because they are not generally trauelers to sée other places, neither hath their brée∣ding bene iudicious, but plaine, according to a slub∣berd patterne of ancient ignorance, by which they onely shape all their courses,Many follow old husban∣drie. as their Fathers did, neuer putting in practise any new deuice, by the rule of more reason. And therefore indeed, we that are yet in a plodding kind of course, may con∣forme vs o new and probable precedents, as time and riall will yeeld experience. But urely, I hold your opinion good for the planting of fruit trees, not only in Orchards, but in the hedge rowes & fields: for I thinke, we haue of no tree more necessarie vse. Sur. It is true in respect of fruite. But in other respects,Oke, Ash, and Elme. the Oke, Elme, and Ash, are more precious. Bayly. These indéed are building trées, and of the three, the Oke is of most request a timber most firme and most durable. I haue bne no great tra∣ueller, and therefore I can speake little of the in∣crease
or decrease of them, other then in the places where I am most resident, and where my ordinary affaires do lye. And for those parts, I can say, that they increase not, though they seeme not to be wan∣ted: for you see this country inclinable to wood and timber much: yet within these twenty yeeres they haue bene diminished two parts of three: and if it go on by like proportion, our children will surely want. How it is in other countries I know not. Sur. I haue seene many places of note for this kind of commodity, (for so t is, howsoeuer it hath bene little preserued) and I find, that it hath vniuer∣sally receiued a mortall blow within the time of my memorie:Oke much decayeth. 35. Hen. 8. notwithstanding there is a Statute for the preseruation and maintenance of the same, and the same continued to this day, but not with wished ef∣fect, as we haue thereof spoken before. Bail. I will tell you, Sir, carelesse Gentle∣men, that haue Mannors and Parkes well wood∣ded, left them by their carefull auncestors, that would not strip a tree for gold, are of the mind (as it seemeth) that the shadow of the high trees do dazle their eyes, they cannot see to play the good hus∣bands, nor looke about them to sell the land, til the trees be taken out of their sight. Sur. Can you breake a iest so boldly vpon men of woorth? Bail. You see as well as I, some do it in earnest: and I thinke indeed, it is partly your fault that are Surueyors:Gentlemen sell their woods too fast. for when Gentlemen haue sunke them∣selues by rowing in Vanities boate, you blow them the bladders of lauishing helps, to make them swim againe awhile, counselling first to cleere the land of
the wood, (in the sale whereof is great abuse) per∣swading them, they shall sell the land little the chea∣per. And indeed I hold i prouidence, where neces∣sitie commands, to chuse of two, the lesser euill: namely, to sell part of a superfluous quantitie of wood, where the remanent will ser the partie in vse,A Surueyor must counsel frugalitie. rather then the land. But withal, it is the part of a good Surueyor, to counsell frugalitie, and a sparing spending, according to the proportion of the means of him he trauel or. And f that great Em∣peror Necessitie will needes haue haucke, sell the wood, or pize it so, as he that buyes the land haue not the wood for nought: as is often seene, when the wood and timber sometimes is woorth the price of wood and land. Sur. It seemes, when you come to be a Surueyor, as you labor to be,Affection. I hope you will be very carefull in your counsell: but it may be, when you seeme to haue best skill, and earnest desire to draw the line straight: for a man inclinable to his owne will, he will rather giue it into the hands of some one that feedes his conceits with flatterie,Simple men do manage mens busines through flat∣terie▪ and he shall man∣nage the building, when you haue laid the founda∣tion. And what he doth, be it right or crooked, is le∣uell with the marke. And therefore leauing euery man to him he likes, I say onely this, that sith tim∣ber and timber trees, and wood by due obseruation, are found to decay so fast, me thinkes, in common discretion, it should behooue euery good husband (for all would be so accompted) both vpon his own and, as also vpon such as he holds of other mens, not onely to maintaine,All men ought to pre∣serue timber and to the vttermost to preserue the timber trees, and saplins likely to become tim∣ber trees, Oke, Elme, and Ash: but voluntarily to plant young: and because there is not onely an vni∣uersall inclination to hurle downe, it were expediēt
that sith will will not, authoritie should constraine some mean of restauration, namely, to enioyne men, as well Lords, as tenants, to plant for euery summe of acre, a number of trees, or to sow or set a quan∣titie of ground with Acorns. Baylie. I remember there is a Statute made, 35 Hen. the 8. and the . Eliz. for the preseruati∣on of timber trees, Oake, Ash, Elme▪ Aspe,35. Hen. 8.1. Eliz. and Beech: and that 12. storers & standils should bee left standing at euery fall, vpon an acre: but mee thinkes, this Statute is deluded, and the meaning abused: for I haue seene in many places at the fas, where in deed they leaue the number of standils and more; but in stead they cut dowe them that were preserued before, and at the next fall,The Statute abused. them that were left to answere the Statute, and yong let againe in their steads: so that there can bee no increase of timber trees, notwithstāding, the words of the Statute, by this kind of reseruation, vnlesse such as were thus left, were continued to become timber trees indeed: And therefore it were not a∣misse, that some prouision were made, to maintain the meaning of the Statute in more force: but I leaue that, to such as see more then I see, and haue power to reforme it. Sur. It is a thing in deed to bee regarded, for in∣deed there is abuse in it. Bayly. Surely it is, especially in places where lit∣tle timber growes: for there is no Coūtry, how var∣raine of timber soeuer but hath vse of timber: and therefore, if neither mens owne wils,Want of Wood▪ and Timber feared. seeing the imient want, nor force of Iustice will mooue and worke a reformation, we may say as the Prouerbe is, Let them that liue longest, fetch their wood farthest. Sur. But some Countries are yet well stored, and for the abundance of timber & wood, were excepted in the Statute, as the Welds of Kent, Sussex, & Surry,
which were all anciently comprehended vnder the name of Holmes dale. There are diuers places al∣so in Darinshire,Holmes dale. Cheshire & Shrpshire, wel woodded. And yet he that well obserues it, and hath knowne the Weles of Sussex, Surry, and Kent, the grand nur∣sery of those kind of trees, especially Oake, & Beech, shal find such an alteratiō within lesse then 30. yeres, as may well strike a feare,Thirty yeres haue consu∣med much wood and timber. Glasse houses Great woods wasted. lest few yeeres more, as pestilent as the former, will leaue fewe good trees standing in those Welds. Such a heate issueth out of the many forges, & furnaces, for the making of Iron, and out of the glasse kilnes, as hath deuoured many famous woods within the Welds: as about Burning∣fold, Lopwood Greene, the Minns, Kirdford, Petworth parkes, Ebernowe Wassal, Rusper, Balcombe, Daling∣ton the Dyker: and some forests, and other places in∣finite. Tantum ui longinqua valet mutare vetustas. The force of time, and mens inclination, make great changes in mightie things. But the croppe of this commodious fruit of the earth, which nature it selfe doth sowe, being thus reaped and cut downe by the sickle of time, hath beene in some plentifull places, in regard of the superfluous aboundance, rather held a hurtfull weed, then a profitable fruit, and therefore the wasting of it held prouidence, to the end that corne,Woods de∣stroyed for cornes sake. a more profitable increase, might be brought in, in stead of it, which hath made Inhabitants so fast to hasten the confusion of the one, to haue the other. But it is to be feared, that posterities will find want, where now they thinke is too much. Virtutem inc∣lumm odmus, sublatam sero saepe quaerimus inuidi. Things that wee haue too common, are not regar∣ded: but being depriued of them, they are oft times sought for in vaine. Bay. 140. Iron workes in Sussex.It is no maruaile, if Sussex and other places you speak off, be depriued of this benefit: for I haue heard, there are, or lately were in Sussex, neere 140.
hammers and furnaces for Iron, and in it, & Surry adioyning, 3. or 4. glasse houses: the hammers and furnaces spend, each of them in euery 24. houres, 2.3. or foure loades of charr coale, which in a yeere a∣mounteth to an infinit quantitie, as you can better account by your Arithmatique, then I. Sur. That which you say, is true, but they worke not all, all the yeere: for many of them lacke water in the Summer to blowe their bellows.Wasting of woods in Sussex, good for the common wealth. And to say truth, the consuming of much of these in the Weld, is no such great preiudice to the weale publike, as is the ouerthrow of wood & timber, in places where there is no great quantitie: for I haue obserued, that the clensing of many of these welde grounds, hath redounded rather to the benefit, then to the hurt of the Country: for where woods did grow in superflu∣ous abundance, there was lacke of pasture for kine, and of arable land for corne, without the which, a Country or country farme cannot stand, or be relee∣ued, but by neighbour helpes, as the Downes haue their wood from the Weld. Beside, people bred a∣mongst woods, are naturally more stubborne, and vnciuil, then in the Champion Countries. Bai. What, are mens manners commonly gui∣ded by the disposition & quality of the places where they are bred? Sur. There is no necessitie in it, I take, but by ob∣seruation it hath bin collected, That Montani sunt as∣pri atque incuti;Mens man∣ners of their place of breed. Molliores corpore atque moribus pra∣tenses: Campestres mansue & Ciuiles: Rudes & refract∣ari Scolae: Paludicolae inconstantes & ebeti inge∣nio: Littorales duri, brrendi, immanes, latrociniis dediti, mniumque deniqu pessimi. &c. So that if this ob∣seruation hold, men varie in wit, manners and dispo∣sition of body & mind, much after the nature of the place where they are brought vp.Diuine grace shapes new minds. But let vs not think that followes alwaies, but that education & diuine grace doth shape new minds, maners & dispositions
in men, as they are trayned vp in the knowledge & feare of God. But woods are commonly most desert, so are Sea coasts subiect to violent winds, & vapors, and therfore these aboue other places are most con∣demned, & the inhabitants the more need to seeke the meanes of reformation. Bay. Truly, I thinke all the places you name, the Mountaines, Meddowes, Woods, Marshes, and the Sea-coast, breed by nature all rudes, refractarios & immanes, without the grace of God directing them. And therefore we wil leaue to censure conditions of men, in one cōtinent, & as it were, vnder one clymat by the places of their breed. That in my cōceit, were to giue sentence against Gods secret Counsaile, & prouidence:Complexion neuer a true argument of good or euill men. As also to say, such a complexion were alwayes an argument of ill condition, and such of good, which neuer holdeth generally true. Let vs▪ I pay, retne to our former cōmunication, for time passeth, and I know, you would not be  long. Sur. Then I say, where, in former times, a  stood in those parts, wholy vpon these vnprofitable bushy and wooddy grounds, hauing only some small and ragged pastures for some kind of cattell, now I see as I trauaile, and where I haue had busines, that these vnprofitable grounds are conuerted to benefi∣ciall tillage:The benefit that Sussex findeth by decay of woods. In so much as the people lacke not, but can to their great benefit, yerely afford to others, both Butter, Cheese, and Corne, euen where was little or none at all: yet I held a oderation necessary, lest that the too much ouerthrowing of timber trees, and stocking vp of Woods bring such a scarcity of that most necessary commodity, as men build not for lack of timber, but vse Peats, Turffe, , Furse, Broome, & such like fuel for firing,Fewell of constrain. where they may be gotten, yea, & Nets dung, as in some places of Wiltshire, and else where: which cannot but insue, if there bee neither preuention for the subuertion of the present,
no prouision to plant or spare for the time to come: who seeth not that the generall extirpation, and stocking vp of coppise grounds in Middlesex,Middlesex stocking. wil not breede want to them that shall succeede? Bail. But that may be the more tolerated, be∣cause it bringeth a greater profit in tillage and pas∣ture, the ground being good, bringeth foorth wheat and oates, and other commodious graine, instead of subs and shrubs. Sur. Stubs and shrubs are also necessarie: but as we desire foode, we must preserue the meanes to prepare it for foode: for as corne auaileth not with∣out Mills to grind: so other necessaries without fi∣ring, are of little vse. If all were arable, where were meddowe and pasture▪ if all pasture and meddowe,The vse of firing necessa∣rie. where corne? if all for corne and grasse, it were like Midas his wish. Therefore it is good to foresee, and to auoyde a mischiefe to come, by desiring or vsing present commodities moderately and prouidently. For when there is a true concurrence betweene the vse, and preseruation, and increase of necessarie com∣modities, without wilfull consuming, there seldome followeth too much want: but if, for the ouergreedy vse of things present, there be no regard of future occasion, it cannot be, but if the earth, the mother of man and other creatures, could verbally complaine, she might well say,A commodi∣tie present should not depriue fu∣ture times of a better. shee were euen robbed of her fruites by her owne children: and namely when for one commodities sake, another is abandoned by some priuate men, more expedient for the publique weale. Bai. I thinke your meaning is, when farmes, or townships are by priuate men dispeopled, and the houses puld downe, and the land conuerted to some more priuate vse: as only to shéepe pastures, or grasing for cattle onely, you meane, corne, the
more commodious, is abandoned for these lesse pro∣fitable. Sur. Depopulatiō, dangerous.Both these are necessary in their places, no man can denie it. But when the Oxe and sheepe shall feede where good houses stoode, where honest men and good subiects dwelled, where hospitalitie was kept, the poore releeued, the king better serued, and the common wealth more steeded: who will not say it is the ban of a common wealth, an apparent badge of Atheism, and an argument of apish ambition, or wooluish emulation? but because there is a statute carefully prouiding reformation, I will be sparing to accuse, though a man might point at the places and persons: Is not this next, Ferne hill, a close of the Lords demeisnes? Bayly. You remember well, it is so. Suruey. If my memory faile not, there is a deepe bottome in this field, and a little rill of water rising out of the hill, runnes thorowe it. Bayly. If you looke but ouer this hill, you shall sée it. Sur. I ee it, and I maruaile that there hath beene no respect had of this place: for it is a desert bot∣tome, full of bushes and shrubs, yeelding now little or no benefit. Bay. What can you aduise to be done with it, to make it more profitable? Sur. I could wish some cost to be bestowed heere∣in,Fish ponds. making a fish pond, nay it would make at the least, two or three, one belowe the other. Bai. Alas, that were to little purpose, as I take it, considering the charge of making the ponds, the clearing of the water course, the clensing of the bo∣dies, the making of the dammes or heads of the ponds will be more chargeable, then the fish will be profitable. Sur. As you conceiue it, for where reason or ex∣perience
teach not, there the will followes to be vn∣toward in all actions: and seldome men practise doubtfull things, howsoeuer probable, for experi∣ence sake. But in this there is no doubt at all, the be∣nefit is certaine by approoued experiēce, & it paieth the charge to the founder in short time, & afterward the benefit comes without much labour or cost. He that hath trauailed, and is acquainted with Sussex,Fish ponds many in Sussex, and Surrie. & Surrie, and hath obserued this commoditie, may find that gentlemen, and others able in those parts, will not suffer such a conuenient place as this for the purpose, to lie vnprepared for this vse: & the sweet∣nesse of the gaine they yearely make of it, hath bred such an increase of ponds for fish, as I thinke, these two shires haue more of them, then any twenty o∣ther shires in England. Baylie. That were very much, but I take it, the making of them is very chargeable, for the clensing and digging, the ridding of the stuffe, and making the head, I thinke will consume a greater charge, then many yeeres will pay, or redeeme againe, as I sayd before. Sur. That which commonly commeth out of these kind of places, is good soile for other lands, and will of it selfe quite the cost of clensing and carrying. As for the head wherein the greatest charge consisteth, may be done, for a marke or a pound a pole at the most, but where there is good fast earth, as is heere, I thinke lesse will doe it. This pond may be 20. pole at the head, few so much: and after 2. or 3. yeres be∣ing well stored, it will yeeld requitall, not only for domesticall vse, but to be vented very beneficially: for the Fishmongers of London doe vse to buy the fish by the score or hundred,Fishmongers buy pond fish far off. of a competent scant∣ling, when the ponds in the country be sewed, and bring thē to London in caske, 20, 30, 40, 50 miles, and vent them by retaile: and if the ponds be so re∣mote
frō the maine Mart London, as the fish cannot be conueniently transferred, other confining Cities, townes, & inhabitāts, besides the owners priuate fa∣milies, will find good vse of them: and many times also, these knds of ponds may haue sufficiēt fal of wa∣ter for corne Mills,Ponds ne∣cessary for Mills. fulling, or wake Mills, syth Mills, and Mills of other kinds, as the country where such conuenient places are, may require: and it is found, by such as duly obserue the courses of countries, and inclinations of men, that want of prouidence and feare of charge, withholdeth mens minds frō many benefites, priuate & publique, and that many times, where they are voluntarily mooued to consume far more in matter of meere vanitie, and things which right reason holdeth very friuolous. Bay. Ambitious building ri∣diculous.Truly I haue obserued this that you say, to be true in many, especially in such, as ambition mooueth without necessity to build more faire and stately piles, then their estate or abilities will well heare, and couet nothing more, then to raise their fame by their follie, not respecting commodities, so much as pleasures, as if the name of a faire house, were meate, drinke and credite vnto them: where if they were forced by necessitie to raise an habitacle, it might be so marshalled in discretion,A house with necessa∣ries commen∣dable. that it should not excéede the qualitie of the person, neither stand without such supply of all conuenient appendances, as might both argue the party prouident, and adde meanes vnto all necessaries for alike families re∣liefe. Sur. Men will haue their humors: but he is wise, that can learne by others harmes to auoyd, and by o∣thers good example to followe the like. Bay. Sir, you see this peece of ground, it hath not the name for nought, it is called fernie close, and as you see, it is full, and so ouergrowne with these
brakes, that all the art we can deuise, and labour we can vse, cannot rid them. Sur. Neglectis vrenda filix, innascitur agris, sayth Horace. But in many places they serue to good vse:Horace. Ferne. & therefore, where they growe, it must be considered, whether it be better, to destroy them, or to foster thē, for they seldome or neuer growe in a fat soile, nor cold, but in a sandy and hot ground: And as Theo∣phrastus sayth in his eight booke,Theophras∣tus. lib. 8. it commeth not vp in manured places, but withereth away. Bai. How, meaneth he by manured places, plow∣ed grounds? Sur. Plowed grounds, may be sayd to be manu∣red, but it is not so ment by Theophrastus:Manuring what is ment by it. for he meaneth grounds well soyled, with good fat marle and dung: for plowing without this kind of manu∣rance, will hardly kill it: for the ground being natural∣ly barraine, it will not quite cost to plowe it, till they growe no more. And if there be no other soile to manure it, take the brakes themselues, to kill the brakes. Bayly. I thinke, that were the way to raise more: for it is like the adding more fewell to put out the fire. Sur. But you see, that though the oyle feede the Lampe, oyle will extinguish it.Ferne destroi∣ed by ferne. Bayly. That is, if you drowne the match with oyle. Sur. So if you cut the brakes often, while they are young, and a little before Midsommer when they are growne, and cast them vpon the same land, and set the fold vpon it, and vse it thus, 2. or three yeeres, feeding it often with cattle or sheepe, you shall find a great decay of them. In the weldes of Sussex and Sur∣ry, places inclinable to brakes, you may learne,The vse of ferne, in di∣uers places. how the inhabitants by their indeuors▪ doe make good
vse of this kind of husbandry, both for corne, and to increase their pasture, by cutting them in August, & after when they are withered, and laying them vpon their grounds, with the fold, as I told you, which causeth the grasse to spring very fast, and freshly: and they are so farre from coueting to kill them, that they fetch them for this vse farre off: but the conti∣nuance of this course wil impaire them much. More∣ouer, they bring the brakes into their yards, where their cattle lodge in the winter, and there they rot, & when they be well dissolued among their other soile, they carry it about September, and October, into their arable fields, to their good aduantage. And in some places they lay it in the common high waies (as in Hartfordshire and other places) and a∣bout March carry it into their grounds. It is so liuely, slymy and vegitable a nature, as it seldome becomes vtterly consumed, but by fat marl, and soile, & cō∣tinuall plowing, as I told you before. But I see, heere is a ground next vnto this, of another nature, full of bushes and briers, he is no good husband that oweth it. Bai. Bushy groundNeither he that owes it, nor a better hus∣band can preuent this inconuenience: for besides the bushes, the mosse is so full and rancke, as the ground is good for nothing, but for that small pasture, that is in it heere and there. Sur. The ground of it selfe, I see is good enough, and not so prone to mosse as you take it,The cause of mosse. but the cause of the mosse is the bushes: for after euery showre of raine, the bushes hang full of droppes, which often falling on the ground, makes the vpper part of the earth so cold, that i increaseth this kind of mosse: but without the aid and industrie of a skil∣full husband, fairest grounds will be come ougly, and best land euill, and will bring oorth vnprofitable
weedes, bushes, brakes, bryers, thornes, and all kind of hurtfull things▪ according to the curse inflicted vp∣on it for mans fault, at the beginning. Bail. Admit, no man did manure the earth,The earth not manurde what be∣comes. yet surely there be many grounds, in my conceit, would neuer become worse then they be. Sur. You are in a great error: for the freest grounds that you see, the fairest pastures, and gree∣nest meddowes, would become in short time, ouer∣growne with bushes, woods, weeds, and things vn∣profitable, as they were before they were rid, and clensed of the same by the industry of man, who was inioyned that care and trauaile to manure the earth, which for his disobedience should bring foorth these things. Bayly. How then was the state of this Island of great Brittaine, at the beginning, when it was first peoplet? Sur. A very desert and wildernes, ful of woods,Great Brit∣taine some∣times a de∣sert. flls, moores, bogs, heathes, and all kind of forlorne places: & howsoeuer we find the state of this Island nowe, records doe witnes vnto vs, that it was for the most part an vniuersall Wildernes, vntill people fin∣ding it a place desolate, and forlorne, beganne to set footing heere, and by degrees grew into multitudes; though for the time, brutish and rude, Time taught them, and Nature drewe them to find the meanes how to stocke vp trees, bushes, bryers, & thornes, & in stead thereof, to plowe the land, to sowe, set, and plant, to build Cities for defence, aswell against the force of Wilde beasts, then plentifull in these grounds which now we manure, as against enemies, as the ruines of Cilchester in Hamshire,Cilchester▪ Verolami∣um. among the woods, and of Verolamium in Hartfordshire, and o∣ther Romane Monuments of antiquity, doe lay be∣fore our eies at this day. After Cities, (as the land be∣came
more and more peopled) they built lesser Townes, Villages, and Dorpes, and after more secu∣ritie, Country Farmes, and Gruinges: and as these increased,Wild beasts in Brittaine. wild beasts, as Beares, Bores, Woolues, & such like decreased: for when their shelters, great woods, were cut downe, and the Country made more and more champion, then the people more and more increased, and more and more decreasing the inconueniences that offended them. Bai. I obserue in this your discourse some doubts, as whether all this Island, now great Brit∣taine, were a Wildernes and Desert, and whether there were euer such wild beast in it, as you speake off. Sur. If you will be satisfied by records, you may find, that most of the Shires in England were Forestae. and as for the wild beasts, Authors very antentique, report of the Calidonian Beare, Bore, Bull,Colidonian beare and bore. and Kine, which were in this Island, with infi∣nite many Woolues: as by reason of the great woods and fastnesse, there are yet in Ireland. Bay. This our discourse is some what from our matter, yet not altogether impertinent: for if this lie hidde▪ and men be ignorant of the state of for∣mer times,Former ages had more art and in∣dustry then ours. our present swelling and ambitious cō∣ceits may séeme to assume more commendation, for present art and industry, in reforming the earth, thē Ages of old: wherein I perceiue, and by your dis∣course collect, that our fathers did more in tenne yéeres, then we in forty. Sur. It is true, because we sawe not the earths for∣mer deformities, we dreame it was then, as now it is, from the beginning,The earth not in the beginning as . whereas indeede our forefa∣thers, by their diligence and trauaile, left vnto our forefathers, and they by increasing experience, and endeuour, left vnto vs that faire and fruitfull, free frō bryers, bushes, & thorns, wherof they foūd it full.
And this field wherein now we are, may be an in∣stance: for you see by the ancient ridges or lands, though now ouergrowne with bushes,Lands for∣merly ara∣ble, now wood. it hath bene arable land, and now become fit for no vse, vnlesse it be reformed. And the bushes that are in this field, you see, are such shrubs and dwarffie bushes, and fruitlesse biars, as are neuer like to proue good vn∣derwood, nor good haying or hedging stuffe. If it were fit for either, and the country scant of such pro∣uision, it might be preserued. But sith they haue bene so cropped & brused with cattle, and sith this coun∣trie is full and most inclinable by nature to this kind of stuffe, more then sufficient for fencing and fewell, and corne ground and good pasture nothing plenti∣full, if the tenant were a good husband, he would stocke it vp and plow it. Baylie. I thinke it is so full of Mosse, it will beare little corne. Sur. The Mosse being turned in by the plowe, will rot, and these hillockes, Mole-hils,Mosse. and Ant-hils, will inrich the ground, & cherish the seed sown. Bayly. What graine is best to be sowne first af∣ter the stocking? Sur. It seemeth to be a good stiffe clay ground, and therefore Otes are best to prepare the earth, to make it fit for wheate the next season: and after it,Oates in clay. as the ground may be by the skilfull husbandman thought fit for wheate againe or pease. But if the soile were leane and light, barly would agree better in it, and a light red rush wheat, where, in the more stron∣ger ground, the white Wheate, and gray Ball,Barly in sand. A mutuall agreement betweene graines and grounds. (as they call it in the West parts) is best. And in some more hot and sandie grounds, Rye, as men shall by experience find the land to like the graine, and the graine it. For there is a naturall affinitie or enmitie betweene graines and grounds, as between stomacks and meates. And therefore the husbandmans expe∣rience
will best guide him. But I do not a little won∣der of men in this age, whom, whether I may rather accuse of idlenesse, or ignorance, I cannot tell: for where I ha trauelled in sundry parts of England, I haue in many of them found many old drie pits, an∣ciently digged in fields, Commons, Moores, and o∣ther grounds, many of them bearing still the names of Mare-pits,Marle pits. and by search haue bin found to yeeld very excellent Marle, first found and digged by the prouidence and industrie of our forefathers, and left by the negligence of later times. Bayly. But by your fauor, fat Marle, me thinks, is not good for this kind of ground, because it is a strong lay, it is better, I take it, for a hot and san∣die soyle, and a hot chalke better for this. Sur. It is very true, that obseruation should not haue bin forgotten: but it is well remembred of you. Bai. We haue, indéed, a kind of plodding and common course of husbandry hereabouts, & a kind of péeush imitation of the most, who (as wise men note) are the worst husbands, who onely try what the earth will do of it selfe, and séeke not to helpe it with such meanes, as nature hath prouided; whereas if men were careful and industrious, they shuld find, that the earth would yéeld in recompence for a good husbands trauell and charge, Centum pro cento without corrupt vsurie.Grounds well manured, greatest in∣trest. Sur. I am glad you can now approue it so in rea∣son: for I think, experience doth not yet so fully teach you. I haue knowne where land hath bene very base and barren, and so continued many generations, as ground in manner forsaken and forlorne, abando∣ned of the plow, which after hath come into the hands of a discreet and industrious husband, that knew how,Ill ground made good. and would take the paines, and bestow the cost to manure it in kind, hath much enriched
himselfe by it, and where before it would not beare a crop of requitefull increase, by marling and good vsage, hath borne crop after crop, 12.16. or 20. yeares without intermission. The benefit of marling, Lancashire, Chesshire, Shropshire, Somerset, Middlesex, Sussex, Surrey, among many other places, can wit∣nesse, though not all by one kind of soyling and mar∣ling. For neither is all kind of Marle in one place, neither any one kind in all places. But few places are so defectiue, but it yeeldeth of it self, or is neere vnto some place of helpe. And men that will haue profite, must vse the means, they must not sit and giue aime, and wish and repine at others increase. There must be obseruation▪ to marke how others thriue, inclina∣tion and imitation to do the like indeuor & charge. And if one experiment faile, trye a second, a third, and many: looke into places and persons, note the qualities of the land of other men, and conferre it with thine owne: and where there is a resemblance, marke what the best husband doth vpon his land like vnto thine: if it prosper, practise it, and follow the example of him, that is commonly reported a thriftie husband. And by this meanes, will experi∣ence grow, & of one principle of reason, many con∣clusions will proceed. If a man looke into Cornewall, there shall he find, that in diuers places, especially v∣pon the North coast, about Pasow, that the inhabi∣tant Farmers do soile their lands with sea sand:Sea sand, a good soyle in Cornewall▪ which because the country affoordeth not in al places, passe for cart-cariage, men fetch this kind of sand 3.4.6. miles in sackes on horsebacke. And poore men liue  etching and selling it to the more wealthie. In  and Somerset, and in some places of Cornewall, Sussex, and in the South part of Surrey, besides their other commendable courses of husbandrie, they burne their land, and call it in the West parts,
Burning of beate, and in the South-East parts, De∣uonshiring, and by that meanes in barren earth haue excellent Rye,Deuōshiring. and in abundance. In Shropshire, De∣highshir, Flintshire, and now lately in some part of Sussex, the industrious people are at a more extraor∣dinarie charge and toyle. For the poore husbandmē and Farmers do buy,Limestones. digge, and fetch limestones, 2.3.4. miles off, and in their fields build Lime kilnes, burne it, and cast it on their fields, to their great ad∣uantage: which kind of lime is of the nature of hot chalke, great helpes to cold and moist grounds. Bai. But this kind of stone is not to be had in all places. Sur. That kind or some other, is to be found in or nere most places, and there is no kind of stone, but being burned, will worke the like effect. So will also & especially the beach or pibble stones burned, that frequent the sea shore in many places,Pibble and beach, good to make lime. as vpon the Camber shore neere Rye, and at East-bourne in Sussex, neere Pmsey about Folkestone, and vpon the coast of Kent, vpon Orford nesse, and about Albrow, Hoseley, and that coast in Suffolke, and sundry other places v∣pon the sea shore: In some places in so great aboun∣dance, as if there were wood in competent measure, would make good & great store of lime for building. Bay. It is farre to fetch it: for I do not thinke, but euery land fetched 5. miles, is worth 5 shillings the cariage, and foure pence at the pit: this is very chargeable. Sur. Yet it quiteth the cost well enough, he that is able,Difficulties pretended, where is no will. doth find at profitable. But you are in the mind of some that I haue heard, when they haue bin mooued to entertaine a helpe for their land, either it is too deale, or too farre to fetch, or too deepe in the earth, or some difficultie they pretend in it, that
few vndertake the right way to good husbandrie, like vnto them that Salomon speaketh of, that in win∣ter will hold his lazie hands in his lowzie amnerie, and for slouth will not looke about his land in the cold, and sleepe out the time in Summer. Many dif∣ficulties and impediments preuent them that will neuer be good husbāds nor thrifty. But such as mean to liue like men, will shake off the cold with trauell, and put by sleepe by their labor, and thinke no cost too great, no labor too painefull, no way too farre to preserue or better their estates. Such they be that search the earth for her fatnes, and fetch it for fruites sake.Moore earth Murgion. Many fetch Moore-earth or Murgion from the riuer betweene Colebrooke and Vxbridge, and carry it to their barren grounds in Buckinghamshire, Hart∣fordshire, and Middlesex, eight or ten miles off. And the grounds whereupon this kind of soile is employ∣ed, will indure tilth aboue a dozen yeres after, with∣out further supply, if it be thorowly bestowed. In part of Hamshire they haue another kind of earth, for their drie and sandy grounds, especially betweene For∣dingbridge and Ringwood, and that is, the slub of the riuer of Auon, which they call Mawme, which they digge in the shallow parts of the riuer:Mawme. and the pits where they digge it, will in few yeares fill againe: & this Mawme is very beneficial for their hot and sandy grounds, arable and pasture. And about Christchurch twineam, and vp the riuer of Stowre, they cut and dig their low and best meddowes,Meddowes cut and ca∣ried into dry grounds. to helpe their vpland hot and heathie grounds. And now of late, the Far∣mers neere London, haue found a benefite, by brin∣ging the Scauingers street soyle, which being mixed as it is with the stone cole dust, is very helpefull to their clay ground: for the cole dust being hot and drie by nature, qualifieth the stiffenesse and cold of the soyle thereabouts.London soile. The soyle of the stables of
London, especially neere the Thaes side, is caried Westward by water, to Chelsey, Futham, Battersay, Putney, and those parts for their sandie grounds. Bai. Whether do you accompt the better, the stall or stable dung▪ Sur. Difference of stable and stall dung.The stable dung is best for cold ground, and the stall dung for hot grounds, if they be both right∣ly applyed. And of all other things, the Ashes that proceed of the great rootes of stocked ground, is fit∣test and most helpefull to a cold clay. So is the sin∣ders that come from the Iron, where hammers or forges are, being made small, and laid thin vpon the cold moist land. Bay. I was once in Somersetshire, about a place neere Tanton, called Tandeane, I did like their land and their husbandry well. Sur. Tandeane, the Paradice of England.You speake of the Paradice of England: and indeed the husbandrie is good, if it be not decayed, since my being in those parts: as indeed (to be lamē∣ted) men in all places giue themselues to too much ease and pleasure, to vaine expence, and idle exerci∣ses, and leaue the true delight, which indeed should be in the true and due prosecution of their callings: as the artificer to his trade, the husbandman to the plow, the gentleman, not to what he list, but to what befits a gentleman, that is, if he be called to place in the commonweal, to respect the execution of Iu∣stice▪ he be an inferior, he may be his owne Bayly, and see the managing and manuring of his owne re∣uenewes, and not to leaue it to the discretion and diligence of lither swaines,A prouident master. that couet onely to get and eae. The eye of the idle master may be worth
two working seruants. But where the master stan∣deth vpon tearmes of his qualitie and condition, and will refuse to put (though not his hand) his eye to∣wards the plow, he may (if he be not the greater: for I speake of the meaner) gentlelize it awhile: but he shall find i farre better, and more sweet in the end, to giue his fellow workmen  in the morning, and affably to call them, and kindly to in∣cite them to their businesse, though he foyle not his fingers in the labor. Thus haue I seene men of good qualitie behaue them towards their people, and in surueying of their hirelings. But indeed it is become now contemptible and reprochfull, for a meane ma∣ster to looke to his laborers, and that is the reason, that many well left, leaue it againe before the time, through prodigalitie and improuidence, and mean men industrious steppe in; and where the former dis∣dained to looke to his charge, this doth both looke and labor, and he it is that becomes able to buy that, which the idle and wanton are forced to sell. Now I say, if this sweet country of Tandeane, and the We∣sterne part of Somersetshire be not degenerated, sure∣ly, as their land is fruitfull by nature,Good hus∣bandry in the West. so do they their best by art and industrie. And that makes poore men to liue as well by a matter of twenty pounds per an∣num, as he that hath an hundred pounds. Bayly I pray you, Sir, what do they more, then other men, vpon their grounds? Sur. They take extraordinarie paines, in soy∣ling, plowing, and dressing their lands.The manner of husbādry in the VVest. After the plow, there goeth some three or foure with mattocks to breake the clods, and to draw vp the earth out of the furrowes, that the lands may lye round, that the water annoy not the seed: and to that end they most
carefully cut gutters and trenches in all places, where the water is likeliest to annoy. And for the better it riching of their plowing grounds, they cut vp, cast, and carry in the vnplowed headlands, and places of no vse. Their hearts, hands, eyes, and all their powers concurre in one, to force the earth to yeeld her vtmost fruite. Bai. And what haue these men in quantitie v∣pon an acre, more then the ordinarie rate of wheat, which is the principall graine? Sur. They haue sometimes, and in some places foure,Great yeel∣ding of wheate. fiue, sixe, eight, yea ten quarters in an ordina∣rie acre. Baily. I would thinke it impossible. Sur. The earth, I say, is good, and their cost and paines great, and there followeth a blessing, though these great proportions alwaies hold not. And the land about Ilchester, Long Sutton, Somerton, Andrey, Middlesy, Weston, and those parts, are also rich, and there are good husbands. Bai. Do they not helpe their land much by the fold? Sur. Not much in those parts: but in Dorset, Wilt-shire, Ham-shire, Barke-shire, and other places cham∣pion, the Farmers do much inrich their land indeed with the sheepfold.The Sheepe∣fold. A most easie, and a most profita∣ble course: and who so neglecteth it, hauing meanes, may be condemned for an ill husband: nay, I know it is good husbandrie, to driue a flocke of sheepe o∣uer a field of wheate, rye, or barly, newly sowne, e∣specially if the ground be light and dry: for the tram∣pling of the sheepe, and their treading, doth settle
the earth about the corne, keeping it the more moist and warme, and causeth it to stand the faster, that the wind shake it not so easely,Sheepes trea∣ding good for corne. as it will doe when the roote lyeth too hollowe. Bai. I cannot reprooue you. But I knowe grounds of a strange nature in mine opinion: for if they be once plowed, they will hardly graze againe in 6. or 7. yeeres: yet haue I seene as rich wheate and barly on it, as may well approoue the ground to be very fruitfull.Grounds long in grazing. And if a stranger that knoweth not the ground, looke vpon it after a crop, he will say it is very barraine. Sur. Such ground I knowe in many places, as in the Northwest part of Essex, in some places in Cam∣bridgeshire, Hartfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Wiltshire. But commonly, where you find this kind of earth, it is a red or browne soile, mixed with a kind of white, and is a mould betweene hot and cold,The cause why grounds will not graze in long time. so brittle in the vpper part, and so fickle, as it hath no firme set∣ling for the grasse to take rooting so soone, & in such sort as in other firmer grounds: and for this kind of ground, good and well rotted stable dung is fittest. Let vs I pray thee, walke into the next field, the Lords demeisnes, called as I take it, Highfield. Bay. It is indéede, a large ground you sée it is▪ and good pasture, but so ouergone with Thistles, as we can by no meanes destroy them. Sur. This kind of Thistle approoueth the good∣nes of the ground, they seldome or neuer growe in a barraine soile. Bay. Yes, I haue seene thistles in meane ground. Sur. It may be so, a kind of smal hungry dwarffy thistle, but this kind which you see large, high and fatty, you shall neuer see in aboundance, in a weake soile.
Bail. But I wish they were fewer in number: though they may be a note of good ground, I find thē nothing profitable, vnles it be to shrowd the vnder grasse in the parching Summer, rom the heate of the scorching Sunne, for they are good for no other vse that I can find. Sur. That is some benefite: but the best way to kill them,Thistles, how to kill them. is to take them vp often by the rootes, euer as they beginne to spring, and either presently to rake them vp, and carry them out of the fields, or else to beate them in small peeces: for their nature is to reuiue againe like an Adder, that is not thorowly battered in the head, and cut in peeces. Such is the nature of this kind of Thistle,Thistle, the nature. that though it be pluck∣ed vp by the roote, if it lie still vpon the ground, as soone as it receiueth the euaporation of the earth, his sliie nature gathers a kind of new life, and be∣ginnes to fasten & cleaue it selfe to the earth againe, and to shoote foorth small strings, which entring in∣to the earth againe, will bring foorth many for one. Bai. That is, if they be cut when they are seeded, the seedes fall and increase. Sur. Nay, if you cut them in their infancie: for if they be not cut often, & that, as soone as they shewe themselues a foote high or lesse, the roote will reco∣uer,The rootes of vegitable things, like the liuer in the body. and bud againe: the roote is as the liuer in the body, from whence proceedeth all the bloud that feedeth the veines, that quickneth the body, which by obstrction and stopping of the passages, putrifieth. So the rootes of these vegitables, when the branches are againe & againe cut off as they spring, the roote is left so ouercharged with moisture, that it wil in the end yeeld, and giue ouer bearing, and die: as will al∣so Rushes, Flagges, and such like, which though they be strong by nature,Rushes. Flagges. Heath. yet by this meanes they will be destroyed soonest. Baily. But what say you to this heathy ground?
I thinke of all other grounds, this is the most vnpro∣fitable. Sur. Indeede, naturally all heathy grounds are barraine, and that comes by the saltnes of the soile. Bai. Doth all barrainnesse procéede of saltnes? Sur. As leannes in a mans body, is principally procured by saltnes of the humor:Saltnes, hot and drie. So is barrainesse in grounds; for salt is hot, and heate drieth, and too much drowth breeds barrainesse and leannesse. And according to the measure and proportion of the de∣cree of hot and cold, moisture and drinesse, are all grounds fruitfull and barraine, as the bodie by these causes is fat or leane. Therefore, though heathy grounds be commonly in the highest degree of bar∣rainesse, yet are some more in the meane then some. Some are more tractable and more easily reduced to some vse then others, and therefore hath sundry names. Heath is the generall or common name, whereof there is one kind, called Hather, the other,Hather. Ling. Ling. And of these particulars, there are also sundry kinds distinguished by their seuerall growth, leaues, stalkes, and flowers: as not far from Graues end, there is a kind of Hather that beareth a white flowre, and is not so common as the rest,Heath diuers kinds. and the ground is not so exceeding barraine as some other, but by manu∣rance would be brought to profitable tillage. Some, and the most, doth beare a purple or reddish flowre, as in the Forest of Windsore, and in Suffolke, and sun∣dry other places; and this kind is most common, and groweth commonly in the worst ground. In the North parts, vpon the Mountaines and Fells, there is a kind of Ling, that beares a berry: euery of these hath his peculiar earth wherein it delighteth. Some in sandy, & hot grounds, as betweene Wilford bridge, and Snape bridge in Suffolke. And that is bettered es∣pecially, and the heath killed best and soonest, by
good fat marle. Some in grauelly and cold earth, and that is hard to be cured, but with good stable dung.Heathy ground vn∣profitable. But there is a kind of heathie ground, that see∣meth altogether vnprofitable for tillage, because that the grauell & clay together retaineth a kind of black water, which so drencheth the earth, & causeth so much cold, as no husbandry can relieue it, yet if there be chalk-hils nere this kind of earth, there may be some good done vpon it: for that onely or lime will comfort the earth, drie vp the superfluous wa∣ter, and kill the heath. But the sandy heathie ground is contrarily amended, as I told you, with fat marle and that is commonly found neere these heathie grounds, if men were prouident and forward to seeke for it. Euery of these heathie grounds are best known of what nature they be of,How to find the natures of the hea∣thie grounds whether hot or cold, by the growing of it: as if it grow low and stubbed, it argues the ground to be grauelly, cold, and most barren; where it groweth ranke and high, and the stalke great, the ground is more warme, and more apt for tilth, yet it requireth some kind of composte, else will it not beare past a crop or two, contenting the owner: but if men will not indeuor to search for the hidden blessings of God, which he hath laid vp in store in the bowels of the earth,The earth commanded to deny vt fruite with∣out labor. for their vse that will be painefull, they may make a kind of idle & vaine hew of good husbandry, whē indeed they only plow, and sow, and charge the earth, to bring foorth fruite of it owne accord, when we know it was cursed for our sakes, and commanded to deny vs increase, without labour, sweate, and charge, which also are little auaileable, if we serue not him in feare and re∣uerence, who is the author of true labors, and of the blessings promised thereunto. Bai. I thinke there is no disease in the body of man, but nature hath giuen vertue to some other
creatures, as to hearbes, plants, and other things,All kinds of grounds haue their helpe. to be medicines for the same: so is there no kind of ground so meane, barren, and defectiue, but God hath prouided some meanes to better it, if man, to whom he hath giuen all, will search for it, and vse the same to that end it was prouided for. And yet this peece of ground adioyning, hath had much la∣bour and great cost bestowed on it, and the ground little or nothing the more reformed:Furse. This fursy close. Sur. In deed it is a strong weed, called in the North Coūtry, Whynns. It seldome giues place where it once footeth,Whynns. I will goe see the forme of the fur∣ses. These furses are not worth the fostering, they be dwarffe furses, & wil neuer grow great, nor igh,Dwarfe furses. and of little vse. Bai. I speake not to learne how to preserue them, but how to destroy them. Sur. But there is a kind of Furse worth the pre∣seruation, if it grow in a Countrie, barren of wood. And of that kind there growes much in the West part of Deuonshire, and in some parts of Cornwall, where they call them French Furses,French Fures. they grow very high, and the stalke great, whereof the people make faggots, and vent them in neighbour Townes, espe∣cially in Exeter, and make great profit of them. And this kind of Furze groweth also vpon the sea coast of Suffolk: But that the people make not that vse of them, as in Deuonshire and Cornewall, for they suffer their sheepe and cattell to bruize them when they be young, and so they grow to scrubbed and low tufts,Quick set hedges of Furse. seldome to that perfection that they might; yet in that part of Suffolk they make another vse of them, they plant them in hedges, and the quickset of them make a strong fence. Bai. Uery silly quickset hedges, I would thinke,
can be made of simple furzes. Sur. Such as after two or three yeares, being cut close to the earth, they will then branch and become so thicke, as no hedge, if the ditch be well made, and quicke well set, can be more defensible, being set in two or three ranckes. Bay. I maruell they learne it not in Cornwal, where for want of quick-set, and haying or hedging stuffe,Fences of Turffes and Stones. especially in the West parts, they are forced to make their fences with turffes and stones. Sur. They do so indeed, vpon the Moors there: but sheepe will easily scale their walles. But the Furse hedges which I haue seene in that part of Suff. no cattle can pierce them. Bai. Then are these furzes good for nothing. Sur. To brew withall and to bake, and to stop a little gappe in a hedge. Bayly. Then may we hereabouts affoord the stan∣ding of them: for we haue no great plenty of these necessaries in these parts. Sur. I see no store of hay boote, vnlesse it be in the Lords wood, where I thinke it be not lawfull for men at their pleasure to take. Bay. What meane you by hay boote? I haue read it often in Leases, and I promise you, I did euer take it to be that which men commonly vse in hay time, as to make their forkes and tooles, and lay in some kind of losts or hay taliets, as they call thē in the West, that are not boorded: and is not that the meaning? Sur. I take it not: it is for hedging stuffe, name∣ly,Hay boot, what it is. Hedge boote and hay boot the differēce. to make a dead hedge or raile, to keepe cattle from corne or grasse to be mowne. Bai. What difference then is there betwéene hay boote and hedge-boote. Sur. Some there is: for a hedge implieth quick-set
and trees: but a hay a dead fence, that may be made one yeare, and pulled downe another, as it is common vpon the downes in many countries where men sow their corne, in vndefenced grounds, there they make a dead hay next some common way to keepe the cattle from the corne. Baylie. If that be the difference, we haue some vse of it also in this country, but we want it much, as you sée, by the lying of our hedges. Sur. I see the hedges lye very vnhusbandly: a true note of few good husbands: for he that will suffer his hedges to lye open, and his houses vncouered, neuer put a good husbands hand to his head. Quicke-set hedges are most commendable: for they increase & yeeld profit and supply, to repaire decayed places: but dead hedges or hayes deuoure and spend,Dead hedges deuoure. and yet are seldome secure. Bayly. I pray, what is the best stuffs to make quick-set of? Sur. The plants of white thorne, mixed here and there with oke and ash. Bayly. But the plants are not easily gotten in all places. Sur. Then the berries of the white or hawthorn,How to make a quick-set hedge. acornes, ash keyes mixed together, & these wrought or wound vp in a rope of straw, wil serue, but that they will be somewhat longer in growing. Bayly. How must the rope thus stuffed with the former berries be layd? Sur. Make a trench at the top or in the edge of the ditch, and lay into it some fat soyle, and then lay the rope all along the ditch, and couer it with good soile also, then couer it with the earth, and euer as any weedes or grasse begins to grow, pull it off & keepe it as cleane as may be from all hindrances: & whē the
seeds begin to come, keepe cattle from bruising them, and after some two or three yeares, cut the yong spring by the earth, and so will they branch and grow thicke, and if occasion serue, cut them so again alwayes, preseruing the Oake and Ashe to become trees. Bayly. Time of quick set∣ting.What is the best time to lay the berries in this manner? Sur. In September or October, if the berries be fully ripe. Bay. What if a man were desirous to make a little grouet, where now no kind of such plantes doe grow? Sur. How to make a gro∣uet.Till the place with the plow, in manner of fallowing▪ and crosse plow it, and bent the clods smal as may bee: Then sow or sett Acornes, Ashkeyes, Hawes, Hedgberries, Nuts, and what else you desire▪ and then arrow it, and for some two or three yeres it were good to keepe it as free from grasse or weeds as could be, vntill the seeds were aboue the grasse, and when they be somewhat stronger, the superflu∣ous weeds will bee the more easely culd out. I know a wood sowne of Acornes about two and twentie yeares since, the Oakes whereof are now as high as an ordinary steeple. The ground in this case must be considered: for some grounds are more naturally inclyned to foster such things, and some are not. Some kind of wood also loueth one kind of soyle more then another, as the Iuniper delighteth in a chalkie soyle,Seuerall trees and the grounds the like. as appeareth in Kent and Surrey. So doth also the Yew tree, which brooketh a light and barren soyle. The Walnut tree likewise in meane ground being hott, and the Elme a sandy earth, the Aspe, the Popple, the Alder, the Able trees moyst ground, the Oake most kinds of ground. Bay. I haue a peece of land, ouercome with a
kind of weed that is full of prickles, and groweth a foot or two foothigh, whereof no cattell will feed, and I know no way to destroy it. Sur. By your description it should be Gorse or prickle broome,Gorse. a weed that groweth commonly vp∣on grounds ouertilled, and worne out of heart, and it commonly groweth not but in cold clay ground, and is hardly killed, but with lyme or chalke, and so plowed, & then sow it two or three crops together. And if you then let it lie, it will beare you the next yeare a cropp of course Hay, and will then yerely increase in goodnes for pasture or Hay, & so much the sweeter and thicker, if you keepe it low eaten. Bay. I thinke you mistake the weed, you meane, I take it, Furse or Whyns, which some call also Gorse. Sur. I thinke I mistake it not, but such as call Furse, Gorse, are as much mistaken, as they that call Brakes, Broome. Bay. Because you speake of Broome,Broome. I know a Lordship of my Landlords, which no doubt you shal suruey too, it is much pestered with Broome, and there hath beene much charge and paynes, and Art too bestowed in destroying of them, but al in vaine. They haue beene cut, stocked vp by the roots, as was thought, burnt and plowed, and yet they grow againe. Sur. It is the nature of Furse, Broome,Furse, Broome, Brakes, their nature. and Brakes, to keepe their standing, and hardly wil yeeld the possession once gotten in a field: for commonly they like the soyle wel, and the soyle them, & where there is a mutuall congruitie, there is seldome a vo∣luntary seperation. And therefore, as long as there is not a disturbance of their possession with a contrarie earth, they will keepe where they are: for as the Fish loueth and liueth in the water, the Camelion by the
Ayre, the Salamander in the fire, and either of them being taken from his element, wil die. So these kinds of weeds (for so they may be called) as long as they possesse the soyle they affect, doe what you can, they will liue. And therefore as the soyle is commonly barrain hott,How to kill Furse, Broome, and Brakes. and dry wherein they liue, make this ground fatt and fruitfull, and they will die. And therefore the greatest enemie that may bee set to in∣counter them, is good and rich Marle, and thereup∣on, the Plowe some few yeeres together: And you shal see, they wil shrinke away, and hide their heads. Bail. But commonly this kind of fatt Marle is not to be gotten in all places; nay seldome where these barren grounds are. Sur. It is true, they commonly come not, and say to the lazie husbandman, Here I am. It is the na∣ture of all things to couet rest, and where dumbe and dead thngs urke, is not easily found without dili∣gent search,All hidden benefits must be sought for Gold, Siluer, Brasse, Tynn, Lead, Cole: Slate, and great Milstones, shew not themselues vo∣luntarily, but are found by scrutation and discretion. And I thinke, many treasureable blessings lie hid from slouthfull men, for want of search, and worthi∣ly. So doth this notable cōmoditie of Marle, from the eyes of the husbandman, vntill he diue into the bowels of the earth, to seeke, and admit hee misse it here, he may find it there, if he fayle to day, he may get it to morrow. But Thryft hath no greater ene∣mies then Ignorance & Idlenes.Ignorance and Idlenes enemies to thrift. The one perswades it cannot be, the other, it wil not be. And betweene these Weeds, Bryers, Thornes, Thistles, Furse, Broome, Gorse and a thousand markes of the first curse annoyous, which by the blessing of God, In∣dustry, and charge might easily and shortly remoue more out of our sights: And yet if the view of them daily could make vs or mooue vs to call our first dis∣obedience
obedience to consideration, & repentance, I would wish thornes to grow where corne stands. But sith no spectacle of former threats, no vse of presēt blessings, will moue the hard harted, either to seeke by labour or charge to reforme these euils, easie to bee refor∣med, Let vs leaue to discourse,None should be idle. and he that hath vn∣derstanding, and will, let him vse them here in this toylesome life, and not be idle: for if we do what wee can, these cankers will follow vs, these inconuenien∣ces wil annoy vs, and will procure euery day, new labour, and newe cost, and newe diligence, and newe Arte, to make vs know, that Omnia proposuit labori Deus. Man of necessity must labour. And whē he hath swett and toyled, and bestowed all his skil & vtmost charge, if God add not a blessing, all is lost. Paul may plant, Apollo may water, but if God giue not the increase, the labour is vaine. God maketh a fruitfull land barraine,Ps. 107.34. for the wickednes of the people that dwel therin there is a curse. Againe, A handful of corne sowne vpon the tops of high mountaines,Psal. 72.26 shal so pros∣per, as the fruites and eare, thereof shal shake like the high Cedars in Libanon. Here is a blessing. It is a gracious thing therefore to feare and reuerence him, whose blessing and cursing so much preuaile, and to pray to him for successe in our endeuors, and to glorifie him for his blessings. Bai. You haue diuinely concluded: And I wish not onely the wordes of mouth, but the substance of your meaning were fully ingrauen, and truly sea∣ted in the hearts of all that labour. So, no doubt, but the Lord would bee alwayes readie to blesse their indeuours: Although indeed Iob saith, The earth is giuen into the hands of the wicked,Iob. 9.24.8.21.7. and they waxe old and wealthie. And Dauid in diuers and sūdry places declareth that the wicked prosper most n the world. And I tell you, it is a daunting
vnto weake men, that thinke they serue God truely, and many tymes it goeth worse with them, then with such as seeme seldome or neuer to call vpon his name. Sur. But when Dauid considered the end of these men,Psal. 37.22 he could say, that the Lord had set them in slippe∣ry places. And that they that are blessed of God, shall inherit the earth: And whatsoeuer they do, it shall pros∣per. Therefore I say, that he that commendeth his la∣bour vnto the Lord, and the successe of all his inde∣uors vnto his diuine prouidence, who doth and can alwayes bring all things to passe for our best good, whether it bee the full fruits of the earth for our re∣leefe and comfort, or scarcitie and want, for our try∣all,Psal. 1.3. he is sure to stand fast, and shall be as a tree planted by the riuers side, whose leafe shall neuer wither: And in the same time of dearth, he shall haue enough to sustayne his necessitie. Bay. It is a good and holy resolution, on which all men ought to rest themselues, with a faithful and patient expectation. And therefore hee that hath far and fruitfull ground, let him bee laborious and thankfull: and hee that hath leane and barraine, let him be painfull and patient. Sur. You say well, and so I leaue you. And for other matters, & better satisfactions in these things thus superficially discoursed, I referre you to the ad∣uice of the better able to resolue you. I will returne to my former taske. Bayly. I thanke you for your patience and pains, and I commend you to your labours. And as your occasions shall challenge my further poore seruice, I shall be readie. FINIS.
