2021 S120819 99856012 21525
THE IVDGEMENT OF A MOST REVEREND AND LEARNED MAN FROM BEYOND THE SEAS, CONCER∣NING A THREEFOLD ORDER OF BISHOPS, WITH A DE∣CLARATION OF CERTAINE OTHER WAIGHTIE POINTS, CONCERNING THE DISCI∣PLINE AND GOVERNEMENT OF THE CHVRCH.
THE IVDGMENT OF A MOST REVEREND AND LEARNED MAN FROM BE∣yond the seas, concerning a threefolde order of Bishops: with a declaration of certaine other waightie pointes, concer∣cerning the discipline and gouernement of the church. We must needes make three bishops. 1 Of God. 2 Of man. 3 Of the deuil. A Bishop ordained of God, or set vp by the law of God, doth de∣clare nothing els but their cal∣ling, which by an other more speciall name, are called Pastoures, whome (saieth Luke) the holy Ghost hath ap∣pointed Etheto e∣piscopon poykanein ten eccle∣sian tou theou. Bishops to feede the Church of GOD. And either of these names of Pastour or of Bishop, is proper to them in the newe Testament, where∣by the Apostle doeth distinguish them from Apostles, Prophets, and Euange∣lists, which were callings to endure for a tyme, Ephes. 4. 11. and from Deacons, 1. Tim. 3. and Phil. 1. 1. for otherwise they
are euery where called Elders, & Paule doth call his Apostleship a Deaconship. Rom. 11. 13. But they are called Bishops in regard of the sheepe committed vnto them, as though a man should call them watchmen of ouerseers. These now were one alone, as where any church had but one Pastor, or more if the Church had more then one. And the meeting of them together ioyntly with their Elders, whom Paule calleth gouernours, of the other commō name eureuses Presbyte∣ion. called, was the Eldership. Their duetie was to attend on the worde and praier, both publikely and priuately, and in common to gouerne the Church, as appeareth by many places of Scripture. That the same were subiect to magi∣strates, though prophane, appeareth not onely by the example of Christ the high Priest, and of the Apostles, but al∣so by the expresse wordes of Paul, 1. Ti∣moth. 2. and Luke 12. 13.
OF THE BISHOP THAT is of man. THe Bishop that is of man, that is to say, brought into the Church by the alone wisedome of man, besides the expresse word of God, is a certain pow∣er giuen to one certaine Pastour aboue his other fellowes, yet limited with cer∣tain orders or rules prouided against ty∣ranny. They which did beare this office of bishop, are called bishops in regard of their fellow Elders and the whole cler∣gie, as watchmen set ouer the clergie. That this calling was not brought in by the word, it is manifest by that, that there is not to be found in the new Te∣stament, so much as one syllable, where∣by there may be the least surmise of any such thing. For although we doubt not, but all thinges ought to be done order∣ly in the lordes house, and therfore that some one should be president in euery assembly, whom Iohn in the Reuelatiō seemeth to call the Angell of the Chur∣ches. And Austen calleth the modera∣tor Proestota, yet this moderator of actiōs
of the Church, sauyng this one thing, that he was the first in order in the cō∣pany; had no authority ouer his felows, neither did hee exercise any higher of∣fice. Therefore the author of the epistle to the Hebrewes, as Hierome noteth, doeth cal the whole company of the el∣ders, Egoume∣nous. Hebr. 13. gouernours; not any one certayne man. Such a one was Peter many times in the very assembly of the Apostles, of a great authoritie surely amongst the A∣postles, who were all otherwise equall, and yet he himselfe one of the compa∣ny of the Apostles, sent by his compa∣nions to Samaria with Iohn, Act. 8. 14. and in the assembly giuing an account of his ministery, to those which were of the Circumcision, Acts 11. 2. But if any such bishoplike authoritie of any one a∣boue the rest, as there was afterwardes, had bin then, surely the apostles would haue set down their names euen at that tyme, in their letters which they sent from one to another, especially seeing Paule in his epistle to the Philip. doth name bishops in the plural number, and Deacons: or there should haue bene at
least some peculiar mention made of them. Which, seeing it is not done, it appeareth that amongest these gouer∣ners, there was none in degree aboue their companions and fellow bishops: but as occasion serued, the Churches were gouerned by a fellowlike & equal authoritie, among the fellow-elders in their elderships, he onely going before the rest, whose godlines and authoritie, the company did most allow of. Epiphanius against the Arrians, de∣fending the contrary opinion: name∣ly, the bishop ordained by man, as or∣dained by God, doth bring forth three reasons to the contrary. Two as it were out of the word of God: the third out of the history of those tymes. The first place is, 1. Tim. 5. 1. Rebuke not an El∣der, Presbyte¦ron me ¦peplexen &c. whereby he gathereth, that Ti∣mothie had some authoritie ouer the Elders, that is, the Pastors of the church of Ephesus. But (be it spokē with the fa∣uour of so woorthy a man) hee should haue marked, that here an elder is cal∣led, he that is such by age, not he that is a Pastor, which is declared by the op∣position
next following of yong men.  reote∣. An other place is out of the same Epistle, Receyue not an accusation agaynst an Elder, the first of Timothie 5. 19. Whereby he gathereth, that the Elders were subiect to the Bishops and tribunall seate. But who will graunt hym that Timothie was Bishop of E∣phesus. For the history will easily re∣ell that, which the fathers doe report as certayne. For no man can denie that Timothie was one that accompa∣nied Paule, and therefore no bishop as∣signed to any one certaine place, who was sent one while to this place, an o∣ther to that, for the establishing of the Churches: and finally, that he was an Euangelist, and not a bishop of any one certayne flocke. I haue desired thee (saieth hee) to abide at Ephesus, whilest I went into Macedonia. And why so? namely, to looke to the Church which hee had begunne to establish, vntill he were called for agayne, which he doth in the other epistle. What? and did the Apostle robbe the Ephesians of their Bishop, without asking their church at
the least? Surely, when he went last to Ierusalem, neuer mindyng to returne to Ephesus, eyther he would haue resto∣red Timothie vnto them, or the Ephe∣sians would haue required him agayne of the Apostle, when hee put them in minde of so great danger at hand: or if another were to be put into his roume, hee would haue made expresse menti∣on in that his diuine Sermon. But he is sayd to haue sent for the Elders onely, and to haue warned them of the duetie belongyng to them all. Yet it need not seeme straunge to any, that the Euan∣gelist Timothie, a man indued with so many and so great giftes remainyng at Ephesus, did gouerne all thinges by his direction, as one in degree aboue the Elders, and by the Apostles authoritie appointed there for a tyme. But let vs graunt Epiphanius more then this, that Timothie had the authoritie of the laying on of handes out of these woordes of the Apostle, Laye not handes sodainely vpon any: Let vs graunt this too, that these duties belōged to the gouernors, yet we deny
that Timothie could haue had any au∣thoritie therefore, ouer the Elders of E∣phesus, except he had bin an Euange∣list. For Paule himselfe Tim. 4. 14. doth shew sufficiently that the laying on of the hands was done, in the name of the Eldership it selfe, not by the authoritie of any superior. Now the reasons of the same Epiphanius are these: Bishops (saieth hee) begette the fathers of the Church, but Elders the sonnes, in as∣much as bishops and not Elders ordai∣ned bishops. But what is this els, then to aske to haue that which is in questi∣on: for it may be and ought to bee an∣swered, that the bishops tooke that au∣thoritie vpon them, without warrant of the word of God, and that the rule is false, which cōcerning this matter, doth attribute it to the Apostles, which may be shewed by the ordaining of Timo∣thie by the Eldership. Againe, foras∣much as election is the chiefe ground of church-offices, which dependeth of the voyces of the whole company, and not of the laying on of handes, which made not bishops, but sent them into
their possession after they had made them: we may more truly affirme with the Apostle, that the holy Ghost by the voices of the children themselues, made the fathers, and not the bishops. An other of his reasons is, a depra∣uing of places alleaged out of Paul, that the Church being new borne, bishops could not be so established euerywhere at the first, as is to be seene in the electi∣on of Deacons. Whom yet can Epipha∣nius perswade, that it was for want of fit men onely, that there were many bi∣shops in euery Church? For that which not onelye Hierome, but Epiphanius against the Miletians also reporteth, concerning them of Alexandria: that is, Alexandria neuer had two bishops, as the other cities, vpon what ground Oupote lexandr duo epis pous eich os kai al poleis. the men of Alexandria did it, & folow∣ed not the examples of other churches, let them see to it. Finally, that this kind of bishop, which who so beareth it, is not the first in or∣der amongst his felow elders, but in de∣gree aboue them, beyng the onely man in his diocesse, is not ordeined by the
word of God, but by custome amongst the fathers Hierome witnesseth, as very many others long since haue obserued: For these are his woordes in his epistle to Euagrius. The Apostle (saieth hee) doeth teach plainely, that Elders and Bishops are all one, &c. And where as one af∣ter was chosen to bee set ouer the rest, that (saith he) was a remedy found out for remedy of schisme, that euery one drawyng Christ vnto himselfe, myght not rend the Church in sunder. For at Alexandria also from the tyme of Marke the Euangelist, to the tyme of Heraclea and Dionysius the Bishop, the Elders placed one in a high degree or place, chosen by themselues, whom they cal∣led a bishop. Moreouer, vppon the first to Titus. An Elder and a Bishop (saith hee) is all one, and before by the insti∣gation of the deuill, there was perta∣kyng in religion, it was sayd amongest the people: I am of Paule, of Apol∣los, and of Caephas: the Churches were gouerned by the common aduise of the Elders. But after that euery one
imagined, that those whome he bapti∣sed were his owne, and not Christes: it was decreed throughout the whole world, that one chosen of the Elders, shoulde bee set aboue the rest; vnto whome all the care of the church might appertayne, to the takyng away of the seedes of contentions. And a little af∣ter, As the Elders knowe that they ate subiect by the custome of the Churche to the Bishop that is set ouer them: so let the Bishops knowe, that they are greater then the Elders, rather by custome, then by any vertue of the Lordes appoyntment. Yea and Au∣gustine also in his 19. epistle saieth, that according to the titles of honor, which the vse of the Church hath gotten, the office of a bishop is greater then the of∣fice of an Elder. Chrysostome also witnesseth, vpon the first to Timothie and the 3. chapter, That the Bishops differ from the Elders onely in ordinatiō; that is (as Theophi∣lact speaketh more plainly) in the onely ceremonie of consecration. Theodoret writing vpon the same place, saith, That
in olde tyme they called the same men Elders and Bishops, as though forsooth the thing it selfe had then bene onely called by another name, and goeth a∣bout to prooue that, because Paule cal∣leth Epaphroditus the Apostle of the Philippians. This is of no weight at all. The names which are giuen of fellow labourer, and fellow souldiour, do de∣clare that he was no bishop in this kind of bishop, but an Euangelist tied to no one citie, much lesse to a diocesse, of the number of those, whome the Apostles did keepe, to send to and fro, at the mo∣tiō of the spirit of God. The councell of Nice also, disputing about the degrees of bishops, alleageth ancient customes, whereof we minde to speake anon. And where as Cyprian not in one place, cal∣leth the bishops successors of the Apo∣stles, whose authoritie is from God; and if we take it so, as though by the very commandement of God, these bishops are the same, that in tyme past the Apo∣stles, the thing it selfe doth refute that, seeyng there was alwayes a certain por∣tion assigned to euery bishop. But the
Apostles, by the direction of the spirite rite of God, though not confusedlie, did exercise their ministery throughout the whole worlde. But if this be true, there should haue beene more bishops, in the Church of Rome it selfe: name∣ly Peter and Paul, which yet afterwards was counted peculiar to one. And sure∣ly, ther cannot be mo, the cheefe in one and the same company at one time. And whereas the name of Byshops, is sayd of the Apostleship. Acte. 1. 20. It maketh nothing to the matter, except a man by a like reason woulde haue the Deacons to haue bin Apostles, because Paul calleth his Apostleship a Deacon∣ship or ministery. But we are to looke Didnian into that also, that Hierome mighte seeme to be of the mind, that this kinde of Byshop begun thē, when as schismes arose vp in the Church. That this is not so, we may gather out of Paul him self, who of purpose writing to the Corin∣thians about the same matter, doth not onely passe ouer this remedy: but also as foreseeing such a matter, doth in the title of the epistle, ioyne vnto him selfe
Sosthenes, to teach by his example how carefully this Primacie is to be auoyded in assemblies of the Church, who (it is euident were not onely the first in or∣der next vnto Christ, but also highest in degree) did execute their ministerie in common. Wherefore, no not the same Paule alone would excommunicate the incestuous persons by his Apostolicall authoritie, but by the authoritie of the whole Eldership, neither doeth Peter doubt to call himselfe fellow elder. Sunpros∣buteron. Nay this is so farre off from being a∣ny good remedy, from staying of schis∣mes, that contrary wise there was neuer more bitter contention in the Church, then about this primacie which had ne∣uer come to passe, if this preheminence aboue their fellowes had bene forbid∣den, or rather, if men had neuer brought it in. Whereupon we conclude, that this kind of bishop which is not of order, but of superioritie, was brought in of man, & as Hierome saith Tit. 1. by litle & litle, & that so as he is in deede thought, that the planets of dissentions might be thereby plucked vp, all the care was
committed to one man. And whereas he sayth in the same place, that it was decreed thoroughout all the world: We are to vnderstand it no otherwise, then of a priuy custome, brought in by little & little. And what soeuer is found in Ignatius, or other an∣cient Writers, when the byshop of Sa∣than was not yet found out, touching the authority of the byshops or ouer∣seers (as Iustin speaketh) is to be vnder∣derstood of this kind of Bishop. THE BISHOP OF THE Deuill. THus also we describe the bishop of the deuill: that euen as that kind of bishop ordained of God, degenerated by litle and litle, into an humane ordi∣nance, whereof we intreated in the se∣cond place: so this of the deuill, against which we now labour, is sprouted forth of the corruptiō of the bishop brought in by man. Of this intollerable corrup∣tion there are foule, most manifest, and vndoubted markes. Some of this kinde
of bishops haue wholy singled them∣selues from the Elderships, so that they haue nothyng to do with them: Some haue wholy abolished them. And that they haue chalenged vnto themselues, and I knowe not to what Officials the whole guidance of the church, & chief∣ly the authoritie to elect, to depose, and to excommunicate: so as they not one∣ly are aboue others, but as it were alone do exercise Lordship ouer Gods heri∣tage, contrary to the expresse inhibition of Peter. That also they haue inuaded vppon temporall dominions, contrary to the flat commaundement of Christ. And that they will not onely be present, but also President in causes of this lyfe, and affaires of the Common wealth, the cō∣mandement of the Apostle to the con∣trary notwithstandyng, 2. Tim. 2. 1. Cor. 6. yea and that of Christ himselfe, Luke 13. 14. That also they waste in riot & state∣linesse agaynst conscience and al shame, the goods consecrate to holy vses. That also they haue tied the spirit of
God to certaine places and persons, as though the bishop of the more noble place, must needes haue necessary giftes aboue the rest: or as though hee, who now is most fit, must needs be so alwais. And last of all, that they are the i∣mage of that beast which is described, Apoc. 13. as Pope Anacletus hymselfe witnesseth, epist. 2. in as much as they are distinguished among themselues, by those their thrones and degrees, accor∣ding to the paterne of the Roman Em∣pire. The Apostle, Act. 20. 19. foretold of this Hierarchie, as they terme it, of the false bishop, which in tyme became an Antichristian primacie. And in the 3. Iohn 9. it is most manifest, that Sathan begun euen then to lay the foundation of this mysterie. Now out of the history of the Ni∣cene Councell, which otherwise tou∣ching doctrine was euery where recey∣ued, it is cleare how foule dissentions were euen then, of orderyng the bonds betweene the bishops, the fountaines whereof they were so farre from dam∣myng vg, that pretending auncient cu∣stomes,
they confirmed the Patriarkship, and made a way for the horrible Papa∣cie of Rome then slidyng on, and vn∣derlayd the seate for the harlot that sit∣teth vpon seuen mountaines. But farre be it of, that these things, although they haue their auncient and great authori∣tie, should be preiudiciall to the deuine and Apostolicall writings, according to the rule, whereof there is no wise man will doubt, that the Councels thēselues are to be squared. And to what purpose should I con∣fute that agreemēt betweene the priest∣hood of the Leuites, & of Christ, which some old writers alleage to prooue this diuelish oligarche, and at the length euē playne tiranny. In deede it is euident, that the high priest was a figure of Christ himselfe, whose second image if we graunt that the bishops are, it wil fo∣low, that there are as many images of Christ, as there be bishops, in as much as there is none aboue him. But contra∣rywise, no bishop hath bene the image of Christ. Besides, bishops are not heds of the vniuersall Church, but of their
owne perticular: Nay, no heads at all, in as much as the Bishops are vnder Archbishops, the Archb. vnder Patri∣arkes, and they agayne vnder the Pope, that is not vnder the true figure, but the counterfet figure of Christ. Now seeing that our onely hed is taken vp into hea∣uen, a successor for whom liuyng for e∣uer, we are not to seeke: who seeth not that the elders ordayned by the law of God, come in the roume of the priestes of the lawe, and the Deacons to answer to the Leuites? The first question. Seeyng that there are ordayned in seuerall Churches, seuerall pastors and ministers, and the authority of all Chri∣stes ministers in the Church seeme to be equall: Whether the office of the bi∣shops be necessary in the church to pro∣cure meetings when occasion serueth, admission to the ministerie, and remoo∣uyng from the place vpon iust causes: or whether all the ministers hauyng e∣quall authoritie, and not vnder the au∣thoritie
of any superiour bishop, ought to chuse fit men with the consent of the Patron who enioyeth the benefice, and the people thēselues, as also to correct & remoue frō the charge. And the maners of the people thēselues, who can hardly or not at all be kept in obedience with∣out the bridle of the bishops authority, which may runne through in visityng of the Churches of the prouince, may put vs in mynd to retaine such bishops. Againe, so often as there shalbe dealing in matters touchyng the safetie of the common wealth in the solemne assem∣blies of the land, accordyng to the laws which the kingdome hath of a long vse and custome receiued, there can be no∣thing established without the bishops, who haue the third roume and place in the kingdome, which to take away, or wholy to put downe, would bee very dangerous to the Common wealth. The answer to the first question. Where as Sathans bishop hath bene the ouerthrowe of the Church and all Christian kingdomes, whose head is
the Romaine Antichrist, it is to be loo∣ked vnto of all handes, especially of all godly princes, that they at once abolish it, if they minde the reformation of the Church, and their owne safetie. As for the bishop ordained by mā, & brought into the Churche by little and little, whereby Sathan made him a waye for greater thinges, it had beene tolerable, so that with all the ancient good lawes prouidyng for the resisting of the go∣uernyng by some few, had bene in their former force agayne. But besides, that the state of the world being quite chan∣ged, experience of so many ages doeth teach vs too well, that vnlesse this roote also be plucked vp, it wil come to passe, that the same fruite will sprout and bud forth again. Finally, seing the Lord hath so oftē decided this cōtrouersie of supe∣riority among his own disciples, that he shut it cleane out, seing the rule both for doctrine & good order of the Church, is to bee sought for out of the very wri∣tings of the apostles: & it is manifested, the churches thē prospered, whē all this authoritie of one man ouer the rest, yet
was not, but as that grew vp, so al things fell to decay. Finally, seeyng where the remnants of this gouernment by a few, are not cleane taken away, the woorke of the Lord, is openly hindered: Our iudgement is, that after the chasing a∣way of this deuise of man, the churches shall be wel prouided for, if they may be repaired according to the writynges of the Apostles. And the reformation as it semeth to vs, consisteth herein, that first the whole kingdome is to bee deuided into regions. Agayne, the regions into parishes, either of Cities or countrey townes: that in places most fit, and of greatest assembly, be placed pastors, be∣yng lawfully propounded by the com∣pany of their owne elders, to the kinges christiā maiestie, or the deputies therof, and allowed of all. Lastly, beyng recey∣ued of their own people, ouer whō they are to be set, they be placed, promulga∣tion hauing gone before: and that in euery parish the pastour may haue with hym fit men to assist him, who also may, beyng watchfull, salue vp the offences not so waighty, leauyng the other of
greater importance, to the whole elder∣ship. Also, that eldership made of the pastors of parishes, both of citie & cun∣try, and a sufficient number of men ap∣prooued for their godlines & wisedom, lawfully also chosen, as is aforesayd, bee placed in most fitte places, who assem∣blyng at a certaine tyme and place, may determine of the Church-affayres, of their owne gouernment, accordyng to the prescript lawes, first set downe in a generall councell, and afterward confir∣med by the authoritie of the soueraigne maiestie. In this company let there be chosen by common voyces, one first in order not superior in authoritie, who shall be thought most fit, and that without ma∣king choyse of any certaine place, & but for a certaine tyme. After the expiryng whereof, either let another bee chosen, or els the same man is to be established agayne for another tyme by a new con∣sent: whose office is to make report of the common affaires to the company, to demaund their iudgements, and to giue sentence by the iudgement of the
eldership, hauing no authority giuē him ouer his felows, to whō rather he is most subiect. In this assembly let nothyng be debated of besides maters of consciēce, & that by the word of god, & the lawes of church discipline established, drawen out of the worde of God, not one whit medling with the authority of the ciuil magistrate. And let the soueraign maie∣sty & the lawfull magistrate thereby ap∣pointed, be keepers of this order, & the punisher of those that seditiously rage against it. But if any shal imagin that this sodain abolishing of both these bishops will minister occasion of new stirres, al∣though we see not with what consciēce the bish. may so chalenge to themselues the goods of the church, or els call thē∣selues bishops, & liue like princes of this world: yet for to keep the cōmon peace, the soueraigne maiesty may leaue vnto thē, which are now bishops, their reue∣nues whole for their lyfe tyme, so they trouble not the well made order of the Church, with prouiding there be none chosen into their place, when they bee dead. As for the frowardnes of the peo∣ple,
it may be kept downe better a great deale by other reynes, then by the au∣thoritie of a false named bishop; as by preaching of the word of God, by cen∣sures of the church, and the authoritie of the magistrate of the cuntry, agaynst the open troubles of the publike state, either ecclesiastical or ciuil. The Chur∣ches may very wel be visited at set times without any great cost and bishoplike pride, by thē whō euery eldership hath chosen vnder the K. maiesties authority which wil not be alwais necessary, if the elders do rightly execute their office. This sitting of the bish. with the autho∣rity of the voice in the publike estates of the kingdom, came in with a manifest a∣buse, cōtrary to the word, & therfore in our mind is to be vtterly abolished. For the bish. hath nothing to do in ordring of meer ciuil affairs: yet forasmuch as in such assemblies, especially some things many times happen, belonging to the establishing of the estate, & order of the churches: the kepers wherof the godly magistrates ought to be, & not the ouer turners, as we are taught by the exāple
of holy kings. It is very necessary, that as often as the meetinges of the land are proclaymed, intelligence thereof be gi∣uen to the chiefe elders, who may bee present in the behalfe of their seigno∣ries, yet not sittyng as iudges, but dea∣ling about matters of the church onely with the estates of the land, as their el∣derships haue giuen them in charge, ex∣cept the states thinke good vpon extra∣ordinary occasion, that they aske coun∣sell of God about some other affaires also. If also the kinges Maiestie thinke good to admit into counsell amongest the pastors or elders, one, who shall bee thought to be wise and experienced in things, he may admit him, though not as a pastor or elder, yet as a citizen. And it were iniurious to remooue from their office in the Church, the pastours, and much lesse the Elders and Deacons, o∣therwise laymen frō that degree, which they hold as citizens, either in the com∣mon wealth, or in the assemblies. But the kings maiesty, and all the Princes & Lordes, are to be exceedyng wary, that they make not courtlike gouernours of
their pastors, to the great endamagyng of the Church, as we haue a faire exam∣ple in Eusebius of Nicomedia in the court of Constantine. As for the right of the patronage, least some man should say, that it was gotten for himselfe. Our iudgement is, that it may be concealed, but not without some conditiōs: name∣ly, that he which shall be chosen by the free voyces of the eldership, should bee offred by the Patrone to the kings ma∣iestie, beyng also to set vpon his charge, after the consenting of his flocke. The second question. After that religion is reformed, it hath bene a receiued custome that the bishops, and of the ministers, pastors & elders, so many as should be sent of the bishops, should assemble themselues, that they together with the chiefe Ba∣rons and nobles which professe the true religion, might make enquirie after the doctrine and maners of euery one. But seeyng the prince himselfe is a louer of the true religion, it is a question whe∣ther
there may be such an assembly with out the consent or commandement of the prince. Whether the ministers alone may meete as often as they will. Last of all, whether the nobles and other godly men & elders, (which are yeerely cho∣sen with vs out of the people and nobi∣litie together) may lawfully or expedi∣ently come without the cōmandement of the king to such assemblies. Which assembly of the nobles and people, see∣meth to some altogether needles vnder a godly prince, either because it hath not long since ben receyued by a meere custome without any law, and that vn∣der a prince, who then resisted the reli∣gion, whereby such assemblies myght haue the greater authoritie: or els be∣cause it may seeme dangerous, if so ma∣ny nobles assemble so oftē, without the consent of the king, they may somtimes consult of some thing els besides reli∣gion. Others thinke that this assemblie is in no case to bee refused, but rather that it is very needefull that the Nobles and other religious men be present as
helpers to their ministers in the assem∣bly, bearyng witnesse of their lyfe and the peoples behauiour, otherwyse it will after come to passe, that if an impi∣ous prince raign afterward, that neither ministers may safely assemble, neyther can the determination be put in execu∣tion without the consent, helpe & ayde of the nobles. To the second question. Councels are necessarye in the Church for many causes, both to the retayning of agreement, and also to the seeking of remedies by common aduise for the daungers which fall out. And last of all, to take order for those that rest not in the iudgement of perticular seignories, if they thinke they haue any iniurie done them. And these Coun∣cels are eyther of a whole nation, or of some one Region or Prouince (or Diocesse as they haue begun to speake after the description of the Prouinces of Rome) deuided into many Seigni∣ories.
It is necessary that the Councels of the prouinces be deuided for many cau∣ses, & except there be other vrgent cau∣ses, they would be appoynted rather e∣uery halfe yeere then quarterly, least in discoursing of matters, they spende the tyme in vayne. And it will bee best for the auoyding of ambition, that the Councell be not alwayes assembled in the same place of euery prouince: but as soone as one halfe yeeres Synode is discussed, it may be determined by cō∣mon consent, where shal be the place of the next followyng. It will be very well that two of euery seignorie of the pro∣uince, chosen by common voyces, and sent with some commission, be present at these councels: one a pastor, and the other an Elder or a Deacon. Neyther would we haue any strife about sitting, who should sitte first or last, but euery one to sit, as it shall fall out without any contention, and the iudgement to bee giuen as any one shall sit. Now, he that shal gouern the whole action, who was chosen for this one thing by common consent of voyce, the
chiefe pastor of the place, beyng in the beginning President, which office shall end, when the Councell shall be ended. There are no matters in question to bee propounded to these Councels to take knowledge of, but such as are more spi∣ritual & belong to that prouince, where they are to be decided without appeale by the word of God, & the rules there set downe, without any brabling or di∣sturbance of the company. Yet if any great priuate controuersie shall fall out in the prouinciall Synode, where some may thinke that he hath cause to com∣playne of iniury done vnto him, he may put vp his complaint to be decided in a generall councel, whē it shalbe thought good to assemble it. Furthermore it is chiefly required, that if all the lawes of the Church be e∣stablished of the kings christian maie∣sty: it foloweth, that the Councels are to be assembled by his commandement and direction, and not otherwise. Nei∣ther yet is there a new commission eue∣ry tyme to be sought for of the king for that purpose, seeyng his maiesty hath
once established a law touching the set tymes of ordinary Synodes. But yet if there arise iust cause of suspition of hād∣ling in these metings, other matters be∣sides meere ecclesiasticall, it shall be safe for the kings maiesty to send one of his subiects whō he will, to disgrace by his presence the meeting of the Synodes: where yet he is not to be as a iudge, ex∣cept some thing fall out where it is ne∣cessary that the authoritie of the ciuill magistrate be put betweene. A generall councel of the land is not to be assembled but vpon great causes, which seeyng they agree not with set tymes, it followeth, that they are not to bee standing neither: but as often as some thing shall seeme to fall out of so great waight, either in doctrine or in go∣uernment of the church, as cannot well be decided but in a generall meeting, that prouince is to be carefull, to put o∣ther prouinces in mind concerning that matter, in these halfe yeeres Synodes: that with the consent of all, or the grea∣ter part, they go vnto the kings maiesty, who (as being a christiā prince, is to de∣sire
nothing more, then the peace of the churches) ought without any stay or doubting, at the suite of the Churches, to appoint a place and tyme for a gene∣ral meeting, as the need of the churches shal require. And the same order may seeme to be kept in the generall Coun∣cels, which is in the prouincial, whether before the kings maiesty himselfe, as in some general councels, the emperors of Rome haue bene present, or before the honorable lordes of the kings maiestie. And last of all, whatsoeuer shal be alow∣ed by the common consent of the Sy∣node, shall be confirmed by the kinges maiesties expresse authoritie, after the example of the godly Emperours. The third question. Whether the king or the bishops are to call the assembly of the Church, and as concernyng what matters they may make lawes. To the third question. Wee haue aunswered the first part
of this question already. To the second we answere. First it is not lawful, no not for the angels themselues, to make any lawes for the consciēce, but the church is to be vpholden by those which the Lord hath enacted, seeyng we are now to looke for no newe reuelation, the whole counsell of God touchyng our saluation, being fully & perfectly made manifest. Our iudgement also is, that the discipline or good order is to bee sought for out of the word of God, and to be kept inuiolable, as the second part of christian doctrine. Yet there remay∣neth two things, wherof there may, yea and there ought to be lawes set downe in the Church. For first of all, where as euery thyng is not expressely and in so many wordes set downe in the wri∣tings of the Prophetes and Apostles: therefore in controuersies both concer∣ning doctrine and the substaunce of Church discipline, the Councell ought to comprehend the decidyng of them in vnfallible and plaine heads, as by cer∣tayne rules, like as it was done profita∣bly in those right approoued Councels
both Oecumenie & perticulars, against the blasphemy of the heretikes, and the malipertnesse of the disordered. And where as there come many questions in the seignories, especially when there is dealing about mariages, though there cannot be certaine rules set downe tou∣ching them out of the worde of God: yet so neere as may be, rules drawn out of the comparing of the scriptures, are to be set downe, after which they may be decided: yet is neither any thing takē from the word of God, by the puttyng to of this, so it be rightly done. But this is rather an interpretation of the worde of God, & a declaring how one folow∣eth vpon another. Agayne, where the substance both of doctrine and ecclesia∣sticall discipline abideth whole and vn∣changeable: yet must the outward cir∣cumstances of the order needs be chan∣ged, for the same reason of the person & places, abideth not alwayes. For we see the Apostles loue feastes taken away, & the decrees touching bloud, and that which was strangled. The gouernors of the church are to prouide also, that all
may haue intelligence, at what tyme & place it is expedient for any thing to be done in the Church: yet so as the do∣ctrine it selfe, vnder which we also com∣prehend the ordaining of the sacramēts, abide whole as God hath set it downe. Further, that in setting down the lawes of this order, there be set down nothing foolish or vnprofitable, much lesse any of the old customes retained, which ei∣ther is already stained with superstition, or which may easily make a way to su∣perstition. Lastly, that in all these, there be a great regard of simplicitie, and that the church be not loaded with a multi∣tude of rules. And for the auoyding of the diuer∣sitie of rites, it is necessary that these Ca∣nons, as in olde tyme they called them, be set downe in their generall counsels, that any thing in the same land may be chaunged according to the tyme. But whatsoeuer shall be set downe in those counsels, is to be established by the au∣thoritie of the kings Christian maiestie, as next after God, the keper and defen∣der of the churches.
The fourth question. Whether the papistes are to be ex∣communicate as Apostates, or vtter fal∣lers away, or to be punished with some smaller punishment. To the fourth question. We see not what sword of excom∣munication may be drawen out against those men, who though they were set into the church by no vaine baptisme: yet neuer entred into the fellowship of the pure church. Yea the doores are al∣wayes to stand opē that they may come to heare the word of God, and they are carefully to be allured thether, if at any tyme (as the Apostle saith) they may re∣pent and get out of the snare of the de∣uill, of whom they are holden captiue. But if any shalbe thought to sinne in an open contempt, our iudgement is, that it ought wholy to bee put ouer to the christiā magistrate. We thinke that it be∣seemeth a Christian magistrate to deale much by lenitie in the matter of religiō towards his subiects, not being trouble∣some sectaries, & such as of knowledge blaspheme.
The fift question. For what cause may any be excom∣municated. As put case one kill a man, saying, he did it by chaunce, or of some necessitie for his owne safetie, and is re∣dy to be iudged about that matter, not yet accused either of the king or of the neighbours of him that is killed: Whe∣ther may the Church make inquirie of the fact, whether it wer done of treche∣rie, or by chance, or of necessity, & com∣pell the manslear to professe repentance openly in the church, or to excommu∣nicate him if he refuse. To the fift question. No man earnestly repenting, is to be excommunicate, but after repentaunce, rather ought to bee receiued. And the cause of excommunication ought to be most waighty & a publike offence, seing that onely the extremitie of the diseases must haue extreme remedies. Yet may such men after the thing be knowen, be suspended from receiuyng the Lordes supper (they were woont to cal such mē
restrained) for whom this is thought to be a necessary remedy, that for the great nes of their offence, they may be an ex∣ample to others, or that their repentāce doth stand in need of triall. As for the present question. If the magistrate put in minde of his duety, doe winke at such faults, and yet it be probable, that none is rashly accused: Wee thinke that the Eldership may call him forth, and there as the matter shal require, to exhort him to the acknowledging of the offence: which if ye shall deny, he is to be left to the iudgement of God, neither are the Elders to proceede any further in the hearing of witnesses. The sixt question. Where as in the former age much wealth hath bene giuen by princes and many other, to the bishops, monasteries &c. vnder the name of almes, & so great riches seeme rather to hurt the bishops, then to do them good: and monasteries in the church and common wealth are vnprofitable: what yet should become
of such goods which were once conse∣crate to the church? For seeing the Bi∣shops and ministers haue sufficient of their tithes, whereof they may liue well and honestly, can the prince with the consent of the states of the kingdome, turne the residue eyther to his priuate vse, or the good of the commō wealth, especially seeyng such goods do consist not onely in tithes, but of possessions, both in the country & the city. Which question, seeing it seemeth to bee rather ciuil then ecclesiasticall, I purposed not to trouble you in this point. But where∣as many both learned & godly amōgst vs, are of this minde, that those thinges which haue bene once vowed to holy vses, cannot be giuen to prophane vses, though they be publike, I could not but mention the matter vnto you. To the sixt question. Cōcerning the goods of the church. First of all we suppose great heed ought to be taken, that none do staine himself with handling the church goods. For if God hath taken reuenge of such sacri∣leges,
euen amongst the very idolaters: what trow we will his iudgement be a∣gainst thē which haue spoiled his chur∣ches, and haue prophaned the thinges which were set a parte for his true wor∣ship. Moreouer it is euident, that this tur∣neth greatly to the reproch of the name of God and of his holy gospel, as thogh forsooth papistry hath ben abandoned, not for the loue of the truth, but to rob the church of her goods, and as though new theeues haue entered in the roume of the olde. Nowe, euen as aboun∣daunce doth ouerwhelme the Church, so it is to be feared, least she be brought into great straights by want, whilest ma∣ny now a daies are no lesse sparyng and niggardly in vpholding the true mini∣sterie, then heretofore kinges and prin∣ces themselues haue beene ouerlaui∣shyng: we thinke it needefull to keepe a meane in this poynte, which so wee take will be the best, if first a view be ta∣ken of the daily expences which are ne∣cessary to be made: then if somwhat be laid vp for many thinges extraordinary,
wheras no iust reckoning can be made, and both of these be accounted not spa∣ringly or slenderly, but bountifully and liberally, seeyng that the Church by the goodnes of God hath plenty. Therfore that number is to bee made of parishes and pastors which may very well suffise the people, and euery one is to haue an honest liuing allowed. Order also is to be taken for the elders, who are to assist the pastors that they may conueniently discharge their duety. It would be also iniurious, that the widowes and childrē of the pastors which are dead, should be brought to beggery, who in a care of their calling, were constrained to lay a∣side the care of prouiding for their fa∣milie. Schooles also and vniuersities, se∣ing they are the Seminary of the church are not the least part of the care thereof. Care also is to bee had of almes houses & hospitals, & of churches, that they be kept in reparations, and new builded if need require. Last of all (as I say before) seeyng the churches haue plenty, order must be taken, what shal be brought in∣to the Church treasury yeerely, from
whēce may be fetched that which may suffise in tyme of warre or famine, least then it be to seeke when it should be in a readinesse. When all these things shall faithfully & frankly be brought by sup∣putation into one summe still yeerely: Good and sufficient men are to take or∣der for their collecting, such a way as shall be without trouble or strife. That which shall be found to be ouerplus, is not to be lauished out with other pub∣like reuenues, but to be layed vp by it selfe (for these are of an other nature, though not alwayes gottē after the ho∣nestest sort by the couetous priests) and we thinke that it may be taken & be∣stowed for the seruice of the king∣dome, when the publike necessi∣tie thereof doth require it, e∣specially if the people be so much the more eased.
