22222 99846326 11286
THE Eyght Tragedie of Seneca. Entituled AGAMEMNON. Translated out of Latin in to English, by Iohn Studley, Student in Trinitie Colledge in Cambridge. ¶IMPRINTED AT LONDON in Fletestreat, beneath the Conduit, at the signe of S. Iohn Euangelyst, by Thomas Col∣well. Anno Domini. M. D. LXVI.
¶In Agamemnona Senecae Thomae Newcei. NOn secus arostro crudelis vultur, obunco Caucaseirodit iecur immortale promethe, Inuida mens stolidi, vitio contorta perenni, Derogat assidue famam nomen{que} merentis Cum legis hanc igitur, si quicquā versio ridet, Non quid verba velint, sed quid es ipsa, videto. Sanguine spumante pateras, cum mente reuoluit, Saeuit in Atridem mens impia saenit adulti. Et Deus Atrm patris de crimine, prolem Perdit: et iniustae tollunt Agamemnona, parcae. Debuit exemplum quosuis terrere superbos: Et, cuiuis, opus hoc iuuenis, laudare molestum. Sed siturbaruant in quaeuis aequora praeceps, Flumine paemrum iusto, Deus obruet llos. ¶Uppon the same, to the same, the verses of the same. SIth frends to frends do frēdly graūt in frednly cases muche, And I perceaued that hys cause, and hys request was suche:
How that, to paynfull laboured stuffe my mynd I wolde annex: And do but as his watched worke, whych he doth here contex Deserues: when as the Poets crab∣bed style I wayd aryght: And saw how well, and saw how apt and feetly he dyd wryte: How hydden storyes oft he showes, to make his poet playne: (So as in double offyce he might seeme for to remayne) As sometyme barely to expound, to cōment sometyme eke, So that to vnderstand this booke, ye neede no farther seeke:) This well deserued worke of hys, when as I weyed well, And partly knew hys fyled frame, as other men can tell, And wholly knew his springing youth, and yeares for age yet greene, So that dame Natures graue aray, on face was scarcely seene, I could not chuse, but when I sawe his labour to be sore, And eke hys wery webbe, then this for to deserue much more,
Furthwith at hys request, both to refrsh hys watchyng eeys, And praysed paynes to others prayse, thys litle worke deuyse, Least haply he shold meete with such, as wolde scarce speke the best, Nor halfe that it deserues, but vn∣to nippyng wordes be prest. And though I know this painfull wight can not hys carpers want, Whych often tymes discorage men, and make such studyes skant, Yet be not thou dismaid, go on, and bolden well thy selfe, The worthyest wyght that euer wrote, did neuer want hys Elfe. Such Emules, & such fyendly freaks, if E thou take away, Playn Mules they be, y• mump & mow, and nothyng els can say. Who if in ranckours poysoned sincke, they lurke and wallow styll, Nor yet with cancred venome bolne, do leaue theyr waspysh wyll, But slothfull sluggerds still vpbraid, that paynfull heads deuyse, And with their tryple forked tongs, anoy thys enterpryse:
Discorage him from other worke, and further fruytes of wit, And other towarde paynes dysgrace, if they such poyson spit. Tak heede: if tongs far worse do bite, then double edged swerd: If bytyng tongs be stinging ills, why mager then thy berd, Thou canst not shun Ioues ruddy wrath, that such deseruers haue, Which willingly, though wofully, them selues they do it craue. In whom it is, if that they will, much better to deserue: And cease, theyr wytlese appetyte for any more to serue. This wofull worke that Senec here depayntes before thy face, The bloody yre of myghty Ioue, propounds in ruthfull case. To such as by their deuilysh deedes, and harts with rancour mixt, Alreddy be, although they lyue, in snakysh dongeon fixt. The crumpled browes of lofty lord, in cloudy throne that sytts, His sore dyspleased mynd portend to euill vsed wytts.
Who in hys fomyng wrath, can turne the worlds well etled seat: And make an indigested thing, and mingle mangle great Beware therfore: of Tantalus that stem, and lynage vyle May cause the wel, with vertues toole, thy vycious lyfe to fyle. For deadly deede whych Atreus dyd vnto Thyestes chylde, (Although Thyest hys brother, then his spousall bed defyld) Hys gryesly ghoast comes back againe from deepe infernall pyt, To make reuenge in Aegists harte, hys onely sonne to syt. That fylthy great adulter, streyght to stryfe and blood yprest, Thyestiall tables to reuendg, doth scarcely take hys rest. First Atreus lyfe he seekes, then, while that Agamemnon laye In Castrall campe, by Troyan towne for countreys cause, streight waye Thys drousie swynehead fylthy he in brutysh pleasures wrapt, Hath Agamemnons louyng wyfe, in Cupid snares entrapt.
Wherby, of sacred Hymeneus the bonds, he makes her flye And, Agamemnons pryuate bed, through pleasure to denye. And, which is greatter greefe then this, and vyllany moste vyle, with deadly thought he makes the wife vppon her husband smyle, When as tryumphantly he came a conquerour from Troy: To thend he, should suspecte the lesse, and haue the greater ioy, And thinking nought, but mening wel: myght take a cursed coat, Which doing on, they ealy myght the soner cut hys throte. Thys deede was done: by Talyon lawe here blood dyd blood requyer: And now Thyest hath that reuenge, that he dyd longe desyer. Wherby thou cheefly mayst be taught the prouydence of god: That so longe after, Atreus fact Thyests reuenge abod. And to thy selfe take better heede, least loytryng styll in sinne, In pinching slaunders, touching talke (whear greater greefes begyn)
Thy selfe alone thou do not plague, which of it selfe is muche, But also make thyne after stocke to smarte, and for thy uche. For be thou sure, though god doth spare thee for a season here, And suffer thee with poysoned tonge to frump, and carp thys gere, That eyther thou thy selfe shalt feele some bytter bytyng greese, Or els shall thy posterytie with payne haue their releefe: Unluckye chyldren reape, that wyc∣ked parents handes haue sowne: A warye wyght, by others woes that knowes tauoyde hys owne. Learne here to lyue a ryght, and know how that thear is a god, That well deseruers well rewardes, andd ill, doth scurge with rod. For to thys and is thys compylde thys play thou hast in hand, In vertues race to make thee run, and vyce for to withstand. Which well deseruyng worke of his, if thou can well digest, Then shalt thou haue hys buddyng pen, to greater matters pret.
¶W. R. to the Reader. IF troublous toyles most tragicall, Or blooddie broyles of enuyous ie, Discrybde with art poetycall Can moue thye hart or sett on fyre Thy wauering mynd, then still procede With good aduise this booke to rede. ¶For here in is set furthe at large, With sugred sopps of lettered tonge, Thun stable state of gloryous barge, Which enuyous harte hath freshlie stong For when that hate encreaseth ie, Nought els but death can quench y• fier. ¶What did avayle the martiall dedes, Which Agamemnons valyant hand Did bring to passe? they sowe the sedes Of enuyous hate in Mycene lande: For Aegist, and his cruell wife, At length do ridd him of his life. ¶Of fycle fortunes waueryng wyles Thys booke ensample doth declare, For when most pleasauntlye she smyles, She doth nought els but plant a snare, To catche at length wt woefull channce The sae, whom she aloft did vaunce.
¶I nede not prayse this goulden booke, So fullye freyght with lerninges ore, The worke enough (if thou doest looke) Doth prayse it selfe, and neads no more: For woordes auayleth not a rushe, And good wine neads no taurne bshe. ¶Therfore ear that thou hast it redd. With temerous rancour iudge none ill, For oft the churlyshe curyous hedd Condemneth youth as wantyng skyll: Yet Daniell young sent Iudithe rest, When horye hedds had her opprest. Idem in Zoilum. ZOile quid frendes? quid mandis spumea labra? Quid vol at horrisono fulmen ab ore tu? Euome corrupto tabescens gultue virus: Eructa bullas O furibunde vafras Faucibus igniuomis minitans et dente lupino: Proeda tuo denti non opus istud erit. Non potes istius calami corrumpere fructus Conseruat famulos magna Minerua sos. Insulsus nitidum reprehendit sutor Apellm. Inuidiam virtus clara praeire solet. Zoile tu{que}, furis, iuuenis quum musa triumphet, Iratus turges: verbula vana vomis.
Ipse tamen rigidi peries Acherontis in vrna, Et Phlegethonteas ante natabis aquas, Quam tu Studlei dimittes carmen in vmbras, Quam possis nomen dilacerare suum. Perpetuo viuet res inuictissima virtus, Non abolent enses, vnda, necignis eam. H. C. To the reader. BE not to rash in iudgyng ought, but waye well in thy mynde The pleasure, and commoditie, that thou herein shall fynde. And deme him not presumtious, whom muses moued ryght, The statlye style of Senec. sage in vulgar verse to wryght, For though the worke of grauer age, the connyng seme to craue, Sumtyme we se yet younger yeares, a ryper witt to haue. Accept it therfore, as it is, (of grener yeres in deede) And as his paynes deserueth prayse, So paye him for his meede.
To the Reader. Thomas Delapeend in the Translatours behalfe. IN volume small a present great a worthy gyfte to thee Good reader here is offered, if thou so thankfull bee. Accordyng to the valew full, the same for to receue: Uouchsaufyng for the wryters paines, deserued paynes to geue. He bouldly hath presented here vnto thy gasyng eyes, The wisdome great, & worthy thinges whych erst by Tragedyes Sage Senec shewyng, so sometyme in latyn verse dyd wryte. The same, in perfect englysh ryme thys Author doth endyte. Which, though thy skilful iudgment maye dyscerne of prayse to be Well worthy. Yet by thys, I do cōmend the same to thee, Because that vertue praysed tyll, increaseth euery wheare: And that, eche readers rygour hard, the lerned should not feare.
Syth fame and vertue, euermore pale Enuy doth pursue, Nor Homer great hym selfe could styng of slaunderous wordes eschewe: Contented better, men may take the lot, whych vnto all That euer wrote, (tyll thys time) doth a lyke in commen fall. Though curious crping Zoili, breade rancour blacke within Theyr poysened breastes, of infamie the spytefull thred to spyn, Let folye feede theyr frensye styll vnto theyr owne dyspyte: For men dyscrete and learned will read thinges with iudgement right. W. Parkar to the Reader. TO beat ye brain about such trifling toyes whose vaine delights by fickle fāsie fed, Enforce ye mind tembrace such fadyng ioyes, Doth argue playne a fond vnstedfast head, As to inuey, enraged with rancours bile, & raile on thē, whose works deserueth praise, Or els to glose, and paint with colourd style Their cloked craft, when reasons groūd de∣cayes:
Or as the proude enflamed with desyer Of prayse, and gape for glorious renoume, Haue vtter shame (theyr due reward & hyer) Wheras they hopte of an immortal crowne. And some there be, that pining pangs of loue Describe at large, & shew their frantick fits, (Cupidoes thrals) whom fond affections moue, plain to bewray their wantō wauering wits. But Studley prict with feruent harty zeale, And vertues force preuailing in his mynd, Regarding laude and honour neuer a deale, Not raunging wide lyke harebraynd rouers blid attēpted hath, to publish this his boke, This tragedy of worthy Seneca, whose sawes profoūd (who so theron do loke) To vertues race do shew a ready way. Persist therfore, thy happy yeares to traine In sciēce lore, that fame thy brute may blase, And soūd thy praise, that euer shal remayne: No terme oftyme thy doinges may deface.
T. B. To. the Reader. WHen Heiwood did in perfect verse, and dolfull tune set out, And by hys smouth and fyled style declared had aboute, What roughe reproche the Troyans o the hardy Grekes receyued, When they of towne, of goods, & lyue togyther were depryued. How wel did then hys freindes requite his trauayle and hys payne, When vnto hym they haue (as due) ten thousand thankes agayne? What greater prayse might Virgill get what more renome then this, Could haue ben gyuen vnto hym, for wrytyng verse of hys? Did Virgill ought reuest but thys, in labouryng to excell? Or what did fame gyue to him more, then prayse to beare the bell? May Heywood this alone get prayse, and Phaer be cleane forgott.
Whose verse & style doth far surmoun and gotten hath the lot? Or may not Googe haue parte with hym, whose trauayle and whose payne, Whose verse also is full as good, or better of the twaine? A Neuyle also one there is, in verse that gyues no place To Heiwood (though he be full good) in vsyng of his grace. Nor Goldinge can haue lesse renome, whych Ouid dyd translate: And by the thondryng of hys vers hath set in chayre of state. With him also (as semeth me) our Edwardes may compare, Who nothing gyuyng place to hym doth syt in egall chayre. A great sorte more I recken myght, with Heiwood to compare, And this our Aucthor one of them to compte I will not spare. Whose paynes is egall with the re in thys he hath begun, And lesser prayse deserueth not then Heiwoods worke hath done. Gye therfore Studley parte of prayse to recompence hys payne:
For egall labour euermore, deserueth egall gayne. Read ear thou iudge, then iudge thy fill. But iudge the best, and mend the ill Vale. ¶Fls escaped in the verses. ¶First in the english meter, of Tho∣mas Nuce, in the .iii. page, the seconde line for refrsh read refresh, in he .viii. line of y• verses of Thomas Delapēd for paynes read prayse. In the .xii. line of the verses of T. B. for agayne read for gayne.
¶To the right honorable sir William Secill, knight. One of the most honorable priuy Counsell, Maister of the Wardes and Liueries, Secretarie to the Queenes hyghnes, & Chance∣lour of ye Uniuersitie of Cam∣bridge. Iohn Studley, wisheth longe lyfe, with increse of honour. WHen as I had (right ho∣norable Syr) at the re∣quest of my frendes, both performed and minded to publysh thys my symple translation of so notable a Tragedie, written by the prudent, and sage Sneca: I thought it good for diuers consideracions to bestowe this the fyrst frutes of my good will, & trauaile, rather vpō your honour, thē vpon any other per¦son: first in y• I cōsidered your honours aucthorie, wisedome, & learning, (takyng the tuicion of it vpon you) might be a terrour, and abashment, to such slaunderous
tonges, who by my symple & slender skill, eyther in this or any other lyke facultie, myght take courage rather of malicious∣nes (then of ryght) to reprehend my do∣ings, furthermore hauing vnderstanding partlye by the report of men, and partlie perceauyng when I was somtyme schol∣ler in th Queenes maiestties Grammer schole at Westminser, the hartye good∣will, and frendlie affction that your ho∣nour bare towardes all studentes, I con∣ceiued this hope, that you would accept my good wyll and doynges the better, in that I professe my selfe to be a student, & that in the vnyuersytye of Cambrydge, wherin somtyme your honour were trai∣ned vp in learnyng, and now being most worthelie Chaunceler ther of, do greatly tender the commoyye of the studentes in the same, wyth te aduauncement & encrease of learnyge, furtheraunce of vrtue, and abolyshment of vice. Thus thrfore trustyg yu honours courtsie will haue me xcsd for my rude bolde∣nes.
and except my good wyll herein sygny∣fyed, I leaue you to the turssyon of all∣myghtye god, who encrease you wyth honour, graunt you longe lyfe with eter∣nall felycytye. Your honours to commaund, Iohn Studley.
¶ The Preface to the Reader. BEholde gentle Reader, howe SENECA in this present Tra∣gedie hath most liuelie painted out vnto thee, the vnstabilytie of fortune, who when she hath aduaun∣ced to the hyest hym, with whom (as the cat with the mouse) it liketh her to daly, sodeinly she trning her wheele, doth let hym fall to greater mysery, then was his former felicitie: wherof AGAMEMNON may be a perfect paterne, as is at large shewed in the Tragedie it selfe: whyche although it be but groslye, & after a rude maner translated, contemne it not for the bsenes of the phrase, but embrace it for the excellencie of the matter therin con∣teyned. And althoughe that the other Tragedies which are set furthe by Iasper Hetwood and Alexander Neuyle, are so excel∣lently well done (that in reading of them it semeth to me no translation, but een
SENECA hym selfe to speke in englysh) take no offence that I (beinge one of the moste that can do least) haue thus rashly attempted so great an enterprise, to min∣gle my barbarusnes wt others eloquencie: for when I had at the ernest requeste of certaine my familiar frendes, thus rude∣lye perfurmed the same, they yet not sa∣tysfyed herewith willed me, not to hyde & kepe to my selfe that small talent which god hath lente vnto me to serue my coun∣trey wt all, but rather to applye it to the vse of suche yonge Studentes as therby myght take some cōmoditie, therwith I consideringe, that keping it close it could profyte nothinge, and againe being pub∣lished it could do no hurte, trusting of thy gentlenes that thou wilt esteine this my good will, I haue presumed to set it furth thus simply and rudely: submitting it to the freindly correction of the learned. Thus desiringe thee to beare with my boldnes, & pardon my ignoraūce, I leaue thee to God. Farewell.
¶The names of the speakers of this Tragedie. Thyestes. Chorus. Clytemnestra. Nutrix. Aegisthus. Eurybates A companie of Grekes. Cassandra. Agamemnon. Electra. Strphilus.
¶The fyrste Acte. Thyestes. SEparting from ye darkned dens whiche Ditis low doth kepe, Loe here I am sent out again from Tartar dungeon pe, Thystes I, that whether coast to shun do stand in doubt, Thinfernall fendes I flye, the oalke of yearth I chase about. My conscience lo abhors, that I shuld hethr passage make, Appauled sore with feare and dread my tremblyng sine w shake: My fathers house, or rather yet my brothers I espye, This is the ould and antique porch of Pelops progenye. Here first the Grekes on pnces hedds do place the royall crowne, And here in throne aloft they lye, that letteth vp and downe, With statelye Scepter in theyr hand, eake here theyr courtes do lye, This is theyr place of banquetyng, returne therfore will I.
Naye: beter were it not to haunt the lothsome Limbo lakes, Wher as the stygion porter doth aduaunce with lustye crakes His tryple gorge be hong with mane shagg hearye, rustie, blacke: Wher Ixions carkas linked fa, the whyrlyng whele doth racke, And rowleth styll vppon him selfe: whear as full oft in vayne Much toyle is lost, (the tottryng stone down tomblyng backe agayne) Whear growing guts the gredie gripe do gnaw with rauenyng bitts. Wher parched vp with burning thur amydd the waues he ytts, And gapes to catche the fletyng flood with hungry chapps beguylde, That paies his painefull punyshment, whose fea the gods defylde: Yet that olde man so step in yeares at length by tract of tyme, How great a parte belonges to me and porcion of his cryme? Account we all the grysly ghostes, whom gyltie found of ill, The Gnosian iudge in plutoes pytts oth tsse in tormentes styll:
Thyestes I in dryrye dedes wyll far surmount the rest, Yet to my brother yeld I, (though I gorged my blooddye brest, And stuffed haue my pawmpred panche euen wyth my chyldren three, That crammedly with in my rybbes, and haue theyr tombe in mee, The bowels of my swalowed babes, deuowred vp I haue, Nor fyckle fortune me alone the father doth depraue, But enterprysyng greater gylt then that is put in vre, To fyle my daughters bawdye bed, my lust shee doth alure. To speake these words I do not spare, I wrought the haynous dede, That therfore I through all my stocke, myght parent styll procead. My doughter driuen by force of aes and destenyes deuyne, Doth brede younge bones, & lades her womb, w• synfull eede of mine. Lo nature chaunged vpsyde down, and out of order turnde This myngle mangle hath she made, (O fact to be forlorn.)
A father and a grandsyre loe, confusedlye I am, My doughters husband both become, and father to the ame. Those babes yt should my nephewes be, when nature ryghtlye runns, She beinge iumbled doth confounde, and myngle with my sonns. The chrystall clearenes of the daye, and Phoebus beames so bryght, Ar myxed with the foggye cloudes, and darkenes dym of nyght. When wyckednes had weryed vs, to late truce taken was, Euen when our detestable dedes were done and brought to passe. But valyant Agamemon he graund captayne of the ote Who bare the sway among the kinges, and ruled all the roste, Whose flanting flagg, & banner bra, displayed in royall sorte, A thousand sayle of sowsyng shypps did gard to Phrygian porte, And with their swelling shatling siles: the surging seas dyd hyde, That heateth on the bankes of Trye, and floweth y her syde:
When Phoebus cart the Zodiack ten tymes had ouer runne, And wate the battred walles do lye of Troye destroyde and woon, Retournd he is to yeld his throte vnto his traytresse wyfe, That shall with force of blooddie blade beryue him of hys lyfe. The glytering swerd, the hewing axe, and woundyng weapons mo, With blood for blood new set a broche shall make the floore to flow. With sturdy stroke, & boysteous blow, of pythye Pollar geuen His beaten braynes are pasht abroad, his cracked skull is reuen. Now myschiefe marcheth on a pace, Now falshod doth appeare, Now butchers slaughter doth approch, and murther draweth neare. In honowr of thye natyue daye Aegisthus they prepare The sollemne feast with inketyng, and dayntie tothsom fare. Fye, what doth shame abashe thee so, and cause thy courage quayle? Why doubts thy right hand what to do? to smyte why doth it fayle?
What he forecastyng myght suspect, why shouldst thou take aduyse? Why fretest thou, demaundyng if thou may it enterpryse Naye: yf amother it beseme, thou rather mayst surmyse. What now? how hapneth it that thus the smylyng sommers nyght, When Phaebus from Thantipodes should render sone the lyght, On sudden chaūg their turns wt nights that last and lyngr longe, When wynters bore as bitter blastes, doth puff the trees among? Or what doth cause the glydyng tarrs to stay styll in the skye? We wayght for Phaebus: to the worlde bryng daye now by and by. Chorus. O Fortune, that dost fayle the great estate of kynges, on slyppery slydyng seat thou placest loftie thynges And sytt on tottring sort, where peryls do abounde
yet neuer kyngdome calme, nor quyet could be founde: No day to scepters sure, doth shyne, that they myght saye, To morow shall we rule, as we haue don to daye. One clod of croked care another bryngeth in, One hurlye burlye done, another doth begin: Not so the ragyng sea doth boyle vpon the sand, Whear as the southern wynd that blowes in Affryck lande, One waue vppon another doth heap wyth sturdye blast: Not so doth Euxine sea, his swellyng waues vp cast: Nor so his belchyng streame from shallow bottom roll, That borders hard vppon the ysye frosen poall: Whear as Bootes bryght doth twyne hys wayne about, And of the marble seas doth nothyng stand in doubt. O how doth fortune tosse and tomble in her whele
The staggring states of kynges, that reddye be to rele? Faye wold they dreded be, and yet not setled so When as they feared are, they feare and lyue in woe. The sylent Ladye nyght so sweete to man and beast, Can not bestow on them hr safe and quyet rest: Slepe that doth ouercom and breake the bonds of greefe, I cannot ease theyr hares, nor mynister releefe: What castell stronglye buylt, what Bulwark, tower, or towne, Is not by mischyfes meanes, brought topsye turey downe? What ramperd walls are not made weake by wicked war? From statelye courtes of kynges doth iustice flye afar: In pryncelye pallacies, of honestie the lore, And wedlock now deuoute, is set by lytle store. The bloodye Bellon thse doth hant with gorye hand,
Whose lyght and vayne conceit in paynted pomp doth stand. And those Erinnys wood turmoyles with frensyes fitts, That euer more in proud and hautie howses sitts, Which fycle fortunes hand in twynklyng of an eye, From hygh and proud degre dryues down in dust to lye. Although that skyrmish eace, no banners be displayed And though no wyles be wrought and pollecye be stayd, Down paysed with theyr wayght the massy thynges do synke, And from her burden doth vnstable fortune shrynke. The swelling Sayles put vp with gale of western wynde, Do yet mystrust therof a tempest in theyr mynd: The threatnyng tops (that touche the clowdes) of loftye towers Be sonest payd and bett with south wynd raynye showres: The darksome wood doth see his tough and sturdye Oke,
Well waynd in yeares to be clean ouerthrown and broke: The lyghtnyngs flashyng flame out breakyng in the skye, Fyrst lyghteth on the mountes, and hylls that are most hye. The bodies corpulet and of the largest syese Are ryfest styll to catch deseases when they ryse. When as the flocke to gase, in pasture fat is putt, Whose necke is larded best, hys throte shall fyrst be cutt: What frtune doth aduaunce, and hoysteth vp on hy, She setes it vpp to fall agayne more greuouslye. The thynges of myddle sorte, and of a meane degree, Endure aboue the rest and longest dayes do see: The man of meane estate most happye is of all, Who pleased with the lott that doth to him befall, Doth sayle on sylent shore. wyth calme and quyet tyde,
And dreads wyth brused barge on swellyng seas to ryde: Nor lawncyng to the depe where bottom none is founde, may with his rudder search, and reach the shallow grownd. ¶The second Act. Clytemnestr. Nutrix. O Drowsie dreaming dotyng soule, what commeth in thy brayne, To seke about for thy defence what waye thou mayest attayne? What aiels thy skittish waiward wits, to wauer vp and down? The fyttest shyft preuented is, the best path ouergrown: Thou myghtest ons mayntayned haue thy wedlck chamber chast, And eak haue rulde with maiestie, by fayth conioyned fast: Now nurtures lore neglected is, all ryght doth clean decay, Relygion and dygnitie with fayth are worne awaye:
And ruddy shae with blushing cheeks so farre god ot is past, That when it would it cannot now com home agayn at last. O let me now at randon run with brydle at my wyll: The safest path to myschyfe is by myschef open styll. Now put in practyss, seke about, search out and learne to fynd The wylie traynes, and craftye guyles of wicked woman kynd: What anye dyuelysh trayerous dame durst do in workyng woe, Or anye wounded in her wittes by shott of Cupids bowe: What euer rygorous stepdame could committ with desperate hand, Or as the wenche who flaming faste by Venus poysonyng brand, Was dreuen by lewd vncesteous loue in shypp of thessail land, To flytt away from Cholchos Ile, where Phsis channell depe With siluer streame down from y• hils of Armenie doth swepe. Get weapons good, get bylbow blades, or temper poyson strong,
Or with som yonker trudge frō Grece by thefte the seas along: Why dost thou faynt to talke of theft, exile, or priuie flyght? These came by hap: thou therfore must on greater myschife lyght. Nu. ¶(O worthy queene) among ye Grekes that beares the swinging waye And borne of Ledas royall blood, what mutrng dost thou say? What furye fell enforceth the, bereued of thy wyttes, To rage & raue wyth bedlam braynes, to frett with franticke fitts? Though madam thou do counsell kepe, and not complayne thy case, Thyne anguysh playne appeareth in thy pale and wanny face: Reueal therfore what is thy grefe, take leysure good and staye, What reason could not remedye, oft eured hath delaye. Cly. ¶So greuous is my carefull case which pluneth me so sore That deale I cannot with delaye, nor lynger nye more. The flashing flames, and furyous force of fyrye feruent heat,
Outragyng in my boylyng brest, my burnyng bones doth beat: It suckes the sappye marowe out, the ioyce it doth conuaye, It frets, it teares, it rents, it gnawes, my guttes and gall away. Now feble feare still eggs me on (wyth dolor beyng prest) And cancred hate wt thwacking thumps doth bounce vppon my brest: The blynded boy that louers hartes doth reue wyth deadly stroke, Entangled hath my lynked mynd with lewd and wanton yoke: Refusyng styll to take afoyle, or clean to be confounde, Among thes broyles, and agonyes my mynd besegyng rownd, Loe feble, wery battred downe, and vnder troden shame, That wresteth, striueth, strugleth hard, and fyghteth wyth the same. Thus am I dryuen to dyuers shores, and beat from bancke to bank, And tossed in the fomye floods, that stryue wyth corage crancke. As when here wynd, & there ye streame when both theyr force wyll trye,
From sandes alow, doth hoyst & reare the seas with surges hye, The waltryng waue doth staggrynge stand, not wetyng what to doe, But (houeryng) doubts, whose furious force he best may yeld him to. My kyngdome therfore I cast of, my scepter I orsake As anger, sorow, hope, me lead, that way I meane to take. At all aduenture to the seas I yelde my beten Barge, At randon carelesse will I ron, now wyll I roue at large. Whear as my mynd to fancy fonde doth gad, and ron astray, It is the best to chuse that chaunce, and folow on that waye. Nu. ¶This desperate dotage doth declare, and rashnes rude and blynde, To chuse out chaunce to be the guyde and ruler of thy mynde. Cly. ¶He that is dryuen to vtter pynche, and furthest shyft of all, What neade he doubt hys doutful lot, or how hys lucke be fall? In sylent shore thou saylest yet, thy trespasse we may hyde,
If thou thy selfe detect it not, nor cause it be dyscryde. Cly. ¶Alas it is more blasd abrode, and further is it blown, Then any cryme that euer in this pryncelye court was sown. Nu ¶Thy former fault with pensiue harte and sorow thou doste rew, And fondly yet thou goest about, to set abroche anew, Cly. ¶It is auery folyshnes to kepe a meane therin, Nu. ¶The thing he feares he doth augmēt, who heapeth syn to syn. Cly. ¶But fyre & swerde to cure the same, the place of salue supplye. Nu. ¶Ther is no man who at the fyrste extremytie wyll try. Cly. ¶In workyng myschyfe men do take the redyest waye they fynd. Nu. ¶The sacred name of wedlocke once reuoke and haue in mynd, Cly. ¶Ten yeares haue I bin desolate, and led a wydowes lyfe. Yet shalt I enteraye anew my husband as hys wyfe? Nu. ¶Consydor yet thy son and hae whom he of the begot
Cly. ¶And eke my doughters wedding blase as yet forget I not. Achilles eke my sonne in lawe to mynde I do not spare, Howe well he kepte hys vowe that he to me hys mother sware. Nu. ¶When as our nauye myght not passe by wynd, nor yet by stream, Thy doughters blood in sacryfyce theyr passage did redeme: She sturd and brake the sluggysh seas, whose water styll dyd stand, Whose feble force myght not hoyse vp, the vessells from the land. Cly. ¶ I am ashamed herewith all, it maketh me repyne, That Tyndaris (who from the gods doth fetche her noble lygne) Shold gyue the ghost tasswage ye wrath of gods and them appeas, Wherby the grekyshe nauye myght haue passage free by seas. My grudgyng mynd styll harpes vpon my daughters weddyng daye, Whom he hath made for Pelops stocke the blooddye rawnsam paye. When as with cruell countenaunce embrewd wyth gorye blood,
As at a weddyng alter syde thunpyyfull parent stood, It erkd Calchas wofull harte, who dyd abhor the same, His Oracle he rewd, and eake the backe reflyctyng flame. O wycked and vngracyous stocke that winnest ill with ill, Tryumphyng in thy fylthy feats, encreasyng lewdnes styll. By blood we win ye wauering windes, By death we purchase warr. Nu. ¶But by this meanes a thousand ships at once released ar: Cly. ¶With lucky fate attempt the seas did not the losed rowt? For Aulis Ile, thungracious flete, from port did tumble oute: As with alewd vnlucky hand the war he did begin, So fortune fauoured his suces to thryue nomore therin. Her loue as captye holdeth him whom captyue he did take. Not moued wyth the ernest sute that could Achilles make, Of Phaebus prelat Sminthicall he did retayne the spoyle:
When for the sacred virgins loue his furious brest doth boyle: Achilles rough and thundring threates could not him ualyfye, Nor he that doth dirt the faes aboue the starrye skye. To vs he is an Augur iuste, and kepes his promys dewe But whyle he threats his captiue truls of word he is not trw. The sauage people fearce in wrath once myght not moue his spright, Who did purloyne the kyndled tentes with fyer blasyng bryght: When slaughter great on Grekes was made in most extreamest fyght Without a foe he conquered. with leanes pynes awaye In lewd and wanton chamber tricks he spendes the idle daye, And freshly  he edes his lust, least that som other whyle His chamber chast shuld wāt a stewes, that myght the ame defyle. On Ladye Brises loue agayn his faneye fond doth stand, Whom he hath got, tha wrested was out of Achilles hand.
And carnal copulacion to haue he doth not shame,, Though from her husbandes bosom he hath snacht the wicked dame, Tushe, he that doth at Paris grudge, With wound but newly stroke Eflamd with Phrygian Prophets loue, his boyling breste doth smoke. Now after Troyan boties braue, and Troy ouerwhelmd he saw, Retournd he is a prysoners spouse, and Priams sonne in lawe. Now hart be bolde, take courage good, of stomake now bestowt, A fyelde that easely is not fought, to pytche thou goest about. In practys myschife thou must put, why hopste thou for a daye, While Priams doughter com from Troy in Grece do beare the swaye? But as for the poore selye wretche, a wayteth at thy place Thye wyddow, virgyns, and Orest his fatherlyke in face, Consyder theyr calamytyes, to com, and eake theyr cares, Whom all the peryll of the broyle doth threat in thy affayres.
O cursed captyue, wofull wretche, why doest thou loyter so? Thy lytle brats a stepdame haue, whose wrath will worke theyr wo. With gasshing swerd (and yf thou can none other way prouyde) Nor thrust it through an thers ribbes, then launche thy gory syde. So murther twayne wt brewd blood, let blood immixed be, And by destroyeng of thye selfe destroy thy spouse wyth thee. Death is not sawst with sops of sorowe if som man els I haue, Whose breathlsse corse I wish to passe wyth me to deadlye graue. Nu. ¶Queene, brydle thyne affections, and wyselye rule y rage, Thy swellyng moode now mytigate, thy chollure eke asswage. Way well the wayghtye enterpryse that thou doest take in hand, Tryumphant victor be retournes of myghty Asia lande Auengyng Europs iniurye, with him he bryngs awaye The spoyles of sacked Pargamie, a huge and myghtie praye.
In bondage eake he leades the foalke of long assaulted Troy, Yet darest thou by pollecye attempt him to annoye? Whom wt the dynt of glittryng swerd Achilles durst not harme, Although his rash and desperate dick The froward knyght did arme Nor Aiax yet more hardye man vp yeldyng vitall breth, Whom frantycke iurye fell enforste to wound him selfe to death: Nor Hector, he, whose onlye lyfe procuerd the Grekes delay, And long in war for victorye enforced them to staye Nor Paris shaft, whose connyng hand with shot so sure did ayme: Nor myghtye Memnon swart and black, had power to hurt the same: Nor Xanhus flood, wher to and froe dead cakasis did swyme, With armour hewd and ther with all some maymed broken lyme: Nor Simois, that purple wawmes with slaughter died doth steare. Nor Cygnus Lylly whyght, the sonn of fenny god so deare:
Nor yet the muteryng Thracian host: nor warlyke Resus kynge: Nor Amazons, who to the wars did painted Quiuers brynge, And bare their harhets in their hands, with target, and wyth sheylde, Yet had no powre with gastly wound to foyle hym in the feylde. Syth he such scourynges hath escapte, and plunge of peryls paste, Entendest thou to murther hym, returning home at laste? And sacred alters to prophane with slaughter so vure? Shall Grece thaduenger, let this wroug longe vnreuengd endure? The gym and fearce coragious horse, the battails shoues and cries, The swelling seas which brusd barks do dread, when stormes aryse, Behold the feildes wt streames of blood ouerflowne and depely drod, And all the Cheualrie of Troy in seruile bondage bounde, Which Grekes haue writ in registers. thy stubburne stomacke binde, Subdue thy onde affections, and pacyfie thy mynd.
¶The .ii. Acte. The .ii. Sceane. Aegisthus. Clytemnestra. THe curssed tyme that euermore my mynd dyd most detest, The dais that I abhorred haue and hated in my brest, Are come, are come, that myne estate wyll brynge to vtter wracke: Alas my harte, why doest thou fayle, and fayntyng flyest backe? What doest thou meane at fyrst assalt from armour thus to flye? Trust thys, the cruell gods intend thy dolfull destinie, To wrap thee in wyth peryls round, and catche thee in a bande: Endeuer drudge with all thy powre theyr plagues for to wythstand: Wyth stomake stoute rebellious, to fyre and swerd appeal. Cly. ¶It is no plague, if such a death thy natyue destnies deal. eg. ¶(O partners of my peryls all, begot of Leda thou) Direct thy doinges ater myne, and vnto thee I vowe,
This drosell, fluggysh ryngleader, thys stoute stronge hared yre, Shall pay the so much blod agayne as shed he hath in fyre. How haps it that hys trēbling cheekes to be so pale and whyght, Lyenge agast, as in a traunce, wyth fayntyng face vpryght? Cly. ¶His cōsciēce wedlok vow doth prick and brynges hym home agayne. Let vs returne the selfe same rade a newe for to retayne, To which at first we should haue stuck and ought not to forsake, To couenaunt contynent a newe let vs our selues betake: To take the trade of honestie at no tyme is to late: He purged is from punyshment whose harte the cryme doth hate. Ag. ¶Why whether wilt thou gad (o rashe and vnaduysed dame?) What doest thou ernestly beleue, and fyrmly trust the same, That Agamemnons spousall bed wyll loyall be to thee, That nought doth vnderprop thy mind whych myght thy terrour bee?
Hys proud successe pufte vp to hyghe wih lucky blast of wynde, Myght make so cranke, and set alofte hys hawty swellyng mynde: Amonge hys peares he stately was, er Troian turrets torne, How hynk ye then hys stomack stout by nature gyuen to scorne, In haughtynes agmented is more in hym selfe to ioye, Through thys tryumphant vyctorye and conquest got of Troye? Before hys voyage miceane kynge moste mylly dyd he reygne, But now a Tyrant truculent returnd he is agayne. Good lucke and proud prosperytie do make hys harte so ryse. With what great preparacion prepared solemne wyse, A rablement of strumpets come that clonge about hym all? But yet the prophetesse of Phaebe, (whom god of trueth we call) Appeares aboue the rest: she kepes the kynge, she doth hym guyde: Wyl thou in wedlock haue a mate and not for it prouyde?
So wolde not she, the greatst greefe this is vnto a wyte, Her husbandes minion in her house to leade an open lyfe. A queenes estate can not abyde her peare with her to reygne, And Ielous wedlock will not her companyon sustayne. Cly. ¶Aegst in desprat mode agayne why sest thou me a flote? Why kyndlest thou the sparkes of ire in imbers couered hote? If that the vyctors owne free will releas his captyues care, Why may not I hys lady spouse haue hope as well to fare? One lawe doth rule in royall throne, and pompous pryncely towers, Amonge the vulgar sorte, another in pryuate symple bowers. what though my grudgyng fansy force that at my husbandes hande, Sharpe execution of the lawe I subbernly withstande? ecordyng thys that haynousye offended hym I haue: gently wyll me pardon graunt who nede the same to craue?
Aeg. ¶Euen so? on thys condicion thou mayst wyth hym compounde, To pardon hym, if he agayne to pardon thee be bounde. The subtle scyence of the lawe, The statutes of our lande, (That longe ago decreed were) thou doest not vnderstande. The Iudges be malicious men, they spyhte and enuye vs, But he shall haue them parciall hys causes to dyscns. Thys is the chiefest pryuiledge that doth to kynges belonge, What lawes forbyddeth other men they do, and do no wronge. Cly. ¶He pardned Helen, she is wedd to Menela agayne, Whych Europ all, wyth Asia dyd plonge alyke in payne. Aeg. ¶No Ladyes luste hath rauyshte yet Atrides in hys lyfe, Nor pryuelie purloynd hys harte, betrthed to hys wyfe. To picke a quarell he begyns, and matter thee to blame, Suppose thou nothyng hast cōmyt that worthy is of shame?
What oteth hym whom prynces hate an honest lyfe to frame? He neuer doth complayne his wronge, but euer beares the blame. Wylt thou repayre to Spart, and to thy countrey trudge aryght? Wylt thou becom a ronagate, from such a worthy wyght? Deuorcement made from kynges, wil not so let the matter scape, Thou easest fear, by fyckle hope, that falsly thou doest shape: Cly. ¶My trespas is dysclosd to none, but to a trustye wyght. Aeg. ¶At prynces gates fydelytye yet neuer enter myght. Cly. ¶I wyll corrupt and fede him s with syluer and wyth gould, That I by brybyng binde hym shall no secrets to vnfould: Aeg. ¶The trust that hyred is and bought by brybes and moneys fee, Thy counsell to bewray a gayne with brybes entyste wyll bee, Cly. ¶The remnaunt left of shamfanes of those vngracyous ryckes, Wherin of late I dyd delyght, my concience freshly prycks.
Why kepest thou such a busy stur, and wyth thy flattryng speache Enst ructyng me wyth lewd aduise dost wicked counsell preache? Shall I forsooth of royall blood with all the speede I can, Refuse the kynge of kynges, and wed an outcast banysht man? Aeg. ¶Why should you thinke in that Thyest was father vnto mee, And Agamemnon Atreus sonne he should my better be? Cly. ¶If that be but a tryfle small Ad Nephew to the same, Aeg. ¶I am of Phaebus linage borne, wherof I do not shame. Why makste thou Phaebus aucthor of thy wycked pedagrew, Whom out of heauen ye forste to fly when brydle backe he drew? When lady nyght with mantell black dyd spred her sudden shade, Why makest thou the gods til suche reproche fulnes to wade? Whose father hath thee conning made by fleyght and subtle guyle To make thy kynsman Cockold, while hys wyfe thou do defyle.
What man is he whom we do know to be thy fathers mate, Abusyng luste of lecherye in suche vnlawfull rate? Auaunt, go packe the hence in hae, dispatche, out of my syght This infamie, whose blemysh staynes this blood of worthy wyght. Aeg. ¶Thys is no newe exile to me that wyckednes do haunt, But if that thou (o worthy queene) cammaund me to aaunt I wyll not onely strayght auoyde the house, the towne, and feild, My lyfe on swerd at thy request I redy am to yeild. Cly. ¶Thys haynous dede permit shall I (most churlesh cruell drab) Agaynst my wyll though I offende, the fault I should not blab: Nay, rather come aparte wyth me, and let vs ioyne our wyts, To wrap our selues out of thys wo, and parlous threatnyng fyts.
Chorus. NOw chaunt it lustye laddes. Apollos prayse suborne, To thee the frolyke flock theyr crowned heads adorne. To thee kynge Inachs stocke of wedlock chamber voyd, Braid out their virgyns lockes and theron haue employd, Theyr sauorie garlandes greene It wyt of Lawrell bow. Draw nere wyth vs o Thebes, our daunsyng folow thou. Come also ye, that dryncke of Ismen bublyng flood, Wheras the Laurell tree full thycke on bankes doth bood. Eke ye whom Man do mild, the Prophetesse diuyne, (Foreseenge fate) and borne of hyghe Tiresias lygne, Hath styrd to celebrate with sacred vse and ryght Appollo and Dian borne of Latona bryght. O victor Phaebe vnbend thy nocked owe agayne,
Syth quyetnes and peace anew we do retayne. And let thy twāckling harpe make melodie so shyll, Whyle that thy nymble hande stryke quauers with thy quill. No curious descant I nor lusie musick crue, No ioly rumbling note, nor trowlyng tune to haue. But on thy treble Lute (accordyng to thy vse) Styke vp a playne song note, as when thy learned Muse Thy lessons do record, though yet on baser strynge It lyketh thee to play the songe that thou did synge: As when from fyry heauen the dynt of lyghtnyng flew, Sent downe by wrath of gods, the Titans ouerthrew. Or els when moūtains were on mountaynes heaped hye That raise for Gauntes fell theyr steppes into the skye, The mountaine Ossa stood on top of Pelion layde,
Olymp (wheron the Pynes theyr buddyng braunches brayd) Downe paised both: draw nere o Iun noble dame, Both spouse of myghty Ioue and syster to the same: Thou that doest rle wt hym made ioynter of his mace, Thy people we of Greece gyue onour to thy grace: Thou onely dost protect from peryls Argos land, That euer carefull was to haue thine honour stand, (Most supplient ther vnto) thou also with thy myght Dost order ioyfull peace and battels fearce of fight, Accept o conquering queene these braunches of the bays, That Agamemnon here doth yeild vnto thy prayse: The holow boxen pype (that doth with holes abound) In syngyng vnto thee doth gyue a solemne sound: To thee the damsels ek that play vpon the strynges,
With connyng harmonie mlodious musick synges. The marons eke of Grc by ryper yeares more graue, To thee the aper paye, that vowed oft they haue, The beyferd yonge & whit companyon of the Full Unskilfull, yet by proofe the paynful plin to pull, whose neck was neuer worn nor gald wyth prynt of yoake, Is in thy temple slayne receyuing deadly stroake. O layde Pallas thou of mot renoumned hap Bred of the brayne of Ioue that smytes with thonder clap. Thou loftie Troian owres of craggy knotty flynt Hast bet with battryng blade, and strooke with iauelyng dyn The elder matrons with the dames that yonger be Together in myngled heapes do honor due to thee. when tho approching nighe thy commyng is espyde,
The preiste vnbarrs the gate and opes the Temple wide: By clustring thronges the flocks thyne altars haunt apace, Bedecte with twysted crownes so trym wyth comely grace. The olde and auncyent men well stept and growne in yeares, Whose feble tremblyng age precureth horye hears, Obteyning theyr request craued of thy grace deuyne, Do offer vp to thee theyr sacryficed wine, O bryght Dian whose blase sheds lyght three sundry wayes, We mynfull are of thee, and render thankfull prayse, Delon thy natyue soyle thou dyddest fyrmly bynde, That to and fro was wont to wander with the wynde: Which with foundacion sure mayn ground for byd to passe: For Nauies (after whych to swim it wonted was) It is become a Road defyenge force of wynde,
The mothers funerals of Tantalus his kinde. The doughters seuen by death thou victresse doest accompte, Whose mother Niobe abydes on Sipill mounte A lamentable rocke, and yet vnto this howre Her teares newe gusshyng, out the marble olde doth powre. The godhead of the twins in sumpteous solemne wise, Both man and wife adore with sauory sacryfyse. But thee aboue the rest, o father great and guide, Whose myghty force is b the burning lightning tryde Who whē thou gauest a beek and didst thy head but shake, At once thetremest poales of heauen and earth did quake. O Iupiter the rote that of our lynage arte, Accept these offered giftes and take them in good parte: And thou o graundsire great o thy posteritie
Haue some remors, that do not swarne in chyualye. But yonder o wt stiuing steps the soldir comes a mayne In all post hast, with token that good newes declareth playne A lawrel braunche, that hangeth on hys speare head he doth brynge: Eurybates is come, who hath ben trustye to the kynge. ¶The thyrd Acte. Eurybates. Clytemnestra. SOre tyred after many yeares with trauaile & with toyle Scant credityng my selfe, the Gods of thys my natyue soyle, The temple, and the alters of the sainctes that rule the skye, In humble sorte with reuerence deuoutly worshyp I. Now pay your vowes vnto the Gods: returned is agayne Unto hys country court, where wont he was to rule, and reygne,
Prince Agamemnon, victor he, of Grece the great rnum. Cly. ¶The tydynges of a message good vnto myne eares is blowne. Where staies my spouse whō longing for ten yeares I haue out scand? What doth he yet sayle on the seas, or is he come a land? Yet hath he fyxt and set hys fote back stepping home againe Uppon the sandy shore, that longe he wisshed to artayne? And doth he styl enioy his health enhaunce in glory great, And paynted out in pomp of prayes whose fame the skye doth beate? Eury. ¶Blesse we with burnyng sacryfyce, at lengthe this luckye daye. Cly. ¶ And eke the gods though gracious Yet dealyng long delaye: Declare if that my brothers wyfe enioy the vitall ayre, And tel me, to what kynd of Coast my syster doth repayre. Eury. ¶God graunt & gyue vs better newes then thys that thou doest craue: The heuy hap of fyghtyng floods orbyddes the trueth to haue.
Our scatred fleete the swelling seas attemptes in such a plyght, That shyp from ship was taken cleane out of eche others syght. Atrides in the waters wyde turmoyld and strayeng far, More vyolence by seas sustaind then by the blooddy war. And as it were a conquerd man escaping home all weete Now bringeth in his companie of such a myghty fleete, A sorte of brused broken barkes, beshaken, torne, and rent. Cly. ¶Shew what vnluckie chaunce it is that hath our Nauye spent, What storme of seas dispersed hath our Captaines heare and theare? Eury. ¶Thou willest me to make reporte of heauy wofull geare. Thou biddest me most greuous newes with tydynges good to parte: For vttryng of thys wofull hap my feble mynde doth starte. And horrybly appauled is with thys so monstrous ill. Cly. ¶Speke out, and vtter it: hym selfe with terrour he doth fyll,
Whose harte hys owne calamytie and carke, doth lothe to know: The harte whom doubted domage duls with greater greefe doth glow. Eury. ¶Whē Troian buyldings blasing bright did burne away, and broyle, Enkindled firste by Grekish brand, they fall to parte the spoyle: Repairing fast vnto the seas agayne we come a boorde, And now the soldiers wery loynes were eased of hys sworde, Their bucklers cast aside vpon the hatches lie aboue: Their warlike handes in practise put, and Oers learne to moue: Eche lytle hyndraunce semes to much to them in hasty plyght, When of recours the Admirall, gaue watchword by his lyght, And trumpet blast began to call our army from delaye, The painted Pup with gilded snowt did firste guyde on the waye: And cut the course, which foling on a thousand shippes did ryue, Then first a winde with ppling puffes our launcing ships did dryue:
Which glyded downe vpon our sailes: the water being calme With breath of westerne wind so mild scant moued any walme. The shynyng seas bespred aboute with shyppes, doth glyster bryght, And also couerd with the same, lay hyd fro Phaebus lyght: It doth vs good, to gase vpon the nakd shore of Troy: The desarte Phrygian plots so bar to vewe, we hopp for ioye: The youth echone besturrs thē selues, and strykyng altogether They tough theyr ores, & wt their toyl they help the winde and weather. They tug, and chearly row by course, the spyrtyng seas vp dash, Agaynst the ratlyng rybs of shippes The flapping floods do flash The hory froth of wrestlyng waues which ores alot doth rayse, Do drawe and trace a furrow through the marble faced seas. When strōger blast with belly swolne our hoysted sayles dyd fill, They row no more, but let the Pup to go with wynde at will,
Their sheryng Ore layd asyde our Pilot doth espye, How far from anye land aloofe our sayles reculyng flye. Or bloody batells doth displaye, the threates of Hector stoute, Or of his ratlyng Waggins tells, wherin he rode about: Or how his gasshed carckas slayne and traynd about the fylde, To funerall flames, and obit ryghtes for coyne agayne was yeld. How Iupiter embathed was all in his royall blood. The frolyck fyshe desposed was to myrth in Tyrren flood, And fetchyng fryskes both in and out playes on the waters brym, And on his broad and fynny back about the seas doth swym, With gamballs quick in rings aroūd, and syde to syde enclynd, Erwhyle he sportes afront the pup, and whyps agayn behynd, Now fydlyng on the snout before, the dalyeng wanton rowt With iocundarye ioly tryckes doth skyp the flete about.
Somtyme he standeth gasyng on and eyes the vessells bryght, Now euery shore is couered clean, and land is out of syght, The parlous poynct of Ida rocke in syght doth open lye, And that alone espye we coulde with fyrmly fyxed eye, A dusky clowd of stilyng smoke from Troy did smolter blacke, When Titan from the werye neckes the heauy yokes did slacke. The fading light did grouelyng bend, and down the day did shrowd, Agaynst the stars amountyng vp a lytle mystie clowd, Came belchyng out in irksom lompe, and Phaebus galland beames He spewd vpon, bestayning them duet down in westerne streames. The Sun set swaruyng in such sorte with diuers change of face Did gyue vs cause, to haue mistruste of Neptunes doubted grace. The euening first did bunnish bright, and paynt with stars the skye, The wynds were layd, & clean forsoke our sayles, that quiet lye.
whē cracking, ratling, rumbling noise, rusht down wih thundryng swaye From top of hyls, which greater stur doth threaten and bewray. With belowinges, & yellynges lowd, the shores do grunt an grone, The craggye clyues, & roryng rockes, do howle in hollow stone. The bublyng waers swelles vpreard before the wrastling winde, When suddenlye the lowryng lyght of moone is hid and blynde. The glymsyng starres do go to glade, the surgyng seas are tost Euen to the skyes, among the clowde the lyght of heauen is lost More nyghtes in one compacted are, wyth shadow dym and blacke, One shade vppon another doth more darknes heape and packe, And euery sparke of lyght consumd the waues and skyes do mete. The ruflyng wynds range on the seas through euerye coast they lytt. They heaue it vp wyth vyolence. ouerturnd from bottom low, The westerne wynde flat in the face of easterne wynd doth blow.
With hurley burley Boreas set ope his blastyng mouth, And gyroeth out his boysteous breth, agaynst the stormy south, Eache wind wt all his might doth blow, and worketh daungers depe, They shake the floods, a sturdye blast along the seas doth swepe. That rowles, & ūbles waue on waue, a northern tempest stronge Aboundaunce great of flackye snow doth hurle our shipps among. The south winde out of Lybia doth rage vppon a shold, And with the puyssaunt force therof the quycke sandes vp be rould, Nor bydeth in the south, which doth with tempest lump and lower, And force the flowyng floods to ryse by powryng out a shower. The stubbern Ers erthquakes made, and shoke the countryes eas, And Es cost, where Phaebus fyrst aryseth from his test. How violent Corus strecht and tare his yawnyng mouth ull wyde? A man wold sure haue thought y• world did from his center flyde,
And that the frames of heuen broke p the gods adown wold fall, And Chaos darke confused heape wold shade and couer all. The stream straue wt the wind, y• wynd dyd beat it backe agayne, The springyng sea within his bankes can not it selfe contayne, The ragyng showr hys tryllyng drops doth myngle with the seas, And yet in all this miserye they fynd not so much eas, To see and know what ill it is, that worketh theyr decaye. The darknes dim oppresseth styll and kepes the lyght awaye: The blacke facst nyght wt hellicke hew was clad of stygian lake And yet full oft with glimsyng beames the sparklyng fyre out brake. The cloud doth crack, and beyng rent the lyghtnyng leapeth out, The wretches lyke the same so well it shinyng them about, That still they wysh such light to hau. (although god wo but ill) The nauy swaying down it selfe doth cast awaye, and spyll.
One syde with other syde is crackt, and helme is rent with helme, The shypp it selfe the gulpyng seas do hedlong ouer whelme. Erwhyle a grydie gapyng gulphe doth sup it vp amayne, Then by an by tost vp aloft it spewes it out agayne, She with her swaggyng full of sea to bottom low doth sinke, And drencheth depe asyde in floodes her tottryng broken brynke. That vnderneath a dosen waues lay drowned out of syght, Her broken plankes swym 'vp & down, spoyld is her tacle quyght, Both sayle and Ores clean are lest, the mayn mast cake is gon. That wonted was to beae vpryght the sayle yard therupon, The tymber and the broken bordes lye on the waters brym, When cold & shiueryng feare in vs doth stryke through euery lym The wysest wyts entocksycate dare nothyng enterpryse, And conning practise nought auayle, When fearfull stormes aryse,
The mareners lettyng dutie slyppe stand staryng al agast, Theyr scoopyng ores sodainly out of theyr handes are wrast. To prayer then apace we fall, when others hope is none, The Grekes & Troyans to the Gods alyke do make theyr mone. Alack what succour of the fates may we poore wretches fynde? Agaynst hys father Pyrrhus beares a spytefull cancred ynde, At Aiax grudge Vlysses doth, kynge Menela doth hate Great Hector: Agamemnon is with Priam at debate. O happy man is he, that doth lye slaine in Troyan ground, And hath deserued by handy stroke, to take hys fatall wounde, Whom fame preserueth, taking vp hys tombe in conquered land. Those momes whose melting cowards hart durst neuer take in hand, Or enterpryse no noble acte, those force of floods shall drowne, But fate forbearyng long, will take stoute brutes of hyghe renoume,
Full well we may ashamed be, in such a sorte to dye, If any man hys spytefull mynd yet can not satysfie, with these ouragious plūging plages That downe from gods are sent, Appeace at length thy wrathfull god agayne, and eke relent. Euen Troy for pitie wold haue wept, to see our wofull case, But if that in thy boylyng brest black rancour styll haue place, And that the Grekes to ruin run, it be thy purpose bent, Why do these Troyans go to wrack? for whom thus are we spent? Asswage the rygour of the sea that threanyng hyls vp reares: This drenched fleete the Troyan folke and Grekes together beares. Then from theyr prayers ar they put, theyr foultryng tonges do stay, the roring seas doth drown their voyce and cares their cries awaye. Then myghty Pallas armed with the leppyng lyghtning fyre, That testy Ioue doth vse to hurle prouokte to swellyng ire,
With thretning Iaueling in her hand, her prowe meanes to trye, And eke her force whoes boyling brest with Gorgon fyts doth frye, Or what with target she can do, and with her fathers fyre. Then from the skyes another storme begynnes abrode to spyre, But Aiax nothyng yet dysmayd all force withstandeth stout, whō when he spred his swelling sailes with cable stretched out, She lyghtyng downe did wryng hym hard, & wrapt him in her ame, And flange another flasshyng dint of lyghtnyng on the same, With all her force and violence her hnd brought back agayne, She tost hym out, as late that feate her ather tought her playne. Both ouer Aiax and hys Pup she slyeth ouerthwart, And rentyng man and shyp, of both she beares away a parte, Hys corage nought abated yet he al to syngde doth eme, Euen lyke a stubberne ragged rock amid the striuing streame,
He traynes along the roaryng seas and eke the waltryng waue By shouyng on hys bourly brest in sonder quyte he draue, The Barke with hand he caught, & on it selfe dyd type it ouer, Yet Aiax shyneth in the flood which darknes blynd doth couer. At length attaynyng to a rock hys thundryng crakes were thes, I conquered haue the force of fyre and rage of fyghtyng seas, It doth me good, to mayster thus the anger of the skye, with Pallas wrath, the lightnyng flames and floods tumultyng hye. The terrour of the warlyck god once could not make me flye, The force of Mars and Hector both at once sustaynd haue I. Nor Phaebus dartes could me cōstrayne, from hym one foote to shoon, All these besyde the Phrygians subdued we haue, and woon: when other Mecocks flings his dartes shall I not them withstand? Yea, what if Phaebus came him selfe, to pytche them with hys hand?
When in hys melancholy moode He boasted without meane. Then father Neptune lyft hys head aboue the waters cleane. The beaten rocke with forked mace he vndermynyng pluckte From bottom loose, & suncke it doune, when doune hym selfe he duckte. Theare Aiax lay, by land, by syre, and storme of seas destroyd, But we by sufferyng shypwrack, are with greater plagues anoyd. A subtyle shallow flood thear is flowne on a stony shold, Where crafty Caphar out of syght the lurkyng rocks doth hould, Uppon whose sharpe and ragged top the swellyng tide doth flow, The boylyng waues do beat theron styll sweaing to and fro: A turret noddyng ouer it doth hange with fallyng swaye, From whence on either side frō height prospect espye we maye Two seas: and on thys hand the coast where Plops ons did reygne, And Istmus flood in narrow creeke, reculyng back agayne,
Doth stop Ionian sea, lest in to Hellespont it run, On thother part is Lemnon flood that fame by blodshed woon. On thother syde Calcedon towne doth stand agaynst thys forte, Ad Aulis Ile that stayd our shyps that thyther dyd resorte. Thys Castell here inhabyte doth our Palimedes sier, Whose cursed hand held in the top a brand o flamyng fier, That dyd alure oure fleete, to turne on lurkyng rocks a ryght, Entysyng them with wily blase to come vnto the lyght. All into fitters shaken are the vesels on the shold, But other some do swym, and some vppon the rocks are roulde. And other slyppyng back agayn so to eschew the rocks, Hys brused rybbes and ratlyng sydes agaynst ech other knocks, Wherby the other he doth breae, and broken is hym selfe, Then wolde they launce int the depe, for now they drad the shelfe,
Thys peck of roubles chaunt to hap in dawning of the daye. But when the Gods (besought of vs) began the rage to staye, And Phaebus golden beames began a fresh to render lyght, The dolfull day dysryed all the domage done by nyght. Cly. ¶O whether may I now lamet, and wepe with waylyng sad, Or shall I els in that my spous returned is be glad? I do reioyce, and yet I am compelled to bewayle My countreys great calamytie that doth the same assayle. O father great whose maiestye doth thundryng sepers shake, The lowryng Gods vnto the Grkes now fauourable make, With garlands greene let euerye head reioysyng now be cround. To to thee the pype in sacryfice mlodiously doth sound, And on thyne alter lyeth slayne an Heyferdlyly whyte, Before the same do present stand with hangyng lockes vndyght,
A carfull Troyan companye in heuy wofull plyght, On whom frō heygh the Lawrell tree with spredding branche doth shyne, Whose vertue hath inspired them with Phaebus grace diuine, Chorus. Cassandra. ALas the cruell stynge of loue how swetely doth it taste, A myserye to mortall man annext whyle lyfe doth last? The path of myscheife for to flye, now syth there is a gap, And wretched soules be franckly calde from euery wofull hap By death, a pleasant port, for aye in rest them selues to shroude, Where dredfull tumultes neuer dwell nor stormes of Fortune proude: Nor yet the burning fyry flakes of Ioue the same doth doubt, whē wrongfully with twacking thūpes he rappes hys thunder out: Hear lady peace thinhabitours doth neuer put in flyght, Nor yet the victors threatnyg wrath approchyng nyg to fyght,
No whyrling western wynd doth rge the rampyng seas to praunce, No dustye cloud that raysed is by sauage Dimilaunce, On horseback riding rancke by ranck, no ferse and cruell hot, No people slaughtred, wt their townes clean topsie turey tost: Whyle that the foe with flamyng fyre doth spoyle and wast the wall, Untamed and vnbridled Mars destroys and batters all: That man alone who forceth not the ficle fates a strawe, The vysage grym of Acheront whose eyes yet neuer sawe, Who neuer vewd with heauy chear the vgsome Limbo lake, And puttynge lyfe in hasarde dare to death hym selfe betake. That parson is a prynces peare, and lyke the gods in myght, Who knoweth not what death dothe mean is in a pitious plight The ruthfull ruin of our na∣tyue countrey we beheld: That woful nyght, in which the roofe of howses ouerqueld,
In Dardans Cytie blasing bryght with flasshyng fiery flames. when as the Grekes wt burning brands enkindle did the frames, That Troy whō war & dedes of armes myght not subdue and take, As ons did mighty Hercules, whose quyuer casde it quake, Which neither he that Peleus sonne, and sonne to Thetis was, Nor whom Achilles loued to wel, could euer brynge to passe, When glyteryng bright in fild he ware false armour on hys back, And counterfayting fearse Achill the Troyans draue to wrack. Nor when Achilles he hym selfe hys mynd from sorow wrast, And Troyan women to the walles dyd scuddyng leape in hast. In myserie she lost her proud estate, and last renoume, By being stoutly ouercome, and hardly pulled downe. Yeares fyue & fyue dyd Troy resiste, that yet hereafter must, In one nyghts space by destenie be layed in the dust.
Theyr fained giftes well haue we tri that huge and fatall gin: We lyght of credit with our own ryght hand haue haled in, That fatall gyft of Grekes: what tyme at entrye of the gap The gye hors did shyueringe stand, wher in them selues did wrap The captaynes close, in holow vautes with bloody war yfreight. When lawfully we myght haue tryde, and serched theyr deceight: So by theyr owne contryned snares the grekes had byn confound: The braseen buclers being shoke did gye a clattryng sound. A pryuie whysperyng often tymes came tycklyng in our ear. And Pyrrhus (in a murreynes name so redye for to heate. The craftye councell picked out of false Vlisses brayne,) Did iangle in the holow vautes, that rang therof agayne. But fearyng and suspectyng nought the heddy youth of Troy Layd handes vpon the sacred ropes, to hale and pull with ioye,
On this syde young Astyanax came garded with his trayne, On thother part Pollixena disponsed to be slayne Upoon Achilles tombe, she com with maydes, and he with men, A ioly flocke with equall yeares as young as they were then. Theyr vowd oblations to the gods in holyday attyre, The matrons bryng and so to churche repayreth euery syre. And all the cytie did alyke, yea Hecuba our queene (That synce the wofull Hectors death or now was neuer sene) She mery is: o grefe accurst, a all thy sorowes depe For which that fyrst, or last befell, entendest thou to wepe? Our battred walls which heuenly han∣des erected haue and framd? Or els the burnyng temples which vpon their Idolls flamd? Lamentyng these calamyties we haue not tyme and space, O myghtye parent Priam we poore Troyans wayle thy case.
The old mans thratlyng throt I sawe, (alas) I saw yborde With cruell Pirrhus blade, that scante with any blood was gord. Cass. ¶Refrayne your teares y• down your chekes should tricle euermore Wyth wofull waylynges piteously your pryuate frendes deplore My myseries refuse a mate, so much accurst as I: To rewe my carefull case, refrayn your lamentable crye. As for myne owne distresse to murne, I shall suffyce alone. Cho. ¶To mingle teares wt other teares it doth vs good to mone: In those the burnyng teary streames more ardently do boyle, Whō secret thoughts of lurking ares in pryuy brest urmoyle: Though that thou were a gossop stout, that brooke much sorow may I warraunt the, thou myghtest well, lament this sore decay. Not sad and solemne Adon that in the woodes doth synge Her sugred ditties fynelye tunde on sweete and pleasaunt stryng:
Recordyng tys wofull hap in dyuers kynde of note, whom Progne though he were her chyld and of her wombe begot, For to reuenge his fathers fault, she did not spare to kyll: And gaue his flesh and blood for food the fathers maw to fyll. Nor Progne who in swallows shape vpon the rydges hye, Of houses sitts in Biston town bewaylyng peteoulye, With chatteryng throte, of Tereus her spouse the cruell act, (Who did by strength & force of arms a shamfull brutyshe fact. Defyle the syster of his wyfe, fayre Philomel by name, And ake cut out her tonge, least shee should blab it to his shame) Though Progne this her husbandes rape lamentyng very sore Do waile, and wepe wt piteous plaint, yet can she not deplore Sufycientlye, though that she would our contreys petious plyght: Though he him selfe among the swans syr Cygnus lyllye whight.
who dwelles in streame of Ister ood, and Tanais channell could, His weping voyce most ernestlye though vtter out he would: Although the mornyng Halcyons with dolefull syghes do wayle, At such tyme as the fyghtyng floodes their Cyex did assayle, Or rashly weryng bould attempt the seas now layd at rest, Or beyng verye fearefull fede their broode in tottryng nest, Although as sqeimysh harted men those preistes in bedlem rage, Whom mother Cyble beyng borne n hyghe in lofty stage, Doth moue, so play on shalmes, Atys the Phrygian to lament, Yet can not they this lot bewayle, though brawn frō armes they rent. Cassandra in our teares ther is, no mesure to refrayne, Those miseryes all mesure pase, that plunged vs in payne. The sacred fillets from thy heds, why doest thou hale and pull? They chyflye ought to worshyp god, whose hartes with grefe be dull.
Cass. ¶My feare by this aflyction is cleane abated al, Nor prayeng to the heauenly ghostes for mercye will I call. Although they wer disposd to chafe and fret in fustien fumes: They nothyng haue me to displease, fortune her force consumes. Her spyte is worne vnto the stumpes, what contrey haue I lefte? Wher is my syre? am I of all my systers quyt bereft. The sacred tombes and alter stones our blood haue dronke and swyld, Where are my bretherne blessed knot? destroyed in the fylde. All wyddow wyues of Priams sonnes may easly now behould, The pallace voyd and cast of court of syllye Priam ould. And by so manye marriages so many wyddows ar, But onlye Hellen commyng from the coast of Lacon far. That Hecuba the mother of so many a pryncelye wyght, whose frutful womb did breed y• brand, of fyer blasyng bryght:
Who also bare the swinge in Troy, by practis now doth learne, New lawes and guyse of destynie in bondage to discerne. On her she taketh hart of grace with lookes so sterne and wylde, And barketh as a bedlem bitche aboute her strangled chyld Dear Polidor, the remnaunt left, and onely hope of Troy, Hector and Priam to reuenge, and to restore her ioy. Cho. ¶ The sacred Phaebus prophet is with sodaine sylence husht: A quakyng tremblyng shiueryng fear throughout her lymbs hath rusht: Her face as pale as asshes is, her fillits stand vpryght, The soft and gentle goldilocks starte vp of her affrigyt. Her panting breathing brest stuft vp within doth grunt and grone. Her glaring bryght and steaming eies are hether and thyther throwne Now glaūcyng vp & downe they roll: now standyng styffe they stare. she stretcheth vp her head more streight then commenly she bare,
Bolt vp she goes, her wrastling iawes that fast together clinge, She doth attempt by dyuers meanes, on sonder how to wringe. Her mōbling words in gabling mouth shut vp she doth asswage, As Menas mad that Bacchus ares doth serue in furious rage. Cass. ¶How doth it hap (o sacred tops of hyghe Parnassus hyll) That me be rapt of sens, with pricks of fury fresh ye fill? Why do you me with ghost inspyre, that am besyde my wits? O Phaebus none of thyne I am, releas me from the fyts: Infixed in my burnyng brestes the flames extinguysh out, Who forceth me with fury fell to gad and trot about? Or for whose sake inspird with spryte mad momblyng make must I? Why play I now the prophet cold, syth Troy in dust doth lye? The day doth shrinke for dread of war, the nyght doth dym myne eyes. With mantell black of darknes depe cleane couerd is the skyes:
But loe two shynyng Sunnes at one in heauen appereth bryght, Two Grecian howses muster do their armies twaine to fyght. Amonge the myghty Goddesis in Ida woods I see, The fatall shepherd in hys throne as vmpier plast to bee: I do aduise you to beware, beware (I say) of kynges, (A kyndred in whose cancred hartes olde pryuy grudges sprynges) That cuntrey clowne Aegisthus he this stock shall ouerthrowe, What doth this folish despret dame her naked wepons showe? Whose crowne entendeh she to crack in weede of Lacon lande, With hatchet (by the Amazons inuented fyrst) in hand? What face of myghty maiestie bewitched hath myne eyes? The conquerour of saluage beastes Marmarick Lyon lyes, Whose noble necke is wurried with currysh fange and tooth The churlysh snappes of eger Li∣onesse abyde he dooth.
Alac ye gostes of all my frendes why should ye say that I, Among the rest am onle safe, from perils far to lye? Fayne father folow thee I wold, Troy beyng layd in dust. O brother terrour of the Grekes, O Troyans ayd and trust. Our auncient pomp I do not see, nor yet thy warmed handes, (That ferce on grekish flaminge flete dyd flyng the fyry brandes) But māgled mēbers, schorched corps, and eake thy valyant armes, Harde piniond and bound in bandes sustaynyng greuous harmes: O Troylus, a match vnfit encounteryng with Achill (That myghtye man of armes) to sone com vnto the I wyll. I do delyght, to sayle with them on stynkyng Stygian flood. To vew the churlyshe mastyfe cu of hell, it doth me good. And gaping mouhed kyngdome darke of gredy Ditis raygne. The barge of fylthy Phlegethon this day shall entertayne,
Me conqueryng, and conquered, and prynces soules with all. You flyteryng shades I you beseche, and eake on the I call, O Stygian poole (wheron the gods theyr solemne othes do take Unbolt a whyle the brasen bars of darksom lymbo lake. Wherby the Phrygian folke in hell may Micean state be holde. Loke vp ye sellye wretched soules, the fates ar backward roulde. The sqallye sisters do approch, and deal thier bloodye strokes, Their smultring faggots in their hāds halfe burnt to asshes smokes. Their visages so pale do burne, with fyrye flamyng eyes: A garment blacke theyr gnawed gutts doth gyrde in morning guyse. Dire dred of night begins to howle, the bones of bodye vast With lieng long do rot corrupt in myrie pudle cast. Behold, the werye aged man his burnyng thurst forgot, The waters dalyeng at his lypps to catche endeuors not:
But murneth for the funerall, that shall ensue anon. The Troyan prince hys royall robes tryumphant putteth on. Cho. ¶The furious rage clean ouerpast begyns it selfe to slake, And flyps away, euen as a Bull that deadly wounde doth take On gasshed neck afront the ares: come let vs ease at last Her lymbes, that of the spryte of god hath felt the myghty blast. Returning home agayne at lengthe and cround with Lawrell bow (A sygne of worthy vyctorye) is Agamemnon now. The wyte to mete her husband, doth her spedy passage plye, Returning hand in hand, and fote by fote most louingly. ¶The .iiii. Acte. Agamemnon. Cassandra. AT lengthe I do aryue agayne vppon my natyue soyle God saue the o dear loued land, to thee is huge a spoyle
So many barbarous people yeilde: the flowre of Asia Troy To beare thy yoke submyts her selfe, that longe did lyue in ioye. Why doth thys prophet (on the groūd her sprawling body layd) Thus rele and stagger on her neck, all tremblynge and dismaide? Sirs, take her vp, with lycour warme let her be cheryshed. Now peepes she vp agayn, wt drouping eyes sonke in her head: Pluck vp thy spryte, here is the porte wisht for in myserye: This day is festiuall. Cass. ¶At Troy so was it wont to be. Aga. ¶Let vs to Chalters worshyp gye. Cass. ¶At Chalters dyed my syer: Aga. ¶Pray we to Ioue. Cass. ¶To Ioue whose grace diuine doth me inspire? Aga. ¶Dost thou suppose that Troy yu seist? Cass. ¶And Priam eke I see. Aga. ¶Troy is not here. Ca. ¶wher Helen is there take I Troy to bee. Aga. ¶Fear not as maid to serue thy dame. Cass. ¶Nay fredome draweth nye. Aga. ¶take thou no thought how yu shalt liue: Cass. ¶All cares for to defye
Death gyues a corage vnto me. Aga. ¶Yet say I once agayne There is no daunger left, wherby thou myghtest hurte sustaine. Cass. ¶But yet much troublous daūger doth hang ouer thy head I wot. Aga. ¶What mischeife may a victor dread? Cass. ¶Euen that he dreadeth not. Aga. ¶Ye trusty meny of my men come cary her away, Tyll of the spryte she ryd her selfe, lest fury force her say That may be preiudicall, her toge she can not frame. To thee o father flyngyng furth the lyghtninges flasshing flame, That dost disperse the cloudes, & rule the course of euery starre, And guide the Globe of earth, to whom the booties woon by warre With tryumphe victors dedicate: to thee o Iuno hyght The syster deare of doughty Ioue, (thy husband full of myht) Both I and Greece with flesh & blood and eke our vowed beast And gorgyou giftes of Arabie gyue worshyp to thy hest.
Chorus. O Grece by noble Gentlemen in honour shyning clear, O Grece to wrathfull Iuno thou that art the darlyng dear, Some ioly worthy lusty blood thou fosters euermore, Thou hast made euen the gods, yt were a number od before. That puyssant myghtie Hercules a noble impe of thine Deserued by hys trauels twelue, rapt vp in heauen to shyne. For whom the heauens did alter cours, and Iupiter with all Did iterate the howres of nyght, when dampish dewe doth fall. And charged Phaebus charyot swyfte, to trot with slower pace, And leasurely bryght lady moone thy homward wayne to trace, Bryght Lucifer that yeare by yeare hys name a newe doth chaunge, Came back againe, to whom the name of Hesper semed straunge.
Aurora to her commn course her reared head addrest, And cowchyng bacward down agayn the same she did arest, Uppon the shoulder of her spouse, whose yeares with age are worne The east did fele, so felt the west, that Hercules was borne. Dame nature could not clean dispatch, to vtter in one nyght, That boystous lad: the whyrling world did wayght for such awyght. O babe whose sholders vnderprop, the ample spacious skye, In clasped armes thy prowes dyd the crusshed Lion trye. Who from his fyrye yawnyng throte spewes out his broyling brande, The nimble hynd in Menall mount hath known thy heauy hand. The Bore hath felt thy fyst, which di Arcadia destroye. The monstrous conquerd Bul hath rord that Creta did anoye. The Dragon dire that bredyng beast in Lerna poole he slew, And choppyng of one head forbadd therof to ryse anewe.
Wtih cloobbed brusyng battring batte he cranckly did subdew. (The bretherne twins y• tewd on teat) wherof .iii. monsters grew. Of tryple formed Gerion the spoyle into the east, A droue of cattell Hercules dyd fetch out of the west. Away from tyrant Diomede the Thracian hors he led Which nether with the grasse that grew by Styrmon flood he fed, Nor yet on Heber bankes, but them the vyllayn dyd refresh His gredy mounching cramming iades with aliantes blood and flesh. Their rawfed iawes imbrewd wer with the carmans blood at last, The spoyles and shaftes Hipolyte saw from her bosom wrast As sone as he with clatryng shaft the duskye cloud did smyte, The Stymphal byrd that shadowed the sun, did take her flyght. The fertyll tree that aples beares of gould, did feare him sore, Which neuer yet acquayntaunce had with asters toth before.
But whipping vp wt lyuely twygges into the ayre she flyes, And while the chinking plate doth soūd then Argos full of eyes, The watchman shrinking close for cold that slepe yet neuer knew, Doth here the noyse while Hercules with mettall of yellow hew Wel loden packs away, and lefte the groue befylched cleane. The hound of hell dyd holde his tonge drawne vp in triple cheane, Nor barkt with any boughing throte, nor could abyde the hewe, Or colour of the heauenly lyght, whose beames he neuer knew. When thou wert captayne generall, and didst conducte our Hoste, (They that) of Dardans lygne, to come theyr stock do falsly boast, Were vanquished by force of armes and since they felt agayne thy gray goose winge, whose bitternes to feare myght them constraine.
¶The .v. Acte. Cassandra. WIthin a reuell rexe is kept, as sore as euer was Euē at ye .x. yeres seige of Troy: What thing is this? (alas) Get vp my soule, and of the rage auengment worthy craue: Though Phrygians we be vanquyshed, the victorie we haue. The matter well is brought abought: vp Troy thou rysest now, Thou flat on floore haste pulde downe Grece, to lye as low as thou. Thy conqerour doth turne hys face: my propheseing spryght Did neuer yet disclose to me so notable a syght: I see the same, and am thearat, and busyed in the broyle, No vision fond fantasticall my senses doth beguile: Such fare as Phrygians feasted with on last vnhappy nyght At Agamemnons royall court full dayntyly they dight:
With purple hangings al adornd the brodred beds do shyne, In olde Assaracks goblets gylt they swinck and swill the wyne. The kinge in gorgyous royall robes on chayre of state doth syt, And pranckt with pride of Priams pomp of whom he conquerd it. Put of this hostile wede, to hym (the queene his wyfe gan saye) And of thy louyng lady wrought weare rather thys araye, This garmēt knit. It makes me lothe, that shiuering here Island. O shall a kynge be murthered, by a banysht wretches hand? Out, shall Thadulterer destroy the husbande of the wyfe? The dreadfull destynies approcht. the foode that last in lyfe He tastd of before hys death, theyr maysters blood shall see, The gubs of blood downe dropping on the wynd shall powred bee. By traytrous tryck of trapping wede hys death is brought aboute, Which being put vppon his head his handes could not get out,
The stopped poake with mouth set op hys muffled head doth hyde, The mankynd dame wt trembling hand the swerde drew from her syde, Nor to the vtmost of her myght it in hys fesh she thrast, But in the giuing of the stroke she stayed all agast, He as it were a brystled Bore entangled in the net Among the brears in busshy woods yet tryeth out to get. wt strugling much the shrinking bands more streyghtly he doth bynd. He stryues in vayne, and wold slip of the snare that doth hym blynd. Which catcheth hold on euery syde. but yet then tangled wreatch Doth grope aboute, hys subtle foes with grypyng hand to catche. But furious Tyndaris prepard the pollax in her hande, And as the preyst to sacryfyce at Thalter syde doth stande, And vewes with eie the bullocks neck, ear that with axe he smyte, So to and fro she heaues her hand to stryke and leuell right.
He hath the stroke: dispatcht it is: not quyte chopt of the hed It hangeth by a lytle crop: here from the carkas ded The spoutyng blood cam gusshing out: and there the head doth lye, With waloing bobling mūbling tong: nor they do by and bye Forsake him so: the breathles coors Aegist doth all to coyle: And mangled hath the gasshed corpes: whyle thus he doth him spoyle, She putteth to her helpyng hand: by detestable dede They both accord vnto the kynd, whereof they do proceade. Dame Helens syster ryght shee is, and he Thyestes sonne: Lo doutfull Titan standeth styll the day now being don, Not knowyng whether best to kepe styll on his wonted waye Or turne his wheles vnto the path of dyre Thiestes daye.
¶The .v. Acte. The .ii. Sceane. ¶ Electra O Thou whom of our fathers death the onely helpe we haue, Fly, fly, frō force of furious foes, make hast my selfe to saue: Our house is topsey turuey tost, our stocke is cast away, Our ruthfull realmes to ruin ronne, our kyngdomes do decaye. Who cometh here in Chariot swyft this gallopyng a mayne? Brother, dysguysed in thy wede let me thy person fayne. O bussard blynde what dost thou mean from forayn folke to flye? Whom dost thou shun? it doth behoue to feare thys famylie. Orestes now be bould, and set all shiuering fear a syde, The certayne succour of a trustye freinde I hue espyde.
¶The .v. Acte. The .iii. Sceane. Strophilus. Electra. WIth solemne pompe I Strophilus forsakyng Phocis lande, Bearing a braūche of palme, yt growes at Elis in my hand, Returned back I am, the cause that wyld me hether wend, Is with these gyftes to gratefie and welcome home my freynd, Whose valiyent armie skalde, & shooke the tattryd Troyan walles, Who weryed with the ten years war now flat on floore she falles. What woful wight is this that staines her mourning face with teares, And drouned depe in drousy dumpes oppressed is with feares? I know full well thys damsell i of prynces lynage borne. What cause Electra hath thys ioy∣full familie to mourne? Elec. ¶By treason that mi mother wrought my father lyeth slayne, And drinkyng of their fathers cup the chyldren do complayne.
Aegist engroceth Castels got by fornication. Sto. ¶Alack that of so longe a tyme fylicitie is none. Elec. ¶I thee request euen for the loue my father thou doest owe, And for the honour of the crowne, whose brute abrode doth growe In euery coast: and by the gods that dyuersly do eal, Take into thy tuicion, conuey away, and steal, Thys poore Orest: such kynd of theft is pietie indede. Stro ¶Although that Agamemnn death doth teache me to take hede, Yet will I vnderake the same, and with all diligence Orestes shall I go aboute with strengthe to haue thee hence. Prosperytie requyreth fayth, but troble exacts the same, Haue here a pryce for those that do contende and wage in game. An ornament with comely grace ordaynd to deck the brow, And let thy head be ouerde with thys greene and pleasaunt bow.
And cary thys vyctoryous triumphant braunche in hand. God graunt this palme yt planted was in fertill Pisa land, (where solemne games wer celebrate Ioues honour to expresse) May both a sauegard be to to thee and brynge thee good successe. Thou that bestryds thy fathers steeds, as he before hath done, Go stryke a league of amytie with Pylades my sonne. Now nimble nagges let Grece hereof recordyng testifye, With headlong scouring cours amain this traytrous contrey flye. Elec. ¶He is escapt and gone, and with vnmesurable myght The Chariot horse with rayne at will do send out of my syght. Now free from peryll on my foes attendance will I make. And offer willingly my head the deadly wound to take. The cruell conqueress of her spouse is come, whose spotted wede With sprynkels (signe of slaughter) do beare record of her dede.
Her gory handes new bathed in blood as yet they be not drye, Her rough & churlish rigorous lookes the facte do notyfye. Unto the temple will I trudge. Cassandra suffer mee, Opprest with egall greefe, take parte of sacryfyce wyth thee. ¶The .v. Acte. The .iiii, Sceane. Clytemnestra. Electra. Aegisthus. Cassandra. O Thou thy mothers enimie, vngracious saucy face, After what sorte dost thou a maid appere in publyque place? Elec. ¶I haue with my vyrgynitie the bowres of baudes forsoke. Cly. ¶What man is hee, that euer thee to be a vyrgyn tooke? Elect. ¶what your own doughter? Cl. ¶wt thy mother more modest shuld yu be. Elec. ¶Do you at length begyn to preache, such godlynes to me.
Cly. ¶A manly stomake stout thou hast wyth swellyng hawtye hart. Subdued with sorow learne thou shall to playe a womans part. Elect. ¶A swerd and buckler verye well a woman doth beseme (Except I dote) Cl: ¶ hy selfe doe yu haylefelow with vs esteme? Elec. ¶What Agamemnon new is this, whom thou hast got f late? Cly. ¶Hereafter shall I tame, and teach thy gyrlysh tong to prate. And make the know, how to a queene hy tauntyng o for beare. ec ¶The whylst (yu widdowe) answer me directly to this geare. Thy husband is ereued quyght of breath, his lyfe is don. Cly. ¶Enquier wher thy brother is, So seke about my son. Elect. ¶He is departed out of Gree. Cly. ¶Go fetch him out of hand. Elect. ¶Fetche thou my father vnto me. Cly. ¶Gyue me to vnderstand, Where doth he lurking hyde his head? where is he shrunk awaye? Elect. ¶All plonge of perills past he is, ad at a quyet staye.
And in another kyngdom where no harme he doth mistrust, This aunswere were sufficient, to please a parent iust. But one whose brest dothboil in wrath, it cannot satesfye. Cly. ¶To daye by death thou shalt receiue thy fatall destynye. Elect. ¶On this condicion am I pleasd, the Alter to forsake. If that this hande shall do the dead, my death when I shall take. Or els if in my throte to bathe thy blade, thou do delyght, Most willynglye I yeld my throte, and gyue the leue to smye. Or if thou wyll chop of my head in brutysh beastly guyse, My necke a waytyng for the wound out stretched redye lies. Thou hast committed synfully a great and greuous guylt. Go purge thy hardned handes, y• which thy husbandes blood haue spil. Cly. ¶O thou that of my perylls all doest suffer part wyth me, And in my realme doest also rule with egall dignitie,
Aegisthus art thou glad at this? (as doth her not behoue,) With checks & taunts y• doughter doth her mothers mallyce moue. She kepes her brothers counsell close Conueyd out of the waye. Aegist. ¶Thou malipert and wiles wench thyne eluysh prayng staye, Refrayne those wordes vnfytt thy mo∣thers glowing ears to vex. Elect. ¶What shall the breder of this broyle controll me with his checkes, Whose fathers gilt hath caused him to haue a doubtfull name, Who both is to his syster sonne, and nephew to the same? Cly. ¶To snapp her head of with thy swerd Aegist doest thou refrayne? Let her gyue vp the ghost: or bryng Her brother strayght agayne: Let her be lockt in dungeon darke, and let her spend her dayes, In Caues & Rocks, wt painefull pangs, torment her euerye wayes. I hope him whom she hidden hath, she will agayne discrye, Through being clapt in pryson strong and suffring pouertye
With earksom and vnsauory smells on euery syde annoyde, Enorst to weare a widdowes wede, er weddinge day enioyde: Put in exile and banyshment when eche man doth her hate: So shall she be by myserye compeld to yeld to late, Prohibyted of holsom ayr fruision to haue. Elec. ¶Graūt me mi dome bi means of death to passe vnto my graue. Cly. ¶I would haue graunted it to the, if thou should it denye. Unskilfull is the tyrant, who by suffryng wretches dye Doth end their pains. Ele. ¶what after death doth any thing remayne? Cly ¶And if thou do desyre to dye, the same se you refrayne. Lay hāds irs on this wōdrous wretch, whom beyng caryed on, Euen to the furthest corner of my iurisdiction Far out beyond Mycenas land in bondes let her be bound, With darknes dym in hiddious hold let her be closed round.
This captiue spous & wicked queane, the trull of prynces bed Shall pay her paynes, and suffer death by losyng of her hed. Com hale her on, that she may folowe, that way my spouse is gon, Whose loue rom me entised was. Cass. ¶Do not thus hale me on. I will before you take the waye, these tydynges fyrste to tell Unto my contrey men of Troy beneath in lowest hell. How ouerquelmed shypps eche whea ar spred the sea vppon And Micoene countrey conquerd is brought in subiection. He that of thousand captaynes was graund captayn generall, Com to as great calamytie as Troy it selfe did fall, Entrapped was by treaytrus trayn, and whordom of his wife, And by a gyft receaued of her depreued of his life. Let vs not linger: on with me, and thankes I do you gyue. I ioy, that it myght be my hap, thus after Troy to lyue.
Cly. ¶Go to, prepare thy selfe to dye thou frantyque ragyng wyght. Cass. ¶The fransy fyts of fury fell on you shall also lyght. ¶ Eurybates. Added to the Tragedie by the ranslatour. ALas ye hatefull ellysh hagges ye furies foule and fell, Why cause ye rusty rancours rage in noble hartes to dwell And cancred hate in boylynge brestes to grow from age to age? Cold not the graūdsyres painful pāges the chyldrens wrath asswage? Nor ayne faint of pynyng paunche, with burnyng thurste of hell, Amid the blackest stream of styckes where poysnyng breathes do well. Where vapors vyle parbrakyng out from damysh myry mud, Encrease the paynes of Tantalus deserued by gyltles blood.
Could not thyne owne offence suffyce Thyestes in thy lyfe, To fyle thy brothers spousall bed, and to abuse hys wyfe? But after breath from body fled, and lyfe thy lymbes hath left, Can not remembraunce of reuenge out of thy brest be reft? What, yet hast thou not layd thy lyps, to cast of Lethes flood? Now after death why dost thou come to moue thy sonne to blood? Could cruell Ditis graunt to thee thy pasporte back agayne? To worke thys wo vpon the world, and make such rygour reygne, That Clytemnestr is become the fyfty syster dire Of Danaus doughters, that did once theyr husbandes death conspyre. Lo here how icle fortune gyues but brytle fading ioy. Lo, be who late a Conquerour tryumphed ouer Troy. Enduring many sturdy Formes with mghty toyle and payne To sowe the seede of fame, hath reant small fruite therof againe.
When as hys honour budding furth with flowre began to bloome, (Alas) the stock was hewed downe and sent to deadly doome. And they that of hys vyctorie and commyng home were glad, to sodain murning change their mirth with heauynes bestad. The lusty pompe of royall courte is dead: (O dolfull day) The people mone theyr prynces death with wo and weal away: with howling, crieng, wringing hands with sobs with syghes, and teares, And wt their ists they beat their bretes they pull and hale theyr heares. And as the shepe amased run, and rampe aboute the fyeld, When as theyr shepherd to the wolfe hys gory throte doth yelde: Euen so as mad they rage and raue throughout Micaenas land, Depriued of theyr prynce, they feare the blooddy Tyrantes hand. While thus were woful wailings hard in euery place aboute, The good Cassandra (come from Troy) to death is haled out.
Like as the Swan, who when the time of death approcheth nye, By nature warned is therof, and pleased well to dye, Doth celebrate her unerall with dirge and solemne songe: Euen so the noble vyrgyn who in wo hath lyued longe, Most ioyfull goes she to her death wyth mylde and pleasaunt face, Stout boulst ryng out her bourly brest with pryncely port & grace. Nothyng dysmade with corage bolde, and chearefull countenaunce, On stage ordeyned for her death she gan her selfe aduaunce, As though she had not thyther come, to leue her lothsome lyfe, As though she had not come, to taste the stroke of fatall knyfe. But euen as if in brydale bed her iurney were to meete Corebus dear, not hauyng mynd of death, nor wyndyng sheete, When lookyng round on euery syde she toke her leaue of all, From vapourd eyes of yonge and ol the tryclyng teares do fall.
The Grekes them selues to greefe a moued to see this heuy sight, So pytie pearest the headmans hart, that thryse aboute to myte He staide the smot: wt shiuering hand yet once agayne he tryed. And frō her shoulders stroke her head. and thus the vyrgyn dyed. But now the Grekes another cause of murnyng haue in hand: Orestes Agamemnons sonne, is forst to flye the lande. Amonge olde rotten ragged rocks hear lyes an vgly place, A dongeon dep, as darke as hell, vnknowne to Phaebus face. An holow huge wyde gapyng hole, with way styll bendyng downe, whose mouth with venomous withred weedes is hid & ouer growne, where stinking smels com belching out from filthy durty dyke, where verment vile do crepe & craule, in bell is not the lyke. Il fauourd, foule mysshapen ugges, do lurke aboute thys caue, With dreadful sounds & roryng noyse within the pyt they raue.
Euen hether is Electra sent, in darkenes depe to lye, In pouertie, and comfortlesse without the lyght of skye, Fast clogd with iron boultes & chaines, thus by her mother layd In tormentes, tyll by her to death Orestes be betrayde: Who (as Cassandra telleth) shall reuenge his fathers death, Depryue with swerd thadulterour, and mother both of breath. So after all these bloody broyles, Greece neuer shall be free: But blood for blood, and death by turnes, the after age shall see. FINIS. ¶Faultes escaped in printing. Letter. page. Li.   B. 6. 23. for sytst read setst B. 8. 13. for I cannot read It cānot B. 8. 25. for now read vow B. 14. 21. for wresteth read wrastleth E. 1. 6. for others read other. In B. the .15. page, against the .27. lygne in the margent, read Nutrix.
